Barn Burning 



THE STORE in which the Justice of the Peace's court was sit- 
ting smelled of cheese. The boy, crouched on his nail keg at 
the back of the crowded room, knew he smelled cheese, and 
more: from where he sat he could see the ranked shelves 
close-packed with the solid, squat, dynamic shapes of tin 
cans whose labels his stomach read, not from the lettering 
which meant nothing to his mind but from the scarlet devils 
arid the silver curve of fish this, the cheese which he knew 
he smelied and the hermetic meat which his intestines be- 
lieved he smelled coming in intermittent gusts momentary 
and brief between the other constant one, the smell and sense 
just a little of fear because mostly of despair and grief, the 
old fierce pull of blood. He could not see the table where the 
Justice sat and before which his father and his father's enemy 
(our enemy he thought in that despair; ourn! mine and hisn 
both! He's my father!} stood, but he could hear them, the 
two of them that is, because his father had said no word yet: 

"But what proof have you, Mr. Harris?" 

"I told you. The hog got into my corn. I caught it up and 
sent it back to him. He had no fence that would hold it. I told 
him so, warned him. The next time I put the hog in my pen. 
When he came to get it I gave him enough wire to patch 
up his pen. The next time I put the hog up and kept it. I rode 
down to his house and saw the wire I gave him still rolled on 



4 The Country 

to the spool in his yard. I told him he could have the hog 
when he paid me a dollar pound fee. That evening a nigger 
came with the dollar and got the hog. He was a strange 
nigger. He said, 'He say to tell you wood and hay kin burn.' 
I said, 'What?' 'That whut he say to tell you,' the nigger 
said. 'Wood and hay kin burn.' That night my barn burned. 
I got the stock out but I lost the barn." 

"Where is the nigger? Have you got him?" 

"He was a strange nigger, I tell you. I don't know what 
became of him." 

"But that's not proof. Don't you see that's not proof?" 

"Get that boy up here. He knows." For a moment the boy 
thought too that the man meant his older brother until 
Harris said, "Not him. The little one. The boy," and, 
crouching, small for his age, small and wiry like his father, 
in patched and faded jeans even too small for him, with 
straight, uncombed, brown hair and eyes gray and wild as 
storm scud, he saw the men between himself and the table 
part and become a lane of grim faces, at the end of which 
he saw the Justice, a shabby, collarless, graying man in 
spectacles, beckoning him. He felt no floor under his bare 
feet; he seemed to walk beneath the palpable weight of the 
grim turning faces. His father, stiff in his black Sunday coat 
donned not for the trial but for the moving, did not even 
look at him. He aims for me to lie, he thought, again with 
that frantic grief and despair. And I 'will have to do hit. 

"What's your name, boy?" the Justice said. 

"Colonel Sartoris Snopes," the boy whispered. 

"Hey?" the Justice said. "Talk louder. Colonel Sartoris? 
I reckon anybody named for Colonel Sartoris in this country 
can't help but tell the truth, can they?" The boy said noth- 
ing. Enemy! Enemy/ he thought; for a moment he could not 
even see, could not see that the Justice's face was kindly nor 
discern that his voice was troubled when he spoke to the man 



Barn Burning 5 

named Harris: "Do you want me to question this boy?" But 
he could hear, and during those subsequent long seconds 
while there was absolutely no sound in the crowded little 
room save that of quiet and intent breathing it was as if he 
had swung outward at the end of a grape vine, over a ravine, 
and at the top of the swing had been caught in a prolonged 
instant of mesmerized gravity, weightless in time. 

"No!" Harris said violently, explosively. "Damnation! 
Send him out of here!" Now time, the fluid world, rushed 
beneath him again, the voices coming to him again through 
the smell of cheese and sealed meat, the fear and despair and 
the old grief of blood: 

"This case is closed. I can't find against you, Snopes, but 
I can give you advice. Leave this country and don't come 
back to it." 

His father spoke for the first time, his voice cold and 
hai;sh, level, without emphasis: "I aim to. I don't figure to 
stay in a country among people who . . ." he said something 
unprintable and vile, addressed to no one. 

"That'll do," the Justice said. "Take your wagon and get 
out of this country before dark. Case dismissed." 

His father turned, and he followed the stiff black coat, the 
wiry figure walking a little stiffly from where a Confederate 
provost's man's musket ball had taken him in the heel on a 
stolen horse thirty years ago, followed the two backs now, 
since his older brother had appeared from somewhere in the 
crowd, no taller than the father but thicker, chewing tobacco 
steadily, between the two lines of grim-faced men and out 
of the store and across the worn gallery and down the sag- 
ging steps and among the dogs and half-grown boys in the 
mild May dust, where as he passed a voice hissed: 

"Barnburner!" 

Again he could not see, whirling; there was a face in a red 
haze, moonlike, bigger than the full moon, the owner of it 



6 The Country 

half again his size, he leaping in the red haze toward the face, 
feeling no blow, feeling no shock when his head struck the 
earth, scrabbling up and leaping again, feeling no blow this 
time either and tasting no blood, scrabbling up to see the 
other boy in full flight and himself already leaping into pur- 
suit as his father's hand jerked him back, the harsh, cold 
voice speaking above him: "Go get in the wagon." 

It stood in a grove of locusts and mulberries across the 
road. His two hulking sisters in their Sunday dresses and his 
mother and her sister in calico and sunbonnets were already 
in it, sitting on and among the sorry residue of the dozen and 
more movings which even the boy could remember the 
battered stove, the broken beds and chairs, the clock inlaid 
with mother-of-pearl, which would not run, stopped at 
some fourteen minutes past two o'clock of a dead and for- 
gotten day and time, which had been his mother's dowry. 
She was crying, though when she saw him she drew her 
sleeve across her face and began to descend from the wagon. 
"Get back," the father said. 

"He's hurt. I got to get some water and wash his . . ." 

"Get back in the wagon," his father said. He got in too, 
over the tail-gate. His father mounted to the seat where the 
older brother already sat and struck the gaunt mules two 
savage blows with the peeled willow, but without heat. It 
was not even sadistic; it was exactly that same quality which 
in later years would cause his descendants to over-run the 
engine before putting a motor car into motion, striking and 
reining back in the same movement. The wagon went on, 
the store with its quiet crowd of grimly watching men 
dropped behind; a curve in the road hid it. Forever he 
thought. Maybe he's done satisfied now, now that he has . . . 
stopping himself, not to say it aloud even to himself. His 
mother's hand touched his shoulder. 

"Does hit hurt?" she said. 



Barn Burning 7 

"Naw," he said. "Hit don't hurt. Lemme be." 
"Can't you wipe some of the blood off before hit dries?" 
"I'll wash to-night," he said. "Lemme be, I tell you." 
The Wagon went on. He did not know where they were 
going. None of them ever did or ever asked, because it was 
always somewhere, always a house of sorts waiting for them 
a day or two days or even three days away. Likely his father 
had already arranged to make a crop on another farm before 
he ... Again he had to stop himself. He (the father) always 
did. There was something about his wolflike independence 
and even courage when the advantage was at least neutral 
which impressed strangers, as if they got from his latent 
ravening ferocity not so much a sense of dependability as a 
feeling that his ferocious conviction in the rightness of his 
own actions would be of advantage to all whose interest 
lay with his. 

That night they camped, in a grove of oaks and beeches 
where a spring ran. The nights were still cool and they had 
a fire against it, of a rail lifted from a nearby fence and cut 
into lengths a small fire, neat, niggard almost, a shrewd 
fire; such fires were his father's habit and custom always, 
even in freezing weather. Older, the boy might have re- 
marked this and wondered why not a big one; why should 
not a man who had not only seen the waste and extravagance 
of war, but who had in his blood an inherent voracious 
prodigality with material not his own, have burned every- 
thing in sight? Then he might have gone a step farther and 
thought that that was the reason: that niggard blaze was the 
living fruit of nights passed during those four years in the 
woods hiding from all men, blue or gray, with his strings of 
horses (captured horses, he called them). And older still, he 
might have divined the true reason: that the element of fire 
spoke to some deep mainspring of his father's being, as the 
element of steel or of powder spoke to other men, as the one 



8 The Country 

weapon for the preservation of integrity, else breath were 
not worth the breathing, and hence to be regarded with 
respect and used with discretion. 

But he did not think this now and he had seen those same 
niggard blazes all his life. He merely ate his supper beside it 
and was already half asleep over his iron plate when his 
father called him, and once more he followed the stiff back, 
the stiff and ruthless limp, up the slope and on to the starlit 
road where, turning, he could see his father against the stars 
but without face or depth a shape black, flat, and bloodless 
as though cut from tin in the iron folds of the frockcoat 
which had not been made for him, the voice harsh like tin 
and without heat like tin: 

"You were fixing to tell them. You would have told him." 
He didn't answer. His father struck him with the flat of his 
hand on the side of the head, hard but without heat, exactly 
as he had struck the two mules at the store, exactly as he 
would strike either of them with any stick in order to kill 
a horse fly, his voice still without heat or anger: "You're 
getting to be a man. You got to learn. You got to learn to 
stick to your own blood or you ain't going to have any 
blood to stick to you. Do you think either of them, any man 
there this morning, would? Don't you know all they wanted 
was a chance to get at me because they knew I had them 
beat? Eh?" Later, twenty years later, he was to tell himself, 
"If I had said they wanted only truth, justice, he would have 
hit me again." But now he said nothing. He was not crying. 
He just stood there. "Answer me," his father said. 

"Yes," he whispered. His father turned. 

"Get on to bed. We'll be there tomorrow." 

To-morrow they were there. In the early afternoon the 
wagon stopped before a paintless two-room house identical 
almost with the dozen others it had stopped before even in 
the boy's ten years, and again, as on the other dozen occa- 



Barn Burning 9 

sions, his mother and aunt got down and began to unload the 
wagon, although his two sisters and his father and brother 
had not moved. 

"Likely hit ain't fitten for hawgs," one of the sisters said. 

"Nevertheless, fit it will and you'll hog it and like it," his 
father said. "Get out of them chairs and help your Ma un- 
load." 

The two sisters got down, big, bovine, in a flutter of 
cheap ribbons; one of them drew from the jumbled wagon 
bed a battered lantern, the other a worn broom. His father 
handed the reins to the older son and began to climb stiffly 
over the wheel. "When they get unloaded, take the team to 
the barn and feed them." Then he said, and at first the boy 
thought he was still speaking to his brother: "Come with 



me." 



"Me?" he said. 

"Yes," his father said. "You." 

'"Abner," his mother said. His father paused and looked 
back the harsh level stare beneath the shaggy, graying, 
irascible brows. 

"I reckon I'll have a word with the man that aims to begin 
to-morrow owning me body and soul for the next eight 
months." 

They went back up the road. A week ago or before last 
night, that is he would have asked where they were going, 
but not now. His father had struck him before last night 
but never before had he paused afterward to explain why; 
it was as if the blow and the following calm, outrageous 
voice still rang, repercussed, divulging nothing to him save 
the terrible handicap of being young, the light weight of his 
few years, just heavy enough to prevent his soaring free of 
the world as it seemed to be ordered but not heavy enough 
to keep him footed solid in it, to resist it and try to change 
the course of its events. 



io The Country 

Presently he could see the grove of oaks and cedars and 
the other flowering trees and shrubs where the house would 
be, though not the house yet. They walked beside a fence 
massed with honeysuckle and Cherokee roses and came to a 
gate swinging open between two brick pillars, and now, 
beyond a sweep of drive, he saw the house for the first time 
and at that instant he forgot his father and the terror and 
despair both, and even when he remembered his father again 
(who had not stopped) the terror and despair did not re- 
turn. Because, for all the twelve movings, they had sojourned 
until now in a poor country, a land of small farms and fields 
and houses, and he had never seen a house like this before. 
Hit's big as a courthouse he thought quietly, with a surge 
of peace and joy whose reason he could not have thought 
into words, being too young for that: They are safe from 
him. People 'whose lives are a part of this peace and dignity 
are beyond his touch, he no more to them than a buzzing 
wasp: capable of stinging for a little moment but that's all; 
the spell of this peace and dignity rendering even the barns 
and stable and cribs which belong to it impervious to the 
puny flames he might contrive . . . this, the peace and joy, 
ebbing for an instant as he looked again at the stiff black 
back, the stiff and implacable limp of the figure which was 
not dwarfed by the house, for the reason that it had never 
looked big anywhere and which now, against the serene 
columned backdrop, had more than ever that impervious 
quality of something cut ruthlessly from tin, depthless, as 
though, sidewise to the sun, it would cast no shadow. Watch- 
ing him, the boy remarked the absolutely undeviating course 
which his father held and saw the stiff foot come squarely 
down in a pile of fresh droppings where a horse had stood 
in the drive and which his father could have avoided by a 
simple change of stride. But it ebbed only for a moment, 
though he could not have thought this into words either, 



Barn Burning L i 

walking on in the spell of the house, which he could even 
want but without envy, without sorrow, certainly never 
with that ravening and jealous rage which unknown to him 
walked in the ironlike black coat before him: Maybe be will 
feel it too. Maybe it 'will even change him now from 'what 
maybe he couldn't help but be. 

They crossed the portico. Now he could hear his father's 
stiff foot as it came down on the boards with clocklike final- 
ity, a sound out of all proportion to the displacement of the 
body it bore and which was not dwarfed either by the white 
door before it, as though it had attained to a sort of vicious 
and ravening minimum not to be dwarfed by anything the 
fiat, wide, black hat, the formal coat of broadcloth which had 
once been black but which had now that friction-glazed 
greenish cast of the bodies of old house flies, the lifted sleeve 
which was too large, the lifted hand like a curled claw. The 
door opened so promptly that the boy knew the Negro must 
have been watching them all the time, an old man with neat 
grizzled hair, in a linen jacket, who stood barring the door 
with his body, saying, "Wipe yo foots, white man, fo you 
come in here. Major ain't home nohow." 

"Get out of my way, nigger," his father said, without 
heat too, flinging the door back and the Negro also and 
entering, his hat still on his head. And now the boy saw the 
prints of the stiff foot on the door jamb and saw them appear 
on the pale rug behind the machinelike deliberation of the 
foot which seemed to bear (or transmit) twice the weight 
which the body compassed. The Negro was shouting "Miss 
Lula! Miss Lula!" somewhere behind them, then the boy, 
deluged as though by a warm wave by a suave turn of 
carpeted stair and a pendant glitter of chandeliers and a mute 
gleam of gold frames, heard the swift feet and saw her too, 
a lady perhaps he had never seen her like before either 
in a gray, smooth gown with lace at the throat and an apron 



12 The Country 

tied at the waist and the sleeves turned back, wiping cake or 
biscuit dough from her hands with a towel as she came up 
the hall, looking not at his father at all but at the tracks on 
the blond rug with an expression of incredulous amazement. 

"I tried," the Negro cried. "I tole him to . . ." 

"Will you please go away?" she said in a shaking voice. 
"Major de Spain is not at home. Will you please go away?" 

His father had not spoken again. He did not speak again. 
He did not even look at her. He just stood stiff in the center 
of the rug, in his hat, the shaggy iron-gray brows twitching 
slightly above the pebble-colored eyes as he appeared to 
examine the house with brief deliberation. Then with the 
same deliberation he turned; the boy watched him pivot on 
the good leg and saw the stiff foot drag round the arc of 
the turning, leaving a final long and fading smear. His father 
never looked at it, he never once looked down at the rug. 
The Negro held the door. It closed behind them, upon the 
hysteric and indistinguishable woman-wail. His father 
stopped at the top of the steps and scraped his boot clean on 
the edge of it. At the gate he stopped again. He stood for 
a moment, planted stiffly on the stiff foot, looking back at 
the house. "Pretty and white, ain't it?" he said. "That's 
sweat. Nigger sweat. Maybe it ain't white enough yet to 
suit him. Maybe he wants to mix some white sweat with it." 

Two hours later the boy was chopping wood behind the 
house within which his mother and aunt and the two sisters 
(the mother and aunt, not the two girls, he knew that; even 
at this distance and muffled by walls the flat loud voices of 
the two girls emanated an incorrigible idle inertia) were 
setting up the stove to prepare a meal, when he heard the 
hooves and saw the linen-clad man on a fine sorrel mare, 
whom he recognized even before he saw the rolled rug in 
front of the Negro youth following on a fat bay carriage 
horse a suffused, angry face vanishing, still at full gallop, 



Barn Burning 13 

beyond the corner of the house where his father and brother 
were sitting in the two tilted chairs; and a moment later, 
almost before he could have put the axe down, he heard the 
hooves again and watched the sorrel mare go back out of 
the yard, already galloping again. Then his father began to 
shout one of the sisters' names, who presently emerged back- 
ward from the kitchen door dragging the rolled rug along 
the ground by one end while the other sister walked behind 
it. 

"If you ain't going to tote, go on and set up the wash 
pot," the first said. 

"You, Sarty!" the second shouted. "Set up the wash pot!" 
His father appeared at the door, framed against that shabbi- 
ness, as he had been against that other bland perfection, im- 
pervious to either, the mother's anxious face at his shoulder. 

"Go on," the father said. "Pick it up." The two sisters 
stooped, broad, lethargic; stooping, they presented an in- 
credible expanse of pale cloth and a flutter of tawdry rib- 
bons. 

"If I thought enough of a rug to have to git hit all the 
way from France I wouldn't keep hit where folks coming in 
would have to tromp on hit," the first said. They raised the 
rug. 

"Abner," the mother said. "Let me do it." 

"You go back and git dinner," his father said. "I'll tend to 
this." 

From the woodpile through the rest of the afternoon the 
boy watched them, the rug spread flat in the dust beside the 
bubbling wash-pot, the two sisters stooping over it with that 
profound and lethargic reluctance, while the father stood 
over them in turn, implacable and grim, driving them 
though never raising his voice again. He could smell the 
harsh homemade lye they were using; he saw his mother 
come to the door once and look toward them with an ex- 



14 The Country 

pression not anxious now but very like despair; he saw his 
father turn, and he fell to with the axe and .saw from the 
corner of his eye his father raise from the ground a flattish 
fragment of field stone and examine it and return to the pot, 
and this time his mother actually spoke: "Abner. Abner. 
Please don't. Please, Abner." 

Then he was done too. It was dusk; the whippoorwills had 
already begun. He could smell coffee from the room where 
they would presently eat the cold food remaining from the 
mid-afternoon meal, though when he entered the house he 
realized they were having coffee again probably because 
there was a fire on the hearth, before which the rug now lay 
spread over the backs of the two chairs. The tracks of his 
father's foot were gone. Where they had been were now 
long, water-cloudy scoriations resembling the sporadic 
course of a lilliputian mowing machine. 

It still hung there while they ate the cold food and then 
went to bed, scattered without order or claim up and down 
the two rooms, his mother in one bed, where his father 
would later lie, the older brother in the other, himself, the 
aunt, and the two sisters on pallets on the floor. But his 
father was not in bed yet. The last thing the boy remem- 
bered was the depthless, harsh silhouette of the hat and coat 
bending over the rug and it seemed to him that he had not 
even closed his eyes when the silhouette was standing over 
him, the fire almost dead behind it, the stiff foot prodding 
him awake. "Catch up the mule," his father said. 

When he returned with the mule his father was standing 
in the black door, the rolled rug over his shoulder. " Ain't 
you going to ride?" he said. 

"No. Give me your foot." 

He bent his knee into his father's hand, the wiry, surpris- 
ing power flowed smoothly, rising, he rising with it, on to the 
mule's bare back (they had owned a saddle once; the boy 



Barn Burning 15 

could remember it though not when or where) and with the 
same effortlessness his father swung the rug up in front of 
him. Now in the starlight they retraced the afternoon's path, 
up the dusty road rife with honeysuckle, through the gate 
and up the black tunnel of the drive to the lightless house, 
where he sat on the mule and felt the rough warp of the rug 
drag across his thighs and vanish. 

"Don't you 'want me to help?" he whispered. His father 
did not answer and now he heard again that stiff foot strik- 
ing the hollow portico with that wooden and clocklike de- 
liberation, that outrageous overstatement of the weight it 
carried. The rug, hunched, not flung (the boy could tell 
that even in the darkness) from his father's shoulder struck 
the angle of wall and floor with a sound unbelievably loud, 
thunderous, then the foot again, unhurried and enormous; a 
light came on in the house and the boy sat, tense, breathing 
steadily and quietly and just a little fast, though the foot 
itself did not increase its beat at all, descending the steps 
now; now the boy could see him. 

"Don't you want to ride now?" he whispered. "We kin 
both ride now," the light within the house altering now, 
flaring up and sinking. He's coming down the stairs no<w, 
he thought. He had already ridden the mule up beside the 
horse block; presently his father was up behind him and he 
doubled the reins over and slashed the mule across the neck, 
but before the animal could begin to trot the hard, thin arm 
came round him, the hard, knotted hand jerking the mule 
back to a walk. 

In the first red rays of the sun they were in the lot, putting 
plow gear on the mules. This time the sorrel mare was in the 
lot before he heard it at all, the rider collarless and even 
bareheaded, trembling, speaking in a shaking voice as the 
woman in the house had done, his father merely looking up 



1 6 The Country 

once before stooping again to the hame he was buckling, so 
that the man on the mare spoke to his stooping back: 

"You must realize you have ruined that rug. Wasn't there 
anybody here, any of your women . . ." he ceased, shaking, 
the boy watching him, the older brother leaning now in the 
stable door, chewing, blinking slowly and steadily at nothing 
apparently. "It cost a hundred dollars. But you never had a 
hundred dollars. You never will. So I'm going to charge you 
twenty bushels of corn against your crop. I'll add it in your 
contract and when you come to the commissary you can 
sign it. That won't keep Mrs. de Spain quiet but maybe it 
will teach you to wipe your feet off before you enter her 
house again." 

Then he was gone. The boy looked at his father, who still 
had not spoken or even looked up again, who was now ad- 
justing the logger-head in the hame. 

"Pap," he said. His father looked at him the inscrutable 
face, the shaggy brows beneath which the gray eyes glinted 
coldly. Suddenly the boy went toward him, fast, stopping 
as suddenly. "You done the best you could!" he cried. "If 
he wanted hit done different why didn't he wait and tell 
you how? He won't git no twenty bushels! He won't git 
none! We'll gether hit and hide hit! I kin watch . . ." 

"Did you put the cutter back in that straight stock like 
I told you?" 

"No, sir," he said. 

"Then go do it." 

That was Wednesday. During the rest of that week he 
\vorked steadily, at what was within his scope and some 
\vhich was beyond it, with an industry that did not need to 
be driven nor even commanded twice; he had this from his 
mother, with the difference that some at least of what he 
did he liked to do, such as splitting wood with the half-size 
axe which his mother and aunt had earned, or saved money 



Barn Burning \j 

somehow, to present him with at Christmas. In company 
with the two older women (and on one afternoon, even one 
of the sisters) , he built pens for the shoat and the cow which 
were a part of his father's contract with the landlord, and 
one afternoon, his father being absent, gone somewhere on 
one of the mules, he went to the field. 

They were running a middle buster now, his brother 
holding the plow straight while he handled the reins, and 
walking beside the straining mule, the rich black soil shear- 
ing cool and damp against his bare ankles, he thought Maybe 
this is the end of it. Maybe even that twenty bushels that 
seems hard to have to pay for just a rug 'will be a cheap price 
for him to stop forever and always from being what he used 
to be; thinking, dreaming now, so that his brother had to 
speak sharply to him to mind the mule: Maybe he even 
won't collect the twenty bushels. Maybe it will all add up 
and balance and vanish corn, rug, fire; the terror and grief, 
the being pulled two ways like between two teams of horses 
gone, done with for ever and ever. 

Then it was Saturday; he looked up from beneath the 
mule he was harnessing and saw his father in the black coat 
and hat. "Not that," his father said. "The wagon gear." 
And then, two hours later, sitting in the wagon bed behind 
his father and brother on the seat, the wagon accomplished 
a final curve, and he saw the weathered paintless store with 
its tattered tobacco- and patent-medicine posters and the 
tethered wagons and saddle animals below the gallery. He 
mounted the gnawed steps behind his father and brother, 
and there again was the lane of quiet, watching faces for the 
three of them to walk through. He saw the man in spec- 
tacles sitting at the plank table and he did not need to be 
told this was a Justice of the Peace; he sent one glare of 
fierce, exultant, partisan defiance at the man in collar and 
cravat now, whom he had seen but twice before in his life, 



1 8 The Country 

and that on a galloping horse, who now wore on his face 
an expression not of rage but of amazed unbelief which the 
boy could not have known was at the incredible circum- 
stance of being sued by one of his own tenants, and came 
and stood against his father and cried at the Justice: "He 
ain't done it! He ain't burnt . . ." 

"Go back to the wagon," his father said. 

''Burnt?" the Justice said. "Do I understand this rug was 
burned too?" 

"Does anybody here claim it was?" his father said. "Go 
back to the wagon." But he did not, he merely retreated to 
the rear of the room, crowded as that other had been, but 
not to sit down this time, instead, to stand pressing among 
the motionless bodies, listening to the voices: 

"And you claim twenty bushels of corn is too high for 
the damage you did to the rug?" 

"He brought the rug to me and said he wanted the tracks 
washed out of it. I washed the tracks out and took the rug 
back to him." 

"But you didn't carry the rug back to him in the same 
condition it was in before you made the tracks on it." 

His father did not answer, and now for perhaps half a 
minute there was no sound at all save that of breathing, the 
faint, steady suspiration of complete and intent listening. 

"You decline to answer that, Mr. Snopes?" Again his 
father did not answer. "I'm going to find against you, Mr. 
Snopes. I'm going to find that you were responsible for the 
injury to Major de Spain's rug and hold you liable for it. 
But twenty bushels of corn seems a little high for a man in 
your circumstances to have to pay. Major de Spain claims it 
cost a hundred dollars. October corn will be worth about 
fifty cents. I figure that if Major de Spain can stand a ninety- 
five dollar loss on something he paid cash for, you can stand 
a five-dollar loss you haven't earned yet. I hold you in dam- 



Barn Burning 19 

ages to Major de Spain to the amount of ten bushels of corn 
over and above your contract with him, to be paid to him 
out of your crop at gathering time. Court adjourned." 

It had taken no time hardly, the morning was but half 
begun. He thought they would return home and perhaps 
back to the field, since they were late, far behind all other 
farmers. But instead his father passed on behind the wagon, 
merely indicating with his hand for the older brother to 
follow with it, and crossed the road toward the blacksmith 
shop opposite, pressing on after his father, overtaking him, 
speaking, whispering up at the harsh, calm face beneath the 
weathered hat: "He won't git no ten bushels neither. He 
won't git one. We'll . . ." until his father glanced for an 
instant down at him, the face absolutely calm, the grizzled 
eyebrows tangled above the cold eyes, the voice almost 
pleasant, almost gentle: 

"You think so? Well, we'll wait till October anyway." 

The matter of the wagon the setting of a spoke or two 
and the tightening of the tires did not take long either, the 
business of the tires accomplished by driving the wagon into 
the spring branch behind the shop and letting it stand there, 
the mules nuzzling into the water from time to time, and the 
boy on the seat with the idle reins, looking up the slope and 
through the sooty tunnel of the shed where the slow ham- 
mer rang and where his father sat on an upended cypress 
bolt, easily, either talking or listening, still sitting there when 
the boy brought the dripping wagon up out of the branch 
and halted it before the door. 

"Take them on to the shade and hitch," his father said. 
He did so and returned. His father and the smith and a third 
man squatting on his heels inside the door were talking, 
about crops and animals; the boy, squatting too in the am- 
moniac dust and hoof-parings and scales of rust, heard his 
father tell a long and unhurried story out of the time before 



20 The Country 

the birth of the older brother even when he had been a pro- 
fessional horsetrader. And then his father came up beside 
him where he stood before a tattered last year's circus poster 
on the other side of the store, gazing rapt and quiet at the 
scarlet horses, the incredible poisings and convolutions of 
tulle and tights and the painted leers of comedians, and said, 
"It's time to eat." 

But not at home. Squatting beside his brother against the 
front wall, he watched his father emerge from the store and 
produce from a paper sack a segment of cheese and divide it 
carefully and deliberately into three with his pocket knife 
and produce crackers from the same sack. They all three 
squatted on the gallery and ate, slowly, without talking; 
then in the store again, they drank from a tin dipper tepid 
water smelling of the cedar bucket and of living beech trees. 
And still they did not go home. It was a horse lot this time, 
a tall rail fence upon and along which men stood and sat 
and out of which one by one horses were led, to be walked 
and trotted and then cantered back and forth along the road 
while the slow swapping and buying went on and the sun 
began to slant westward, they the three of them watch- 
ing and listening, the older brother with his muddy eyes and 
his steady, inevitable tobacco, the father commenting now 
and then on certain of the animals, to no one in particular. 

It was after sundown when they reached home. They ate 
supper by lamplight, then, sitting on the doorstep, the boy 
watched the night fully accomplish, listening to the whip- 
poorwills and the frogs, when he heard his mother's voice: 
"Abner! No! No! Oh, God. Oh, God. Abner!" and he rose, 
whirled, and saw the altered light through the door where 
a candle stub now burned in a bottle neck on the table and 
his father, still in the hat and coat, at once formal and bur- 
lesque as though dressed carefully for some shabby and 
ceremonial violence, emptying the reservoir of the lamp 



Barn Burning 2 1 

back into the five-gallon kerosene can from which it had 
been filled, while the mother tugged at his arm until he 
shifted the lamp to the other hand and flung her back, not 
savagely or viciously, just hard, into the wall, her hands 
flung out against the wall for balance, her mouth open and 
in her face the same quality of hopeless despair as had been 
in. her voice. Then his father saw him standing in the door. 

"Go to the barn and get that can of oil we were oiling 
the wagon with," he said. The boy did not move. Then he 
could speak. 

"What . . ." he cried. "What are you . . ." 

"Go get that oil," his father said. "Go." 

Then he was moving, running, outside the house, toward 
the stable: this the old habit, the old blood which he had not 
been permitted to choose for himself, which had been be- 
queathed him willy nilly and which had run for so long 
(and who knew where, battening on what of outrage and 
savagery and lust) before it came to him. / could keep on, 
he thought. / could run on and on and never look back, 
never need to see his face again. Only I carft. I can't, the 
rusted can in his hand now, the liquid sploshing in it as he 
ran back to the house and into it, into the sound of his 
mother's weeping in the next room, and handed the can to 
his father. 

"Ain't you going to even send a nigger?" he cried. "At 
least you sent a nigger before!" 

This time his father didn't strike him. The hand came 
even faster than the blow had, the same hand which had set 
the can on the table with almost excruciating care flashing 
from the can toward him too quick for him to follow it, 
gripping him by the back of his shirt and on to tiptoe before 
he had seen it quit the can, the face stooping at him in 
breathless and frozen ferocity, the cold, dead voice speaking 
over him to the older brother who leaned against the table. 



22 The Country 

chewing with that steady, curious, sidewise motion of cows: 

"Empty the can into the big one and go on. I'll catch up 
with you/' 

"Better tie him up to the bedpost," the brother said. 

"Do like I told you," the father said. Then the boy was 
moving, his bunched shirt and the hard, bony hand between 
his shoulder-blades, his toes just touching the floor, across 
the room and into the other one, past the sisters sitting with 
spread heavy thighs in the two chairs over the cold hearth, 
and to where his mother and aunt sat side by side on the 
bed, the aunt's arms about his mother's shoulders. 

"Hold him," the father said. The aunt made a startled 
movement. "Not you," the father said. "Lennie. Take hold 
of him. I want to see you do it." His mother took him by the 
wrist. "You'll hold him better than that. If he gets loose 
don't you know what he is going to do? He will go up 
yonder." He jerked his head toward the road. "Maybe I'd 
better tie him." 

"I'll hold him," his mother whispered. 

"See you do then." Then his father was gone, the stiff 
foot heavy and measured upon the boards, ceasing at last. 

Then he began to struggle. His mother caught him in 
both arms, he jerking and wrenching at them. He would be 
stronger in the end, he knew that. But he had no time to wait 
for it. "Lemme go!" he cried. "I don't want to have to hit 
you!" 

"Let him go!" the aunt said. "If he don't go, before God, 
I am going up there myself! " 

"Don't you see I can't?" his mother cried. "Sarty! Sarty! 
No! No! Help me, Lizzie!" 

Then he was free. His aunt grasped at him but it was too 
late. He whirled, running, his mother stumbled forward on 
to her knees behind him, crying to the nearer sister: "Catch 
him, Net! Catch him!" But that was too late too, the sister 



Barn Burning 23 

(the sisters were twins, born at the same time, yet either of 
them now gave the impression of being, encompassing as 
much living meat and volume and weight as any other two 
of the family) not yet having begun to rise from the chair, 
her head, face, alone merely turned, presenting to him in 
the flying instant an astonishing expanse of young female 
features untroubled by any surprise even, wearing only an 
expression of bovine interest. Then he was out of the room, 
out of the house, in the mild dust of the starlit road and the 
heavy rifeness of honeysuckle, the pale ribbon unspooling 
with terrific slowness under his running feet, reaching the 
gate at last and turning in, running, his heart and lungs 
drumming, on up the drive toward the lighted house, the 
lighted door. He did not knock, he burst in, sobbing for 
breath, incapable for the moment of speech; he saw the 
astonished face of the Negro in the linen jacket without 
knowing when the Negro had appeared. 

"De Spain!" he cried, panted. "Where's . . ." then he saw 
the white man too emerging from a white door down the 
hall. "Barn!" he cried. "Barn!" 

"What?" the white man said. "Barn?" 

"Yes!" the boy cried. "Barn!" 

"Catch him!" the white man shouted. 

But it was too late this time too. The Negro grasped his 
shirt, but the entire sleeve, rotten with washing, carried 
away, and he was out that door too and in the drive again, 
and had actually never ceased to run even while he was 
screaming into the white man's face. 

Behind him the white man was shouting, "My horse! 
Fetch my horse!" and he thought for an instant of cutting 
across the park and climbing the fence into the road, but he 
did not know the park nor how high the vine-massed fence 
might be and he dared not risk it. So he nn on down the 
drive, blood and breath roaring; presently he was in the 



24 The Country 

road again though he could not see it. He could not hear 
either: the galloping mare was almost upon him before he 
heard her, and even then he held his course, as if the very 
urgency of his wild grief and need must in a moment more 
find him wings, waiting until the ultimate instant to hurl 
himself aside and into the weed-choked roadside ditch as the 
horse thundered past and on, for an instant in furious sil- 
houette against the stars, the tranquil early summer night sky 
which, even before the shape of the horse and rider vanished, 
stained abruptly and violently upward: a long, swirling roar 
incredible and soundless, blotting the stars, and he springing 
up and into the road again, running again, knowing it was 
too late yet still running even after he heard the shot and, 
an instant later, two shots, pausing now without knowing he 
had ceased to run, crying "Pap! Pap!", running again before 
he knew he had begun to run, stumbling, tripping over some- 
thing and scrabbling up again without ceasing to run, look- 
ing backward over his shoulder at the glare as he got up, 
running on among the invisible trees, panting, sobbing, 
"Father! Father!" 

At midnight he was sitting on the crest of a hill. He did 
not know it was midnight and he did not know how far he 
had come. But there was no glare behind him now and he 
sat now, his back toward what he had called home for four 
days anyhow, his face toward the dark woods which he 
would enter when breath was strong again, small, shaking 
steadily in the chill darkness, hugging himself into the re- 
mainder of his thin, rotten shirt, the grief and despair now no 
longer terror and fear but just grief and despair. Father. 
My father, he thought. "He was brave!" he cried suddenly, 
aloud but not loud, no more than a whisper: "He was! He 
was in the war! He was in Colonel Sartoris' cav'ry!" not 
knowing that his father had gone to that war a private in 
the fine old European sense, wearing no uniform, admitting 



Barn Burning 25 

the authority of and giving fidelity to no man or army or 
flag, going to war as Malbrouck himself did: for booty it 
meant nothing and less than nothing to him if it were enemy 
booty or his own. 

The slow constellations wheeled on. It would be dawn 
and then sun-up after a while and he would be hungry. But 
that would be to-morrow and now he was only cold, and 
walking would cure that. His breathing was easier now and 
he decided to get up and go on, and then he found that he 
had been asleep because he knew it was almost dawn, the 
night almost over. He could tell that from the whippoor- 
wills. They were everywhere now among the dark trees 
below him, constant and inflectioned and ceaseless, so that, 
as the instant for giving over to the day birds drew nearer 
and nearer, there was no interval at all between them. He 
got up. He was a little stiff, but walking would cure that 
too as it would the cold, and soon there would be the sun. 
He went on down the hill, toward the dark woods within 
which the liquid silver voices of the birds called unceasing 
the rapid and urgent beating of the urgent and quiring 
heart of the late spring night. He did not look back. 



Shingles for the Lord 



PAP GOT UP a good hour before daylight and caught the 
mule and rid down to Killegrews' to borrow the froe and 
maul. He ought to been back with it in forty minutes. But 
the sun had rose and I had done milked and fed and was eat- 
ing my breakfast when he got back, with the mule not only 
in a lather but right on the edge of the thumps too. 

"Fox hunting," he said. "Fox hunting. A seventy-year-old 
man, with both feet and one knee, too, already in the grave, 
squatting all night on a hill and calling himself listening to a 
fox race that he couldn't even hear unless they had come 
right up onto the same log he was setting on and bayed into 
his ear trumpet. Give me my breakfast," he told maw. 
"Whitfield is standing there right this minute, straddle of that 
board tree with his watch in his hand." 

And he was. We rid on past the church, and there was not 
only Solon Quick's school-bus truck but Reverend Whit- 
field's old mare too. We tied the mule to a sapling and hung 
our dinner bucket on a limb, and with pap toting Killegrew's 
froe and maul and the wedges and me toting our ax, we went 
on to the board tree where Solon and Homer Bookwright, 
with their froes and mauls and axes and wedges, was setting 
on two upended cuts, and Whitfield was standing jest like 
pap said, in his boiled shirt and his black hat and pants and 
necktie, holding his watch in his hand. It was gold and in 



28 The Country 

the morning sunlight it looked big as a full-growed squash. 

"You're late/' he said. 

So pap told again about how Old Man Killegrew had been 
off fox hunting all night, and nobody at home to lend him the 
froe but Mrs. Killegrew and the cook. And naturally, the 
cook wasn't going to lend none of Killegrew's tools out, and 
Mrs. Killegrew was worser deaf than even Killegrew. If you 
was to run in and tell her the house was afire, she would jest 
keep on rocking and say she thought so, too, unless she began 
to holler back to the cook to turn the dogs loose before you 
could even open your mouth. 

"You could have gone yesterday and borrowed the froe," 
Whitfield said. "You have known for a month now that you 
had promised this one day out of a whole summer toward 
putting a roof on the house of God." 

"We ain't but two hours late," pap said. "I reckon the 
Lord will forgive it. He ain't interested in time, nohow. He's 
interested in salvation." 

Whitfield never even waited for pap to finish. It looked to 
me like he even got taller, thundering down at pap like a 
cloudburst. "He ain't interested in neither! Why should He 
be, when He owns them both? And why He should turn 
around for the poor, mizzling souls of men that can't even 
borrow tools in time to replace the shingles on His church, I 
don't know either. Maybe it's just because He made them. 
Maybe He just said to Himself: 'I made them; I don't know 
why. But since I did, I Godfrey, I'll roll My sleeves up and 
drag them into glory whether they will or no!' " 

But that wasn't here nor there either now, and I reckon 
he knowed it, jest like he knowed there wasn't going to 
be nothing atall here as long as he stayed. So he put the 
watch back into his pocket and motioned Solon and Homei 
up, and we all taken off our hats except him while he stood 
there with his face raised into the sun and his eyes shut and 



Shingles for the Lord 29 

his eyebrows looking like a big iron-gray caterpillar lying 
along the edge of a cliff. "Lord," he said, "make them good 
straight shingles to lay smooth, and let them split out easy; 
they're for You," and opened his eyes and looked at us again, 
mostly at pap, and went and untied his mare and dumb up 
slow and stiff, like old men do, and rid away. 

Pap put down the froe and maul and laid the three wedges 
in a neat row on the ground and taken up the ax. 

"Well, men," he said, "let's get started. We're already 
late." 

"Me and Homer ain't," Solon said. "We was here." This 
time him and Homer didn't set on the cuts. They squatted 
on their heels. Then I seen that Homer was whittling on a 
stick. I hadn't noticed it before. "I make it two hours and a 
little over," Solon said. "More or less." 

Pap was still about half stooped over, holding the ax. "It's 
nigher one," he said. "But call it two for the sake of the argu- 
ment. What about it?" 

"What argument?" Homer said. 

"All right," pap said. "Two hours then. What about it?" 

"Which is three man-hour units a hour, multiplied by two 
hours," Solon said. "Or a total of six work units." When the 
WPA first come to Yoknapatawpha County and started to 
giving out jobs and grub and mattresses, Solon went in to 
Jefferson to get on it. He would drive his school-bus truck 
the twenty-two miles in to town every morning and come 
back that night. He done that for almost a week before he 
found out he would not only have to sign his farm off into 
somebody else's name, he couldn't even own and run the 
school bus that he had built himself. So he come back that 
night and never went back no more, and since then hadn't 
nobody better mention WPA to him unless they aimed to 
fight, too, though every now and then he would turn up 
with something all figured down into work units like he done 
now. "Six units short." 



30 The Country 

"Four of which you and Homer could have already 
worked out while you was setting here waiting on me," pap 
said. 

"Except that we didn't/' Solon said. "We promised Whit- 
field two units of twelve three-unit hours toward getting 
some new shingles on the church roof. We been here ever 
since sunup, waiting for the third unit to show up, so we 
could start. You don't seem to kept up with these modern 
ideas about work that's been flooding and uplifting the coun- 
try in the last few years." 

"What modren ideas?" pap said. "I didn't know there was 
but one idea about work until it is done, it ain't done, and 
when it is done, it is." 

Homer made another long, steady whittle on the stick. His 
knife was sharp as a razor. 

Solon taken out his snuffbox and filled the top and tilted 
the snuff into his lip and offered the box to Homer, and 
Homer shaken his head, and Solon put the top back on the 
box and put the box back into his pocket. 

"So," pap said, "jest because I had to wait two hours for a 
old seventy-year man to get back from fox hunting that 
never had no more business setting out in the woods all night 
than he would 'a' had setting all night in a highway juke 
joint, we all three have got to come back here tomorrow to 
finish them two hours that you and Homer " 

"I ain't," Solon said. "I don't know about Homer. I prom- 
ised Whitfield one day. I was here at sunup to start it. When 
the sun goes down, I will consider I have done finished it." 

"I see," pap said. "I see. It's me that's got to come back. By 
myself. I got to break into a full morning to make up them 
two hours that you and Homer spent resting. I got to spend 
two hours of the next day making up for the two hours of the 
day before that you and Homer never even worked." 

"It's going to more than jest break into a morning," Solon 



Shingles for the Lord 3 1 

said. "It's going to wreck it. There's six units left over. Six 
one-man-hour units. Maybe you can work twice as fast as 
me and Homer put together and finish them in four hours, 
but I don't believe you can work three times as fast and finish 
in two." 

Pap was standing up now. He was breathing hard. We 
could hear him. "So," he said. "So." He swung the ax and 
druv the blade into one of the cuts and snatched it up onto 
its flat end, ready to split. "So I'm to be penalized a half a 
day of my own time, from my own work that's waiting for 
me at home right this minute, to do six hours more work than 
the work you fellers lacked two hours of even doing atall, 
purely and simply because I am jest a average hard-working 
farmer trying to do the best he can, instead of a durn froe- 
owning millionaire named Quick or Bookwright." 

They went to work then, splitting the cuts into bolts and 
riving the bolts into shingles for Tull and Snopes and the 
others that had promised for tomorrow to start nailing onto 
the church roof when they finished pulling the old shingles 
off. They set flat on the ground in a kind of circle, with 
their legs spraddled out on either side of the propped-up bolt, 
Solon and Homer working light and easy and steady as two 
clocks ticking, but pap making every lick of hisn like he was 
killing a moccasin. If he had jest swung the maul half as fast 
as he swung it hard, he would have rove as many shingles as 
Solon and Homer together, swinging the maul up over his 
head and holding it there for what looked like a whole min- 
ute sometimes and then swinging it down onto the blade of 
the froe, and not only a shingle flying off every lick but the 
froe going on into the ground clean up to the helve eye, and 
pap setting there wrenching at it slow and steady and hard, 
like he jest wished it would try to hang on a root or a rock 
and stay there. 

"Here, here," Solon said. "If you don't watch out you 



32 The Country 

won't have nothing to do neither during them six extra units 
tomorrow morning but rest." 

Pap never even looked up. "Get out of the way," he said. 
And Solon done it. If he hadn't moved the water bucket, pap 
would have split it, too, right on top of the bolt, and this 
time the whole shingle went whirling past Solon's shin jest 
like a scythe blade. 

"What you ought to do is to hire somebody to work out 
them extra overtime units," Solon said. 

"With what?" Pap said. "I ain't had no WPA experience 
in dickering over labor. Get out of the way." 

But Solon had already moved this time. Pap would have 
had to change his whole position or else made this one curve. 
So this one missed Solon, too, and pap set there wrenching 
the froe, slow and hard and steady, back out of the ground. 

"Maybe there's something else besides cash you might be 
able to trade with," Solon said. "You might use that dog." 

That was when pap actually stopped. I didn't know it my- 
self then either, but I found it out a good long time before 
Solon did. Pap set there with the maul up over his head and 
the blade of the froe set against the block for the next lick, 
looking up at Solon. "The dog?" he said. 

It was a kind of mixed hound, with a little bird dog and 
some collie and maybe a considerable of almost anything 
else, but it would ease through the woods without no more 
noise than a hant and pick up a squirrel's trail on the ground 
and bark jest once, unless it knowed you was where you 
could see it, and then tiptoe that trail out jest like a man and 
never make another sound until it treed, and only then when 
it knowed you hadn't kept in sight of it. It belonged to pap 
and Vernon Tull together. Will Varner give it to Tull as a 
puppy, and pap raised it for a half interest; me and him 
trained it and it slept in my bed with me until it got so big 
maw finally run it out of the house, and for the last six months 



Shingles for the Lord 33 

Solon had been trying to buy it. Him and Tull had agreed on 
two dollars for Tull's half of it, but Solon and pap was still 
six dollars apart on ourn, because pap said it was worth ten 
dollars of anybody's money and if Tull wasn't going to col- 
lect his full half of that, he was going to collect it for him. 

"So that's it," pap said. "Them things wasn't work units 
atall. They was dog units." 

"Jest a suggestion," Solon said. "Jest a friendly offer to 
keep them runaway shingles from breaking up your private 
business for six hours tomorrow morning. You sell me your 
half of that trick overgrown fyce and I'll finish these shingles 
for you." 

"Naturally including them six extra units of one dollars," 
pap said. 

"No, no," Solon said. "I'll pay you the same two dollars 
for your half of that dog that me and Tull agreed on for his 
half of it. You meet me here tomorrow morning with the 
dog and you can go on back home or wherever them urgent 
private affairs are located, and forget about that church 
roof." 

For about ten seconds more, pap set there with the maul 
up over his head, looking at Solon. Then for about three sec- 
onds he wasn't looking at Solon or at nothing else. Then he 
was looking at Solon again. It was jest exactly like after about 
two and nine-tenths seconds he found out he wasn't looking 
at Solon, so he looked back at him as quick as he could. 
"Hah," he said. Then he began to laugh. It was laughing all 
right, because his mouth was open and that's what it sounded 
like. But it never went no further back than his teeth and it 
never come nowhere near reaching as high up as his eyes. 
And he never said "Look out" this time neither. He jest 
shifted fast on his hips and swung the maul down, the froe 
done already druv through the bolt and into the ground 



34 The Country 

while the shingle was still whirling off to slap Solon across 
the shki. 

Then they went back at it again. Up to this time I could 
tell pap's licks from Solon's and Homer's, even with my back 
turned, not because they was louder or steadier, because 
Solon and Homer worked steady, too, and the froe never 
made no especial noise jest going into the ground, but because 
they was so infrequent; you would hear five or six of Solon's 
and Homer's little polite chipping licks before you would 
hear pap's froe go "chug!" and know that another shingle 
had went whirling off somewhere. But from now on pap's 
sounded jest as light and quick and polite as Solon's or 
Homer's either, and, if anything, even a little faster, with the 
shingles piling up steadier than I could stack them, almost; 
until now there was going to be more than a plenty of them 
for Tull and the others to shingle with tomorrow, right on 
up to noon, when we heard Armstid's farm bell, and Solon 
laid his froe and maul down and looked at his watch too. And 
I wasn't so far away neither, but by the time I caught up with 
pap he had untied the mule from the sapling and was already 
on it. And maybe Solon and Homer thought they had pap, 
and maybe for a minute I did, too, but I jest wish they could 
have seen his face then. He reached our dinner bucket down 
from the limb and handed it to me. 

"Go on and eat," he said. "Don't wait for me. Him and 
his work units. If he wants to know where I went, tell him 
I forgot something and went home to get it. Tell him I had 
to go back home to get two spoons for us to eat our dinner 
with. No, don't tell him that. If he hears I went somewhere 
to get something I needed to use, even if it's jest a tool to eat 
with, he will refuse to believe I jest went home, for the reason 
that I don't own anything there that even I would borrow." 
He hauled the mule around and heeled him in the flank. 
Then he pulled up again. "And when I come back, no matter 



Shingles for the Lord 35 

what I say, don't pay no attention to it. No matter what hap- 
pens, don't you say nothing. Don't open your mouth a-tall, 
you hear?" 

Then he went on, and I went back to where Solon and 
Homer was setting on the running board of Solon's school- 
bus truck, eating, and sho enough Solon said jest exactly 
what pap said he was going to. 

"I admire his optimism, but he's mistaken. If it's something 
he needs that he can't use his natural hands and feet for, he's 
going somewhere else than jest his own house." 

We had jest went back to the shingles when pap rid up 
and got down and tied the mule back to the sapling and come 
and taken up the ax and snicked the blade into the next cut. 

"Well, men," he said, "I been thinking about it. I still don't 
think it's right, but I still ain't thought of anything to do 
about it. But somebody's got to make up for them two hours 
nobody worked this morning, and since you fellers are two 
to one against me, it looks like it's going to be me that makes 
them up. But I got work waiting at home for me tomorrow. 
I got corn that's crying out loud for me right now. Or maybe 
that's jest a lie too. Maybe the whole thing is, I don't mind 
admitting here in private that I been outfigured, but I be dog 
if I'm going to set here by myself tomorrow morning admit- 
ting it in public. Anyway, I ain't. So I'm going to trade with 
you, Solon. You can have the dog." 

Solon looked at pap. "I don't know as I want to trade 
now," he said. 

"I see," pap said. The ax was still stuck in the cut. He 
began to pump it up and down to back it out. 

"Wait," Solon said. "Put that durn ax down." But pap 
held the ax raised for the lick, looking at Solon and waiting. 
"You're swapping me half a dog for a half a day's work," 
Solon said 



36 The Country 

"Your half of the dog for that half a day's work you still 
owe on these shingles." 

u And the two dollars/' pap said. "That you and Tull 
agreed on. I sell you half the dog for two dollars, and you 
come back here tomorrow and finish the shingles. You give 
me the two dollars now, and I'll meet you here in the morn- 
ing with the dog, and you can show me the receipt from Tull 
for his half then." 

"Me and Tull have already agreed," Solon said. 

"All right," pap said. "Then you can pay Tull his two 
dollars and bring his receipt with you without no trouble." 

"Tull will be at the church tomorrow morning, pulling 
off them old shingles," Solon said. 

"All right," pap said. "Then it won't be no trouble at all 
for you to get a receipt from him. You can stop at the church 
when you pass. Tull ain't named Grier. He won't need to be 
off somewhere borrowing a crowbar." 

So Solon taken out his purse and paid pap the two dollars 
and they went back to work. And now it looked like they 
really was trying to finish that afternoon, not jest Solon, but 
even Homer, that didn't seem to be concerned in it nohow, 
and pap, that had already swapped a half a dog to get rid of 
whatever work Solon claimed would be left over. I quit try- 
ing to stay up with them; I jest stacked shingles. 

Then Solon laid his froe and maul down. "Well, men," he 
said, "I don't know what you fellers think, but I consider 
this a day." 

"All right," pap said. "You are the one to decide when to 
quit, since whatever elbow units you consider are going to be 
shy tomorrow will be yourn." 

"That's a fact," Solon said. "And since I am giving a day 
and a half to the church instead of jest a day, like I started 
out doing, I reckon I better get on home and tend to a little 
of my own work." He picked up his froe and maul and ax, 



Shingles for the Lord 37 

and went to his truck and stood waiting for Homer to come 
and get in. 

'Til be here in the morning with the dog," pap said. 

"Sholy," Solon said. It sounded like he had forgot about 
the dog, or that it wasn't no longer any importance. But he 
stood there again and looked hard and quiet at pap for about 
a second. "And a bill of sale from Tull for his half of it. As 
you say, it won't be no trouble a-tall to get that from him." 
Him and Homer got into the truck and he started the engine. 
You couldn't say jest what it was. It was almost like Solon 
was hurrying himself, so pap wouldn't have to make any ex- 
cuse or pretense toward doing or not doing anything. "I 
have always understood the fact that lightning don't have to 
hit twice is one of the reasons why they named it lightning. 
So getting lightning-struck is a mistake that might happen to 
any man. The mistake I seem to made is, I never realized in 
time that what I was looking at was a cloud. I'll see you in 
the morning." 

"With the dog," pap said. 

"Certainly," Solon said, again like it had slipped his mind 
completely. "With the dog." 

Then him and Homer drove off. Then pap got up. 

"What?" I said. "What? You swapped him your half of 
Tull's dog for that half a day's work tomorrow. Now what?" 

"Yes," pap said. "Only before that I had already swapped 
Tull a half a day's work pulling off them old shingles tomor- 
row, for Tull's half of that dog. Only we ain't going to wait 
until tomorrow. We're going to pull them shingles off to- 
night, and without no more racket about it than is necessary. 
I don't aim to have nothing on my mind tomorrow but 
watching Mr. Solon Work-Unit Quick trying to get a bill 
of sale for two dollars or ten dollars either on the other half 
of that dog. And we'll do it tonight. I don't want him jest to 
find out at sunup tomorrow that he is too late. I want him to 



38 The Country 

find out then that even when he laid down to sleep he was 
already too late." 

So we went back home and I fed and milked while pap 
went down to Killegrews' to carry the froe and maul back 
and to borrow a crowbar. But of all places in the world and 
doing what under the sun with it, Old Man Killegrew had 
went and lost his crowbar out of a boat into forty feet of 
water. And pap said how he come within a inch of going to 
Solon's and borrowing his crowbar out of pure poetic jus- 
tice, only Solon might have smelled the rat jest from the idea 
of the crowbar. So pap went to Armstid's and borrowed hisn 
and come back and we et supper and cleaned and filled the 
lantern while maw still tried to find out what we was up to 
that couldn't wait till morning. 

We left her still talking, even as far as the front gate, and 
come on back to the church, walking this time, with the rope 
and crowbar and a hammer for me, and the lantern still dark. 
Whitfield and Snopes was unloading a ladder from Snopes' 
wagon when we passed the church on the way home before 
dark, so all we had to do was to set the ladder up against the 
church. Then pap clumb up onto the roof with the lantern 
and pulled off shingles until he could hang the lantern inside 
behind the decking, where it could shine out through the 
cracks in the planks, but you couldn't see it unless you was 
passing in the road, and by that time anybody would 'a' al- 
ready heard us. Then I clumb up with the rope, and pap 
reached it through the decking and around a rafter and back 
and tied the ends around our waists, and we started. And we 
went at it. We had them old shingles jest raining down, me 
using the claw hammer and pap using the crowbar, working 
the bar under a whole patch of shingles at one time and then 
laying back on the bar like in one more lick or if the crowbar 
ever happened for one second to get a solid holt, he would 
tilt up that whole roof at one time like a hinged box lid. 



Shingles f0r the Lord 39 

That's exactly what he finally done. He laid back on the 
bar and this time it got a holt. It wasn't jest a patch of shin- 
gles, it was a whole section of decking, so that when he 
lunged back he snatched that whole section of roof from 
around the lantern like you would shuck a corn nubbin. The 
lantern was hanging on a nail. He never even moved the nail, 
he jest pulled the board off of it, so that it looked like for a 
whole minute I watched the lantern, and the crowbar, too, 
setting there in the empty air in a little mess of floating shin- 
gles, with the empty nail still sticking through the bail of the 
lantern, before the whole thing started down into the church. 
It hit the floor and bounced once. Then it hit the floor again, 
and this time the whole church jest blowed up into a pit of 
yellow jumping fire, with me and pap hanging over the edge 
of it on two ropes. 

I don't know what become of the rope nor how we got 
out of it. I don't remember climbing down. Jest pap yelling 
behind me and pushing me about halfway down the ladder 
and then throwing me the rest of the way by a handful of my 
overhalls, and then we was both on the ground, running for 
the water barrel. It set under the gutter spout at the side, and 
Armstid was there then; he had happened to go out to his lot 
about a hour back and seen the lantern on the church roof, 
and it stayed on his mind until finally he come up to see 
what was going on, and got there jest in time to stand yelling 
back and forth with pap across the water barrel. And I be- 
lieve we still would have put it out. Pap turned and squatted 
against the barrel and got a holt of it over his shoulder and 
stood up with that barrel that was almost full and run around 
the corner and up the steps of the church and hooked his 
toe on the top step and come down with the barrel busting 
on top of him and knocking him cold out as a wedge. 

So we had to drag him back first, and maw was there then, 
and Mrs. Armstid about the same time, and me and Armstid 



40 The Country 

run with the two fire buckets to the spring, and when we got 
back there was a plenty there, Whitfield, too, with more 
buckets, and we done what we could, but the spring was two 
hundred yards away and ten buckets emptied it and it taken 
five minutes to fill again, and so finally we all jest stood 
around where pap had come to again with a big cut on his 
head and watched it go. It was a old church, long dried out, 
and full of old colored-picture charts that Whitfield had ac- 
cumulated for more than fifty years, that the lantern had lit 
right in the middle of when it finally exploded. There was a 
special nail where he would keep a old long nightshirt he 
would wear to baptize in. I would use to watch it all the time 
during church and Sunday school, and me and the other boys 
would go past the church sometimes jest to peep in at it, 
because to a boy of ten it wasn't jest a cloth garment or even 
a iron armor; it was the old strong Archangel Michael his 
self, that had fit and strove and conquered sin for so long 
that it finally had the same contempt for the human beings 
that returned always to sin as hogs and dogs done that the old 
strong archangel his self must have had. 

For a long time it never burned, even after everything else 
inside had. We could watch it, hanging there among the fire, 
not like it had knowed in its time too much water to burn 
easy, but like it had strove and fit with the devil and all the 
hosts of hell too long to burn in jest a fire that Res Griet 
started, trying to beat Solon Quick out of half a dog. But at 
last it went, too, not in a hurry still, but jest all at once, kind 
of roaring right on up and out against the stars and the far 
dark spaces. And then there wasn't nothing but jest pap, 
drenched and groggy-looking, on the ground, with the rest 
of us around him, and Whitfield like always in his boiled shirt 
and his black hat and pants, standing there with his hat on, 
too, like he had strove too long to save what hadn't ought to 
been created in the first place, from the damnation it didn't 



Shingles for the Lord 41 

even want to escape, to bother to need to take his hat off in 
any presence. He looked around at us from under it; we was 
all there now, all that belonged to that church and used it to 
be born and marry and die from us and the Armstids and 
Tulls, and Bookwright and Quick and Snopes. 

"I was wrong," Whitfield said. "I told you we would meet 
here tomorrow to roof a church. We'll meet here in the 
morning to raise one." 

"Of course we got to have a church," pap said. "We're 
going to have one. And we're going to have it soon. But 
there's some of us done already give a day or so this week, 
at the cost of our own work. Which is right and just, and 
we're going to give more, and glad to. But I don't believe 
that the Lord " 

Whitfield let him finish. He never moved. He jest stood 
there until pap finally run down of his own accord and 
hushed and set there on the ground mostly not looking at 
maw, before Whitfield opened his mouth. 

"Not you," Whitfield said. "Arsonist." 

"Arsonist?" pap said. 

"Yes," Whitfield said. "If there is any pursuit in which 
you can engage without carrying flood and fire and destruc- 
tion and death behind you, do it. But not one hand shall you 
lay to this new house until you have proved to us that you 
are to be trusted again with the powers and capacities of a 
man." He looked about at us again. "Tull and Snopes and 
Armstid have already promised for tomorrow. I understand 
that Quick had another half day he intended " 

"I can give another day," Solon said. 

"I can give the rest of the week," Homer said. 

"I ain't rushed neither," Snopes said. 

"That will be enough to start with, then," Whitfield said. 
"It's late now. Let us all go home." 

He went first. He didn't look back once, at the church or 



42 The Country 

at us. He went to the old mare and clumb up slow and stiff 
and powerful, and was gone, and we went too, scattering. 
But I looked back at it. It was jest a shell now, with a red 
and fading core, and I had hated it at times and feared it at 
others, and I should have been glad. But there was something 
that even that fire hadn't even touched. Maybe that's all it 
was jest indestructibility, endurability that old man that 
could plan to build it back while its walls was still fire-fierce 
and then calmly turn his back and go away because he 
knowed that the men that never had nothing to give toward 
the new one but their work would be there at sunup tomor- 
row, and the day after that, and the day after that, too, as 
long as it was needed, to give that work to build it back 
again. So it hadn't gone a-tall; it didn't no more care for that 
little fire and flood than Whitfield's old baptizing gown had 
done. Then we was home. Maw had left so fast the lamp was 
still lit, and we could see pap now, still leaving a puddle 
where he stood, with a cut across the back of his head where 
the barrel had busted and the blood-streaked water soaking 
him to the waist. 

"Get them wet clothes off," maw said. 

"I don't know as I will or not," pap said. "I been publicly 
notified that I ain't fitten to associate with white folks, so 1 
publicly notify them same white folks and Methodists, too, 
not to try to associate with me, or the devil can have the 
hindmost." 

But maw hadn't even listened. When she come back with a 
pan of water and a towel and the liniment bottle, pap was 
already in his nightshirt. 

"I don't want none of that neither," he said. "If my head 
wasn't worth busting, it ain't worth patching." But she never 
paid no mind to that neither. She washed his head off and 
dried it and put the bandage on and went out again, and pap 
went and got into bed. 



Shingles for the Lord 43: 

"Hand me my snuff; then you get out of here and stay out 
too/' he said. 

But before I could do that maw come back. She had a glass 
of hot toddy, and she went to the bed and stood there with 
it, and pap turned his head and looked at it. 

"What's that?" he said. 

But maw never answered, and then he set up in bed and 
drawed a long, shuddering breath we could hear it and 
after a minute he put out his hand for the toddy and set there 
holding it and drawing his breath, and then he taken a sip 
of it. 

"I Godfrey, if him and all of them put together think they 
can keep me from working on my own church like ary other 
man, he better be a good man to try it." He taken another 
sip of the toddy. Then he taken a long one. "Arsonist," he 
said. "Work units. Dog units. And now arsonist. I Godfrey,, 
what a day!" 



The Tall Men 



THEY PASSED THE DARK bulk of the cotton gin. Then they 
saw the lamplit house and the other car, the doctor's coupe, 
just stopping at the gate, and they could hear the hound 
baying. 

"Here we are/' the old deputy marshal said. 

"What's that other car?" the younger man said, the stran- 
ger, the state draft investigator. 

"Doctor Schofield's," the marshal said. "Lee McCallum 
asked me to send him out when I telephoned we were com- 
ing." 

"You mean you warned them?" the investigator said. 
"You telephoned ahead that I was coming out with a war- 
rant for these two evaders? Is this how you carry out the 
orders of the United States Government?" 

The marshal was a lean, clean old man who chewed to- 
bacco, who had been born and lived in the county all his life. 

"I understood all you wanted was to arrest these two 
McCallum boys and bring them back to town," he said. 

"It was!" the investigator said. "And now you have 
warned them, given them a chance to run. Possibly put the 
Government to the expense of hunting them down with 
troops. Have you forgotten that you are under a bond your- 
self?" 

"I ain't forgot it," the marshal said. "And ever since we 



46 The Country 

left Jefferson I been trying to tell you something for you 
not to forget. But I reckon it will take these McCallums to 
impress that on you. . . . Pull in behind the other car. We'll 
try to find out first just how sick whoever it is that is sick 



is." 



The investigator drew up behind the other car and 
switched off and blacked out his lights. "These people," he 
said. Then he thought, But this doddering, tobacco-chewing 
old man is one of them, too, despite the honor and pride of 
his office, which should have made him different. So he 
didn't speak it aloud, removing the keys and getting out of 
the car, and then locking the car itself, rolling the windows 
up first, thinking, These people who lie about and conceal 
the ownership of land and property in order to hold relief 
jobs which they have no intention of performing, standing 
on their constitutional rights against having to work, who 
jeopardize the very job itself through petty and transparent 
subterfuge to acquire a free mattress which they intend to 
attempt to sell; who would relinquish even the job, if by so 
doing they could receive free food and a place, any rathole, 
in town to sleep in; who, as farmers, make false statements 
to get seed loans which they will later misuse, and then react 
in loud vituperative outrage and astonishment when caught 
at it. And then, when at long last a suffering and threatened 
Government asks one thing of them in return, one thing 
simply, which is to put their names down on a selective- 
service list, they refuse to do it. 

The old marshal had gone on. The investigator followed, 
through a stout paintless gate in a picket fence, up a broad 
brick walk between two rows of old shabby cedars, toward 
the rambling and likewise paintless sprawl of the two-story 
house in the open hall of which the soft lamplight glowed 
and the lower story of which, as the investigator now per- 
ceived, was of logs. 



The Tall Men 47 

He saw a hall full of soft lamplight beyond a stout paint- 
less gallery running across the log front, from beneath which 
the same dog which they had heard, a big hound, came 
booming again, to stand foursquare facing them in the walk, 
bellowing, until a man's voice spoke to it from the house. 
He followed the marshal up the steps onto the gallery. Then 
he saw the man standing in the door, waiting for them to 
approach a man of about forty-five, not tall, but blocky, 
with a brown, still face and horseman's hands, who looked 
at him once, brief and hard, and then no more, speaking to 
the marshal, "Howdy, Mr. Gombault. Come in." 

"Howdy, Rafe," the marshal said. "Who's sick?" 

"Buddy," the other said. "Slipped and caught his leg in 
the hammer mill this afternoon." 

"Is it bad?" the marshal said. 

"It looks bad to me," the other said. "That's why we sent 
for the doctor instead of bringing him in to town. We 
couldn't get the bleeding stopped." 

"I'm sorry to hear that," the marshal said. "This is Mr. 
Pearson." Once more the investigator found the other look- 
ing at him, the brown eyes still, courteous enough in the 
brown face, the hand he offered hard enough, but the clasp 
quite limp, quite cold. The marshal was still speaking. "From 
Jackson. From the draft board." Then he said, and the in- 
vestigator could discern no change whatever in his tone: 
"He's got a warrant for the boys." 

The investigator could discern no change whatever any- 
where. The limp hard hand merely withdrew from his, the 
still face now looking at the marshal. "You mean we have 
declared war?" 

"No," the marshal said. 

"That's not the question, Mr. McCallum," the investi- 
gator said. "All required of them was to register. Their num- 
bers might not even be drawn this time; under the law of 



48 The Country 

averages, they probably would not be. But they refused 
failed, anyway to register." 

"I see," the other said. He was not looking at the investi- 
gator. The investigator couldn't tell certainly if he was even 
looking at the marshal, although he spoke to him, "You 
want to see Buddy? The doctor's with him now." 

"Wait," the investigator said. "I'm sorry about your 

brother's accident, but I " The marshal glanced back 

at him for a moment, his shaggy gray brows beetling, with 
something at once courteous yet a little impatient about the 
glance, so that during the instant the investigator sensed 
from the old marshal the same quality which had been in 
the other's brief look. The investigator was a man of better 
than average intelligence; he was already becoming aware 
of something a little different here from what he had ex- 
pected. But he had been in relief work in the state several 
years, dealing almost exclusively with country people, so he 
still believed he knew them. So he looked at the old marshal, 
thinking, Yes. The same sort of people, despite the office, 
the authority and responsibility ivhich should have changed 
him. Thinking again, These people. These people. "I in- 
tend to take the night train back to Jackson," he said. "My 
reservation is already made. Serve the warrant and we 
will " 

"Come along," the old marshal said. "We are going to 
have plenty of time." 

So he followed there was nothing else to do fuming 
and seething, attempting in the short length of the hall to 
regain control of himself in order to control the situation, 
because he realized now that if the situation were controlled, 
it would devolve upon him to control it; that if their de- 
parture with their prisoners were expedited, it must be him- 
self and not the old marshal who would expedite it. He had 
been right. The doddering old officer was not only at bot- 



The Tall Men 49 

torn one of these people, he had apparently been corrupted 
anew to his old, inherent, shiftless sloth and unreliability 
merely by entering the house. So he followed in turn, down 
the hall and into a bedroom; whereupon he looked about 
him not only with amazement but with something very like 
terror. The room was a big room, with a bare unpainted 
floor, and besides the bed, it contained only a chair or two 
and one other piece of old-fashioned furniture. Yet to the 
investigator it seemed so filled with tremendous men cast 
in the same mold as the man who had met them that the 
very walls themselves must bulge. Yet they were not big, 
not tall, and it was not vitality, exuberance, because they 
made no sound, merely looking quietly at him where he 
stood in the door, with faces bearing an almost identical 
stamp of kinship a thin, almost frail old man of about 
seventy, slightly taller than the others; a second one, white- 
haired, too, but otherwise identical with the man who had 
met them at the door; a third one about the same age as 
the man who had met them, but with something delicate in 
his face and something tragic and dark and wild in the same 
dark eyes; the two absolutely identical blue-eyed youths; 
and lastly the blue-eyed man on the bed over which the 
doctor, who might have been any city doctor, in his neat 
city suit, leaned all of them turning to look quietly at him 
and the marshal as they entered. And he saw, past the doctor, 
the slit trousers of the man on the bed and the exposed, 
bloody, mangled leg, and he turned sick, stopping just in- 
side the door under that quiet, steady regard while the 
marshal went up to the man who lay on the bed, smoking 
a cob pipe, a big, old-fashioned, wicker-covered demijohn, 
such as the investigator's grandfather had kept his whisky 
in, on the table beside him. 

"Well, Buddy," the marshal said, "this is bad." 

"Ah, it was my own damn fault," the man on the bed 



50 The Country 

said. "Stuart kept warning me about that frame I was using." 

"That's correct," the second old one said. 

Still the others said nothing. They just looked steadily and 
quietly at the investigator until the marshal turned slightly 
and said, "This is Mr. Pearson. From Jackson. He's got a 
warrant for the boys." 

Then the man on the bed said, "What for?" 

"That draft business, Buddy," the marshal said. 

"We're not at war now," the man on the bed said. 

"No," the marshal said. "It's that new law. They didn't 
register." 

"What are you going to do with them?" 

"It's a warrant, Buddy. Swore out." 

"That means jail." 

"It's a warrant," the old marshal said. Then the investi- 
gator saw that the man on the bed was watching him, puff- 
ing steadily at the pipe. 

"Pour me some whisky, Jackson," he said. 

"No," the doctor said. "He's had too much already." 

"Pour me some whisky, Jackson," the man on the bed 
said. He puffed steadily at the pipe, looking at the investi- 
gator. "You come from the Government?" he said. 

"Yes," the investigator said. "They should have registered. 

That's all required of them yet. They did not " His 

voice ceased, while the seven pairs of eyes contemplated him, 
and the man on the bed puffed steadily. 

"We would have still been here," the man on the bed 
said. "We wasn't going to run." He turned his head. The 
two youths were standing side by side at the foot of the bed. 
"Anse, Lucius," he said. 

To the investigator it sounded as if they answered as one, 
"Yes, father." 

"This gentleman has come all the way from Jackson to 



The Tall Men 51 

say the Government is ready for you. I reckon the quickest 
place to enlist will be Memphis. Go upstairs and pack." 

The investigator started, moved forward. "Wait!" he 
cried. 

But Jackson, the eldest, had forestalled him. He said, 
"Wait," also, and now they were not looking at the investi- 
gator. They were looking at the doctor. 

"What about his leg?" Jackson said. 

"Look at it," the doctor said. "He almost amputated it 
himself. It won't wait. And he can't be moved now. I'll 
need my nurse to help me, and some ether, provided he 
hasn't had too much whisky to stand the anesthetic too. 
One of you can drive to town in my car. I'll telephone " 

"Ether?" the man on the bed said. "What for? You just 
said yourself it's pretty near off now. I could whet up one 
of Jackson's butcher knives and finish it myself, with another 
drink or two. Go on. Finish it." 

"You couldn't stand any more shock," the doctor said. 
"This is whisky talking now." 

"Shucks," the other said. "One day in France we was 
running through a wheat field and I saw the machine gun, 
coming across the wheat, and I tried to jump it like you 
would jump a fence rail somebody was swinging at your 
middle, only I never made it. And I was on the ground then, 
and along toward dark that begun to hurt, only about that 
time something went whang on the back of my helmet, like 
when you hit a anvil, so I never knowed nothing else until 
I woke up. There was a heap of us racked up along a bank 
outside a field dressing station, only it took a long time for 
the doctor to get around to all of us, and by that time it 
was hurting bad. This here ain't hurt none to speak of since 
I got a-holt of this johnny-jug. You go on and finish it. If 
it's help you need, Stuart and Rafe will help you. . . . Pour 
me a drink, Jackson." 



52 The Country 

This time the doctor raised the demijohn and examined 
the level of the liquor. "There's a good quart gone," he said. 
"If you've drunk a quart of whisky since four o'clock, I 
doubt if you could stand the anesthetic. Do you think you 
could stand it if I finished it now?" 

"Yes, finish it. I've ruined it; I want to get shut of it." 

The doctor looked about at the others, at the still, identical 
faces watching him. "If I had him in town, in the hospital, 
with a nurse to watch him, I'd probably wait until he got 
over this first shock and got the whisky out of his system. 
But he can't be moved now, and I can't stop the bleeding 
like this, and even if I had ether or a local anesthetic " 

"Shucks," the man on the bed said. "God never made no 
better local nor general comfort or anesthetic neither than 
what's in this johnny-jug. And this ain't Jackson's leg nor 
Stuart's nor Rafe's nor Lee's. It's mine. I done started it; I 
reckon I can finish cutting it off any way I want to." 

But the doctor was still looking at Jackson. "Well, Mr. 
McCallum?" he said. "You're the oldest." 

But it was Stuart who answered. "Yes," he said. "Finish 
it. What do you want? Hot water, I reckon." 

"Yes," the doctor said. "Some clean sheets. Have you got 
a big table you can move in here?" 

"The kitchen table," the man who had met them at the 
door said. "Me and the boys " 

"Wait," the man on the bed said. "The boys won't have 
time to help you." He looked at them again. "Anse, Lucius," 
he said. 

Again it seemed to the investigator that they answered as 
one, "Yes, father." 

"This gentleman yonder is beginning to look impatient. 
You better start. Come to think of it, you won't need to 
pack. You will have uniforms in a day or two. Take the 
truck. There won't be nobody to drive you to Memphis and 



The Tall Men 53 

bring the truck back, so you can leave it at the Gayoso 
Feed Company until we can send for it. I'd like for you to 
enlist into the old Sixth Infantry, where I used to be. But I 
reckon that's too much to hope, and you'll just have to 
chance where they send you. But it likely won't matter, 
once you are in. The Government done right by me in my 
day, and it will do right by you. You just enlist wherever 
they want to send you, need you, and obey your sergeants 
and officers until you find out how to be soldiers. Obey 
them, but remember your name and don't take nothing from 
no man. You can go now." 

"Wait!" the investigator cried again; again he started, 
moved forward into the center of the room. "I protest this! 
I'm sorry about Mr. McCallum's accident. I'm sorry about 
the whole business. But it's out of my hands and out of his 
hands now. This charge, failure to register according to law, 
has been made and the warrant issued. It cannot be evaded 
this way. The course of the action must be completed before 
any other step can be taken. They should have thought of 
this when these boys failed to register. If Mr. Gombault 
refuses to serve this warrant, I will serve it myself and take 
these men back to Jefferson with me to answer this charge 
as made. And I must warn Mr. Gombault that he will be 
cited for contempt!" 

The old marshal turned, his shaggy eyebrows beetling 
again, speaking down to the investigator as if he were a 
child, "Ain't you found out yet that me or you neither ain't 
going nowhere for a while?" 

"What?" the investigator cried. He looked about at the 
grave faces once more contemplating him with that remote 
and speculative regard. "Am I being threatened?" he cried. 

"Ain't anybody paying any attention to you at all," the 
marshal said. "Now you just be quiet for a while, and you 
will be all right, and after a while we can go back to town." 



54 The Country 

So he stopped again and stood while the grave, contem- 
plative faces freed him once more of that impersonal and 
unbearable regard, and saw the two youths approach the 
bed and bend down in turn and kiss their father on the 
mouth, and then turn as one and leave the room, passing 
him without even looking at him. And sitting in the lamplit 
hall beside the old marshal, the bedroom door closed now, 
he heard the truck start up and back and turn and go down 
the road, the sound of it dying away, ceasing, leaving the 
Still, hot night the Mississippi Indian summer, which had 
already outlasted half of November filled with the loud 
last shrilling of the summer's cicadas, as though they, too, 
were aware of the imminent season of cold weather and of 
death. 

"I remember old Anse," the marshal said pleasantly, chat- 
tily, in that tone in which an adult addresses a strange child. 
"He's been dead fifteen-sixteen years now. He was about 
sixteen when the old war broke out, and he walked all the 
way to Virginia to get into it. He could have enlisted and 
fought right here at home, but his ma was a Carter, so 
wouldn't nothing do him but to go all the way back to 
Virginia to do his fighting, even though he hadn't never seen 
Virginia before himself; walked all the way back to a land 
he hadn't never even seen before and enlisted in Stonewall 
Jackson's army and stayed in it all through the Valley, and 
right up to Chancellorsville, where them Carolina boys shot 
Jackson by mistake, and right on up to that morning in 
'Sixty-five when Sheridan's cavalry blocked the road from 
Appomattox to the Valley, where they might have got away 
again. And he walked back to Mississippi with just about 
what he had carried away with him when he left, and he 
got married and built the first story of this house this here 
log story we're in right now and started getting them boys 
Jackson and Stuart and Raphael and Lee and Buddy. 



The Tall Men 55 

"Buddy come along late, late enough to be in the other 
war, in France in it. You heard him in there. He brought 
back two medals, an American medal and a French one, and 
no man knows till yet how he got them, just what he done. 
I don't believe he even told Jackson and Stuart and them. 
He hadn't hardly got back home, with them numbers on 
his uniform and the wound stripes and them two medals, 
before he had found him a girl, found her right off, and a year 
later them twin boys was born, the livin', spittin' image of 
old Anse McCallum. If old Anse had just been about seventy- 
five years younger, the three of them might have been 
thriblets. I remember them two little critters exactly alike, 
and wild as spikehorn bucks, running around here day and 
night both with a pack of coon dogs until they got big 
enough to help Buddy and Stuart and Lee with the farm 
and the gin, and Rafe with the horses and mules, when he 
would breed and raise and train them and take them to 
Memphis to sell, right on up to three, four years back, when 
they went to the agricultural college for a year to learn 
more about whiteface cattle. 

"That was after Buddy and them had quit raising cotton. 
I remember that too. It was when the Government first 
begun to interfere with how a man farmed his own land, 
raised his cotton. Stabilizing the price, using up the surplus, 
they called it, giving a man advice and help, whether he 
wanted it or not. You may have noticed them boys in yon- 
der tonight; curious folks almost, you might call them. That 
first year, when county agents was trying to explain the 
new system to farmers, the agent come out here and tried 
to explain it to Buddy and Lee and Stuart, explaining how 
they would cut down the crop, but that the Government 
would pay farmers the difference, and so they would ac- 
tually be better off than trying to farm by themselves. 

" 'Why, we're much obliged,' Buddy says. 'But we don't 



56 The Country 

need no help. We'll just make the cotton like we always 
done; if we can't make a crop of it, that will just be our look- 
out and our loss, and we'll try again.' 

"So they wouldn't sign no papers nor no cards nor noth- 
ing. They just went on and made the cotton like old Anse 
had taught them to; it was like they just couldn't believe 
that the Government aimed to help a man whether he 
wanted help or not, aimed to interfere with how much of 
anything he could make by hard work on his own land, 
making the crop and ginning it right here in their own gin, 
like they had always done, and hauling it to town to sell, 
hauling it all the way into Jefferson before they found out 
they couldn't sell it because, in the first place, they had 
made too much of it and, in the second place, they never 
had no card to sell what they would have been allowed. So 
they hauled it back. The gin wouldn't hold all of it, so they 
put some of it under Raf e's mule shed and they put the rest 
of it right here in the hall where we are setting now, where 
they would have to walk around it all winter and keep them- 
selves reminded to be sho and fill out that card next time. 

"Only next year they didn't fill out no papers neither. It 
was like they still couldn't believe it, still believed in the 
freedom and liberty to make or break according to a man's 
fitness and will to work, guaranteed by the Government 
that old Anse had tried to tear in two once and failed, and 
admitted in good faith he had failed and taken the conse- 
quences, and that had give Buddy a medal and taken care 
of him when he was far away from home in a strange land 
and hurt. 

"So they made that second crop. And they couldn't sell it 
to nobody neither because they never had no cards. This 
time they built a special shed to put it under, and I remember 
how in that second winter Buddy come to town one day to 
see Lawyer Gavin Stevens. Not for legal advice how to sue 



The Tall Men 57 

the Government or somebody into buying the cotton, even 
if they never had no card for it, but just to find out why. 'I 
was for going ahead and signing up for it,' Buddy says. 'If 
that's going to be the new rule. But we talked it over, and 
Jackson ain't no farmer, but he knowed father longer than 
the rest of us, and he said father would have said no, and I 
reckon now he would have been right.' 

"So they didn't raise any more cotton; they had a plenty 
of it to last a while twenty-two bales, I think it was. That 
was when they went into whitef ace cattle, putting old Anse's 
cotton land into pasture, because that's what he would have 
wanted them to do if the only way they could raise cotton 
was by the Government telling them how much they could 
raise and how much they could sell it for, and where, and 
when, and then pay them for not doing the work they didn't 
do. Only even when they didn't raise cotton, every year the 
county agent's young fellow would come out to measure 
the pasture crops they planted so he could pay them for that, 
even if they never had no not-cotton to be paid for. Except 
that he never measured no crop on this place. i You're wel- 
come to look at what we are doing,' Buddy says. 'But don't 
draw it down on your map.' 

" 'But you can get money for this,' the young fellow says. 
'The Government wants to pay you for planting all this.' 

" 'We are aiming to get money for it,' Buddy says. 'When 
we can't, we will try something else. But not from the Gov- 
ernment. Give that to them that want to take it. We can 
make out.' 

"And that's about all. Them twenty-two bales of orphan 
cotton are down yonder in the gin right now, because 
there's room for it in the gin now because they ain't using 
the gin no more. And them boys grew up and went off a year 
to the agricultural college to learn right about whiteface 
cattle, and then come back to the rest of them these here 



58 The Country 

curious folks living off here to themselves, with the rest of 
the world all full of pretty neon lights burning night and 
day both, and easy, quick money scattering itself around 
everywhere for any man to grab a little, and every man with 
a shiny new automobile already wore out and throwed away 
and the new one delivered before the first one was even paid 
for, and everywhere a fine loud grabble and snatch of AAA 
and WPA and a dozen other three-letter reasons for a man 
not to work. Then this here draft comes along, and these 
curious folks ain't got around to signing that neither, and 
you come all the way up from Jackson with your paper all 
signed and regular, and we come out here, and after a while 
we can go back to town. A man gets around, don't he?" 

"Yes," the investigator said. "Do you suppose we can go 
back to town now?" 

"No," the marshal told him in that same kindly tone, "not 
just yet. But we can leave after a while. Of course you will 
miss your train. But there will be another one tomorrow." 

He rose, though the investigator had heard nothing. The 
investigator watched him go down the hall and open the bed- 
room door and enter and close it behind him. The investiga- 
tor sat quietly, listening to the night sounds and looking at 
the closed door until it opened presently and the marshal 
came back, carrying something in a bloody sheet, carrying it 
gingerly. 

"Here," he said. "Hold it a mihute." 

"It's bloody," the investigator said. 

"That's all right," the marshal said. "We can wash when 
we get through." So the investigator took the bundle and 
stood holding it while he watched the old marshal go back 
down the hall and on through it and vanish and return pres- 
ently with a lighted lantern and a shovel. "Come along," he 
said. "We're pretty near through now." 

The investigator followed him out of the house and across 



The Tall Men 59 

the yard, carrying gingerly the bloody, shattered, heavy 
bundle in which it still seemed to him he could feel some 
warmth of life, the marshal striding on ahead, the lantern 
swinging against his leg, the shadow of his striding scissoring 
and enormous along the earth, his voice still coming back 
over his shoulder, chatty and cheerful, "Yes, sir. A man gets 
around and he sees a heap; a heap of folks in a heap of situa- 
tions. The trouble is, we done got into the habit of confus- 
ing the situations with the folks. Take yourself, now," he 
said in that same kindly tone, chatty and easy; "you mean 
all right. You just went and got yourself all fogged up with 
rules and regulations. That's our trouble. We done invented 
ourselves so many alphabets and rules and recipes that we 
can't see anything else; if what we see can't be fitted to an 
alphabet or a rule, we are lost. We have come to be like 
critters doctor folks might have created in laboratories, that 
have learned how to slip off their bones and guts and still 
live, still be kept alive indefinite and forever maybe even 
without even knowing the bones and the guts are gone. We 
have slipped our backbone; we have about decided a man 
don't need a backbone any more; to have one is old-fashioned. 
But the groove where the backbone used to be is still there, 
and the backbone has been kept alive, too, and someday 
we're going to slip back onto it. I don't know just when nor 
just how much of a wrench it will take to teach us, but 
someday." 

They had left the yard now. They were mounting a slope; 
ahead of them the investigator could see another clump of 
cedars, a small clump, somehow shaggily formal against the 
starred sky. The marshal entered it and stopped and set the 
lantern down and, following with the bundle, the investiga- 
tor saw a small rectangle of earth enclosed by a low brick 
coping. Then he saw the two graves, or the headstones 
two plain granite slabs set upright in the earth. 



60 The Country 

"Old Anse and Mrs. Anse," the marshal said. "Buddy's 
wife wanted to be buried with her folks. I reckon she would 
have been right lonesome up here with just McCallums. Now, 
let's see." He stood for a moment, his chin in his hand; to the 
investigator he looked exactly like an old lady trying to de- 
cide where to set out a shrub. "They was to run from left to 
right, beginning with Jackson. But after the boys was born^ 
Jackson and Stuart was to come up here by their pa and ma t 
so Buddy could move up some and make room. So he will be 
about here." He moved the lantern nearer and took up the 
shovel. Then he saw the investigator still holding the bundle. 
"Set it down," he said. "I got to dig first." 

"I'll hold it," the investigator said. 

"Nonsense, put it down." the marshal said. "Buddy won't 
mind." 

So the investigator put the bundle down on the brick cop- 
ing and the marshal began to dig, skillfully and rapidly, still 
talking in that cheerful, interminable voice, "Yes, sir. We 
done forgot about folks. Life has done got cheap, and life 
ain't cheap. Life's a pretty durn valuable thing. I don't mean 
just getting along from one WPA relief check to the next 
one, but honor and pride and discipline that make a man 
worth preserving, make him of any value. That's what we 
got to learn again. Maybe it takes trouble, bad trouble, to 
teach it back to us; maybe it was the walking to Virginia 
because that's where his ma come from, and losing a war and 
then walking back, that taught it to old Anse. Anyway, he 
seems to learned it, and to learned it good enough to bequeath 
it to his boys. Did you notice how all Buddy had to do was 
to tell them boys of his it was time to go, because the Gov- 
ernment had sent them word? And how they told him 
good-by? Crowned men kissing one another without hiding 
and without shame. Maybe that's what I am trying to say. 
, . . There." he said. "That's big enough." 



The Tall Men 61 

He moved quickly, easily; before the investigator could 
stir, he had lifted the bundle into the narrow trench and was 
covering it, covering it as rapidly as he had dug, smoothing 
the earth over it with the shovel. Then he stood up and raised 
the lantern a tall, lean old man, breathing easily and lightly. 

"I reckon we can go back to town now," he said. 



A Bear Hunt 



RATLIFF is TELLING THIS. He is a sewing-machine agent; time 
was when he traveled about our county in a light, strong 
buckboard drawn by a sturdy, wiry, mismatched team of 
horses; now he uses a model T Ford, which also carries his 
demonstrator machine in a tin box on the rear, shaped like a 
dog kennel and painted to resemble a house. 

Ratliff may be seen anywhere without surprise the only 
man present at the bazaars and sewing bees of farmers' wives; 
moving among both men and women at all-day singings at 
country churches, and singing, too, in a pleasant barytone. 
He was even at this bear hunt of which he speaks, at the 
annual hunting camp of Major de Spain in the river bottom 
twenty miles from town, even though there was no one 
there to whom he might possibly have sold a machine, since 
Mrs. de Spain doubtless already owned one, unless she had 
given it to one of her married daughters, and the other man 
the man called Lucius Provine with whom he became in- 
volved, to the violent detriment of his face and other mem- 
bers, could not have bought one for his wife even if he 
would, without Ratliff sold it to him on indefinite credit. 

Provine is also a native of the county. But he is forty now 
and most of his teeth are gone, and it is years now since he 
and his dead brother and another dead and forgotten con- 
temporary named Jack Bonds were known as the Provine 



64 The Country 

gang and terrorized our quiet town after the unimaginative 
fashion of wild youth by letting off pistols on the square late 
Saturday nights or galloping their horses down scurrying 
and screaming lanes of churchgoing ladies on Sunday morn- 
ing. Younger citizens of the town do not know him at all 
save as a tall, apparently strong and healthy man who loafs 
in a brooding, saturnine fashion wherever he will be allowed, 
never exactly accepted by any group, and who makes no 
effort whatever to support his wife and three children. 

There are other men among us now whose families are in 
want; men who, perhaps, would not work anyway, but who 
now, since the last few years, cannot find work. These all 
attain and hold to a certain respectability by acting as agents 
for the manufacturers of minor articles like soap and men's 
toilet accessories and kitchen objects, being seen constantly 
about the square and the streets carrying small black sample 
cases. One day, to our surprise, Provine also appeared with 
such a case, though within less than a week the town officers 
discovered that it contained whisky in pint bottles. Major 
de Spain extricated him somehow, as it was Major de Spain 
who supported his family by eking out the money which 
Mrs. Provine earned by sewing and such perhaps as a 
Roman gesture of salute and farewell to the bright figure 
which Provine had been before time whipped him. 

For there are older men who remember the Butch he has 
even lost somewhere in his shabby past the lusty dare-devil- 
try of the nickname Provine of twenty years ago; that 
youth without humor, yet with some driving, inarticulate 
zest for breathing which has long since burned out of him, 
who performed in a fine frenzy, which was, perhaps, mostly 
alcohol, certain outrageous and spontaneous deeds, one of 
which was the Negro-picnic business. The picnic was at a 
Negro church a few miles from town. In the midst of it, the 
two Provines and Jack Bonds, returning from a dance in the 



A Bear Hunt 65 

country, rode up with drawn pistols and freshly lit cigars; 
and taking the Negro men one by one, held the burning cigar 
ends to the popular celluloid collars of the day, leaving each 
victim's neck ringed with an abrupt and faint and painless 
ling of carbon. This is he of whom Ratliff is talking. 

But there is one thing more which must be told here in 
order to set the stage for Ratliff. Five miles farther down the 
river from Major de Spain's camp, and in an even wilder part 
of the river's jungle of cane and gum and pin oak, there is an 
Indian mound. Aboriginal, it rises profoundly and darkly 
enigmatic, the only elevation of any kind in the wild, flat 
jungle of river bottom. Even to some of us children though 
we were, yet we were descended of literate, town-bred peo- 
ple it possessed inferences of secret and violent blood, of 
savage and sudden destruction, as though the yells and hatch- 
ets which we associated with Indians through the hidden and 
secret dime novels which we passed among ourselves were 
but trivial and momentary manifestations of what dark 
power still dwelled or lurked there, sinister, a little sar- 
donic, like a dark and nameless beast lightly and lazily slum- 
bering with bloody jaws this, perhaps, due to the fact that 
a remnant of a once powerful clan of the Chickasaw tribe 
still lived beside it under Government protection. They now 
had American names and they lived as the sparse white peo- 
ple who surrounded them in turn lived. 

Yet we never saw them, since they never came to town, 
having their own settlement and store. When we grew older 
we realized that they were no wilder or more illiterate than 
the white people, and that probably their greatest deviation 
from the norm and this, in our country, no especial devia- 
tion was the fact that they were a little better than suspect 
to manufacture moonshine whisky back in the swamps. Yet 
to us, as children, they were a little fabulous, their swamp- 
hidden lives inextricable from the life of the dark mound, 



66 The Country 

which some of us had never seen, yet of which we had all 
heard, as though they had been set by the dark powers to be. 
guardians of it. 

As I said, some of us had never seen the mound, yet all of 
us had heard of it, talked of it as boys will. It was as much a 
part of our lives and background as the land itself, as the lost 
Civil War and Sherman's march, or that there were Negroes 
among us living in economic competition who bore our 
family names; only more immediate, more potential and alive. 
When I was fifteen, a companion and I, on a dare, went into 
the mound one day just at sunset. We saw some of those In- 
dians for the first time; we got directions from them and 
reached the top of the mound just as the sun set. We had 
camping equipment with us, but we made no fire. We didn't 
even make down our beds. We just sat side by side on that 
mound until it became light enough to find our way back to 
the road. We didn't talk. When we looked at each other in 
the gray dawn, our faces were gray, too, quiet, very grave. 
When we reached town again, we didn't talk either. We just 
parted and went home and went to bed. That's what we 
thought, felt, about the mound. We were children, it is true, 
yet we were descendants of people who read books and who 
were or should have been beyond superstition and im- 
pervious to mindless fear. 

Now Ratliff tells about Lucius Provine and his hiccup. 

When I got back to town, the first fellow I met says, 
"What happened to your face, Ratliff? Was De Spain using 
you in place of his bear hounds?" 

"No, boys," I says. "Hit was a cattymount." 

"What was you trying to do to hit, Ratliff?" a fellow says. 

"Boys," I says, "be dog if I know." 

And that was the truth. Hit was a good while after they 
had done hauled Luke Provine offen me that I found that 



A Bear Hunt 67 

out. Because I never knowed who Old Man Ash was, no 
more than Luke did. I just knowed that he was Major's nig- 
ger, a-helping around camp. All I knowed, when the whole 
thing started, was what I thought I was aiming to do to 
maybe help Luke sho enough, or maybe at the outside to just 
have a little fun with him without hurting him, or even 
maybe to do Major a little favor by getting Luke outen camp 
for a while. And then hyer hit is about midnight and that 
durn fellow comes swurging outen the woods wild as a 
skeered deer, and runs in where they are setting at the poker 
game, and I says, "Well, you ought to be satisfied. You done 
run clean out from under them." And he stopped dead still 
and give me a kind of glare of wild astonishment; he didn't 
even know that they had quit; and then he swurged all over 
me like a barn falling down. 

Hit sho stopped that poker game. Hit taken three or four 
of them to drag him off en me, with Major turned in his chair 
with a set of threes in his hand, a-hammering on the table 
and hollering cusses. Only a right smart of the helping they 
done was stepping on my face and hands and feet. Hit was 
like a fahr the fellows with the water hose done the most 
part of the damage. 

"What the tarnation hell does this mean?" Major hollers, 
with three or four fellows holding Luke, and him crying like 
a baby. 

"He set them on me!" Luke says. "He was the one sent me 
up there, and I'm a-going to kill him!" 

"Set who on you?" Major says. 

"Them Indians!" Luke says, crying. Then he tried to get 
at me again, flinging them fellows holding his arms around 
like they was rag dolls, until Major pure cussed him quiet. 
He's a man yet. Don't let hit fool you none because he claims 
he ain't strong enough to work. Maybe hit's because he ain't 
never wore his strength down toting around one of them 



68 The Country 

little black satchels full of pink galluses and shaving soap. 
Then Major asked me what hit was all about, and I told him 
how I had just been trying to help Luke get shed of them 
hiccups. 

Be dog if I didn't feel right sorry for him. I happened to 
be passing out that way, and so I just thought I would drop 
in on them and see what luck they was having, and I druv up 
about sundown, and the first fellow I see was Luke. I wasn't 
surprised, since this here would be the biggest present gather- 
ing of men in the county, let alone the free eating and 
whisky, so I says, "Well, this is a surprise." And he says: 

"Hic-uh! Hic-ow! Hic-oh! Hie oh, God!" He had done 
already had them since nine o'clock the night before; he had 
been teching the jug ever' time Major offered him one and 
ever' time he could get to hit when Old Man Ash wasn't 
looking; and two days before Major had killed a bear, and I 
reckon Luke had already et more possum-rich bear pork 
let alone the venison they had, with maybe a few coons and 
squirls throwed in for seasoning than he could have hauled 
off in a waggin. So here he was, going three times to the min- 
ute, like one of these here clock bombs; only hit was bear 
meat and whisky instead of dynamite, and so he couldn't ex- 
plode and put himself outen his misery. 

They told me how he had done already kept ever'body 
awake most of the night before, and how Major got up mad 
anyway, and went off with his gun and Ash to handle them 
two bear hounds, and Luke following outen pure misery, I 
reckon, since he hadn't slept no more than nobody else 
walking along behind Major, saying, "Hic-ah! Hic-ow! Hic- 
oh! Hie oh, Lord! " until Major turns on him and says: 

"Get to hell over yonder with them shotgun fellows on 
the deer stands. How do you expect me to walk up on a bear 
or even hear the dogs when they strike? I might as well be 
riding a motorcycle." 



A Bear Hunt 69 

So Luke went on back to where the deer standers was 
along the log-line levee. I reckon he never so much went 
away as he kind of died away in the distance like that ere mo- 
torcycle Major mentioned. He never tried to be quiet. I 
reckon he knowed hit wouldn't be no use. He never tried to 
keep to the open, neither. I reckon he thought that any fool 
would know from his sound that he wasn't no deer. No. I 
reckon he was so mizzable by then that he hoped somebody 
would shoot him. But nobody never, and he come to the first 
stand, where Uncle Ike McCaslin was, and set down on a log 
behind Uncle Ike with his elbows on his knees and his face 
in his hands, going, "Hic-uh! Hic-uh! Hic-uh! Hic-uh!" 
until Uncle Ike turns and says: 

"Confound you, boy; get away from here. Do you reckon 
any varmint in the world is going to walk up to a hay baler? 
Go drink some water." 

"I done already done that," Luke says, without moving. 
"I been drinking water since nine o'clock last night. I done 
already drunk so much water that if I was to fall down I 
would gush like a artesian well." 

"Well, go away anyhow," Uncle Ike says. "Get away 
from here." 

So Luke gets up and kind of staggers away again, kind of 
dying away again like he was run by one of these hyer one- 
cylinder gasoline engines, only a durn sight more often and 
regular. He went on down the levee to where the next stand 
was, and they druv him way from there, and he went on 
toward the next one. I reckon he was still hoping that some- 
body would take pity on him and shoot him, because now he 
kind of seemed to give up. Now, when he come to the "oh, 
God" part of hit, they said you could hyear him clean back 
to camp. They said he would echo back from the canebrake 
across the river like one of these hyer loud-speakers down in 
a well. They said that even the dogs on the trail quit baying, 



70 The Country 

and so they all come up and made him come back to camp. 
That's where he was when I come in. And Old Man Ash was 
there, too, where him and Major had done come in so Major 
could take a nap, and neither me nor Luke noticing him 
except as just another nigger around. 

That was hit. Neither one of us knowed or even thought 
about him. I be dog if hit don't look like sometimes that when 
a fellow sets out to play a joke, hit ain't another fellow he's 
playing that joke on; hit's a kind of big power laying still 
somewhere in the dark that he sets out to prank with without 
knowing hit, and hit all depends on whether that ere power is 
in the notion to take a joke or not, whether or not hit blows 
up right in his face like this one did in mine. Because I says, 
"You done had them since nine o'clock yesterday? That's 
nigh twenty-four hours. Seems like to me you'd 'a' done 
something to try to stop them." And him looldng at me like 
he couldn't make up his mind whether to jump up and bite 
my head off or just to try and bite hisn off, saying "Hic-uh! 
Hic-uh!" slow and regular. Then he says, 

"I don't want to get shed of them. I like them. But if you 
had them, I would get shed of them for you. You want to 
know how?" 

"How? "I says. 

"I'd just tear your head off. Then you wouldn't have 
nothing to hiccup with. They wouldn't worry you then. 
I'd be glad to do hit for you." 

"Sho now," I says, looking at him setting there on the 
kitchen steps hit was after supper, but he hadn't et none, 
being as his throat had done turned into a one-way street on 
him, you might say going "Hic-uh! Hic-oh! Hic-oh! Hic- 
uh!" because I reckon Major had done told him what would 
happen to him if he taken to hollering again. I never meant no 
harm. Besides, they had done already told me how he had 
kept everybody awake all night the night before and had 



A Bear Hunt yj 

done skeered all the game outen that part of the bottom, and 
besides, the walk might help him to pass his own time. So 
I says, "I believe I know how you might get shed of them. 
But, of course, if you don't want to get shed of them " 

And he says, "I just wish somebody would tell me how. 
I'd pay ten dollars just to set here for one minute without 

saying 'hie' " Well, that set him off sho enough. Hit 

was like up to that time his insides had been satisfied with 
going u hic-uh" steady, but quiet, but now, when he re- 
minded himself, hit was like he had done opened a cut-out, 
because right away he begun hollering, "Hie oh, God!" like 
when them fellows on the deer stands had made him come 
back to camp, and I heard Major's feet coming bup-bup-bup 
across the floor. Even his feet sounded mad, and I says quick, 

"Sh-h-h-h! You don't want to get Major mad again, now." 

So he quieted some, setting there on the kitchen steps, 
with Old Man Ash and the other niggers moving around 
inside the kitchen, and he says, "I will try anything you can 
sujest. I done tried ever' thing I knowed and ever'thing any- 
body else told me to. I done held my breath and drunk water 
until I feel just like one of these hyer big automobile tahrs 
they use to advertise with, and I hung by my knees offen 
that limb yonder for fifteen minutes and drunk a pint bottle 
full of water upside down, and somebody said to swallow a 
buckshot and I done that. And still I got them. What do you 
know that I can do?" 

"Well," I says, "I don't know what you would do. But if 
hit was me that had them, I'd go up to the mound and get 
old John Basket to cure me." 

Then he set right still, and then he turned slow and looked 
at me; I be dog if for a minute he didn't even hiccup. "John 
Basket?" he says. 

"Sho," I says. "Them Indians knows all sorts of dodges that 
white doctors ain't hyeard about yet. He'd be glad to do 



j2 The Country 

that much for a white man, too, them pore aboriginees 
would, because the white folks have been so good to them 
not only letting them keep that ere hump of dirt that don't 
nobody want noways, but letting them use names like ourn 
and selling them flour and sugar and farm tools at not no 
more than a fair profit above what they would cost a white 
man. I hyear tell how pretty soon they are even going to start 
letting them come to town once a week. Old Basket would 
be glad to cure them hiccups for you." 

"John Basket," he says; "them Indians," he says, hiccuping 
slow and quiet and steady. Then he says right sudden, "I be 
dog if I will!" Then I be dog if hit didn't sound like he was 
crying. He jumped up and stood there cussing, sounding like 
he was crying. "Hit ain't a man hyer has got any mercy on 
me, white or black. Hyer I done suffered and suffered more 
than twenty-four hours without food or sleep, and not a 
sonabitch of them has any mercy or pity on me!" 

"Well, I was trying to," I says. "Hit ain't me that's got 
them. I just thought, seeing as how you had done seemed to 
got to the place where couldn't no white man help you. But 
hit ain't no law making you go up there and get shed of 
them." So I made like I was going away. I went back around 
the corner of the kitchen and watched him set down on the 
steps again, going "Hic-uh! Hic-uh!" slow and quiet again; 
and then I seen, through the kitchen window, Old Man Ash 
standing just inside the kitchen door, right still, with his head 
bent like he was listening. But still I never suspected nothing. 
Not even did I suspect nothing when, after a while, I watched 
Luke get up again, sudden but quiet, and stand for a minute 
looking at the window where the poker game and the folks 
was, and then look off into the dark towards the road that 
went down the bottom. Then he went into the house, quiet, 
and come out a minute later with a lighted lantrun and a 
shotgun. I don't know whose gun hit was and I don't reckon 



A Bear Hunt 73 

he did, nor cared neither. He just come out kind of quiet 
and determined, and went on down the road. I could see the 
lantrun, but I could hyear him a long time after the lantrun 
had done disappeared. I had come back around the kitchen 
then and I was listening to him dying away down the bot- 
tom, when old Ash says behind me: 

"He gwine up dar?" 

"Up where? "I says. 

"Up to de mound," he says. 

"Why, I be dog if I know," I says. "The last time I talked 
to him he never sounded like he was fixing to go nowhere. 
Maybe he just decided to take a walk. Hit might do him some 
good; make him sleep tonight and help him get up a appetite 
for breakfast maybe. What do you think?" 

But Ash never said nothing. He just went on back into the 
kitchen. And still I never suspected nothing. How could I? 
I hadn't never even seen Jefferson in them days. I hadn't 
never even seen a pair of shoes, let alone two stores in a row 
or a arc light. 

So I went on in where the poker game was, and I says, 
"Well, gentlemen, I reckon we might get some sleep to- 
night." And I told them what had happened, because more 
than like he would stay up there until daylight rather than 
walk them five miles back in the dark, because maybe them 
Indians wouldn't mind a little thing like a fellow with hic- 
cups, like white folks would. And I be dog if Major didn't 
rear up about hit. 

"Dammit, Ratliff," he says, "you ought not to done that." 

"Why, I just sujested hit to him, Major, for a joke," I says. 
"I just told him about how old Basket was a kind of doctor. 
I never expected him to take hit serious. Maybe he ain't even 
going up there. Maybe's he's just went out after a coon." 

But most of them felt about hit like I did. "Let him go," 
Mr. Fraser says. "I hope he walks around all night. Damn if, 



74 The Country 

I slept a wink for him all night long. . . . Deal the cards. 
Uncle Ike." 

"Can't stop him now, noways," Uncle Ike says, dealing 
the cards. "And maybe John Basket can do something for 
his hiccups. Durn young fool, eating and drinking himself to 
where he can't talk nor swallow neither. He set behind me 
on a log this morning, sounding just like a hay baler. I thought 
once I'd have to shoot him to get rid of him. . . . Queen bets 
a quarter, gentlemen." 

So I set there watching them, thinking now and then about 
that durn fellow with his shotgun and his lantrun stumbling 
and blundering along through the woods, walking five miles 
in the dark to get shed of his hiccups, with the varmints all 
watching him and wondering just what kind of a hunt this 
was and just what kind of a two-leg varmint hit was that 
made a noise like that, and about them Indians up at the 
mound when he would come walking in, and I would have 
to laugh until Major says, "What in hell are you mumbling 
an J giggling at?" 

"iNbthing," I says. "I was just thinking about a fellow 
I kncow." 

"A-nd damn if you hadn't ought to be out there with him," 
Majc->r says. Then he decided hit was about drink time and he 
beg^m to holler for Ash. Finally I went to the door and hol~ 
lere^d for Ash towards the kitchen, but hit was another one 
of i the niggers that answered. When he come in with the 
deniijohn and fixings, Major looks up and says "Where's 
Ash?" 

"He done gone," the nigger says. 
"Gone?" Major says. "Gone where?" 
"He say he gwine up to'ds de mound," the nigger says. 
And still I never knowed, never suspected. I just thought to 
myself, "That old nigger has turned powerful tender-hearted 
all of a sudden, being skeered for Luke Provine to walk 



A Bear Hunt 75 

around by himself in the dark. Or maybe Ash likes to listen 
to them hiccups," I thought to myself. 

"Up to the mound?" Major says. "By dad, if he comes 
back here full of John Basket's bust-skull whisky I'll skin 
him alive." 

"He ain't say what he gwine fer," the nigger says. "All he 
tell me when he left, he gwine up to'ds de mound and he be 
back by daylight." 

"He better be," Major says. "He better be sober too." 

So we set there and they went on playing and me watching 
them like a durn fool, not suspecting nothing, just thinking 
how hit was a shame that that durned old nigger would have 
to come in and spoil Luke's trip, and hit come along towards 
eleven o'clock and they begun to talk about going to bed, 
being as they was all going out on stand tomorrow, when we 
hyeard the sound. Hit sounded like a drove of wild horses 
coming up that road, and we hadn't no more than turned 
towards the door, a-asking one another what in tarnation hit 
could be, with Major just saying, "What in the name 

of " when hit come across the porch like a harrycane 

and down the hall, and the door busted open and there Luke 
was. He never had no gun and lantrun then, and his clothes 
was nigh tore clean offen him, and his face looked wild as 
ere a man in the Jackson a-sylum. But the main thing 1 
noticed was that he wasn't hiccuping now. And this time, 
too, he was nigh crying. 

"They was fixing to kill me! " he says. "They was going to 
burn me to death! They had done tried me and tied me onto 
the pile of wood, and one of them was coming with the fahr 
when I managed to bust loose and run! " 

"Who was?" Major says. "What in the tarnation hell are 
you talking about?" 

"Them Indians!" Luke says. "They was fixing to " 

"What?" Major hollers. "Damn to blue blazes, what?" 



j6 The Country 

And that was where I had to put my foot in hit. He hadn't 
never seen me until then. "At least they cured your hiccups," 
I says. 

Hit was then that he stopped right still. He hadn't never 
even seen me, but he seen me now. He stopped right still and 
looked at me with that ere wild face that looked like hit had 
just escaped from Jackson and had ought to be took back 
there quick. 

"What? "he says. 

"Anyway, you done run out from under them hiccups," 
I says. 

Well, sir, he stood there for a full minute. His eyes had 
done gone blank, and he stood there with his head cocked a 
little, listening to his own insides. I reckon hit was the first 
time he had took time to find out that they was gone. He 
stood there right still for a full minute while that ere kind of 
shocked astonishment come onto his face. Then he jumped 
on me. I was still setting in my chair, and I be dog if for a 
minute I didn't think the roof had done fell in. 

Well, they got him offen me at last and got him quieted 
down, and then they washed me off and give me a drink, and 
I felt better. But even with that drink I never felt so good 
but what I felt hit was my duty to my honor to call him 
outen the back yard, as the fellow says. No, sir. I know when 
I done made a mistake and guessed wrong; Major de Spain 
wasn't the only man that caught a bear on that hunt; no, sir. 
I be dog, if it had been daylight, I'd a hitched up my Ford 
and taken out of there. But hit was midnight, and besides, 
that nigger, Ash, was on my mind then. I had just begun to 
suspect that hit was more to this business than met the nekkid 
eye. And hit wasn't no good time then to go back to the 
kitchen then and ask him about hit, because Luke was using 
the kitchen. Major had give him a drink, too, and he was 
back there, making up for them two days he hadn't et, talk- 



A Bear Hunt 77 

ing a right smart about what he aimed to do to such and such 
a sonabitch that would try to play his durn jokes on him, not 
mentioning no names; but mostly laying himself in a new set 
of hiccups, though I ain't going back to see. 

So I waited until daylight, until I hyeard the niggers stir- 
ring around in the kitchen; then I went back there. And 
there was old Ash, looking like he always did, oiling Major's 
Jboots and setting them behind the stove and then taking up 
Major's rifle and beginning to load the magazine. He just 
looked once at my face when I come in, and went on shoving 
ca'tridges into the gun. 

"So you went up to the mound last night," I says. He 
looked up at me again, quick, and then down again. But he 
never said nothing, looking like a durned old frizzle-headed 
ape. "You must know some of them folks up there," I says. 

"I knows some of um," he says, shoving ca'tridges into 
the gun. 

"You know old John Basket?" I says. 

"I knows some of um," he says, not looking at me. 

"Did you see him last night?" I says. He never said noth- 
ing at all. So then I changed my tone, like a fellow has to do 
to get anything outen a nigger. "Look here," I says. "Look 
at me." He looked at me. "Just what did you do up there 
last night?" 

"Who, me? "he says. 

"Come on," I says. "Hit's all over now. Mr. Provine has 
done got over his hiccups and we done both forgot about 
anything that might have happened when he got back last 
night. You never went up there just for fun last night. Or 
maybe hit was something you told them up there, told old 
man Basket. Was that hit?" He had done quit looking at me, 
but he never stopped shoving ca'tridges into that gun. He 
looked quick to both sides. "Come on," I says. "Do you want 
to tell me what happened up there, or do you want me to 



78 The Country 

mention to Mr. Provine that you was mixed up in hit some 
way?" He never stopped loading the rifle and he never 
looked at me, but I be dog if I couldn't almost see his mind 
working. "Come on," I says. "Just what was you doing up 
there last night?" 

Then he told me. I reckon he knowed hit wasn't no use 
to try to hide hit then; that if I never told Luke, I could still 
tell Major. "I jest dodged him and got dar first en told um 
he was a new revenue agent coming up dar tonight, but dat 
he warn't much en dat all dey had to do was to give um a 
good skeer en likely he would go away. En dey did en he 
did." 

"Well!" I says. "Well! I always thought I was pretty 
good at joking folks," I says, "but I take a back seat for you. 
What happened?" I says. "Did you see hit?" 

"Never much happened," he says. "Dey jest went down 
cle road a piece en atter a while hyer he come a-hickin' en 
a-blumpin' up de road wid de lant'un en de gun. They took 
de lant'un en de gun away frum him en took him up pon 
topper de mound en talked de Injun language at him fer a 
while. Den dey piled up some wood en fixed him on hit so 
he could git loose in a minute, en den one of dem come up 
de hill wid de fire, en he done de rest." 

"Well!" I says. "Well, I'll be eternally durned!" And then 
all on a sudden hit struck me. I had done turned and was 
going out when hit struck me, and I stopped and I says, 
"There's one more thing I want to know. Why did you do 
hit?" 

Now he set there on the wood box, rubbing the gun with 
his hand, not looking at me again. "I wuz jest helping you 
kyo him of dem hiccups." 

"Come on," I says. "That wasn't your reason. What was 
hit? Remember, I got a right smart I can tell Mr. Provine 
and Major both now. I don't know what Major will do, but 
I know what Mr. Provine will do if I was to tell him." 



A Bear Hunt 79 

And he set there, rubbing that ere rifle with his hand. He 
was kind of looking down, like he was thinking. Not like he 
was trying to decide whether to tell me or not, but like he 
was remembering something from a long time back. And 
that's exactly what he was doing, because he says: 

"I ain't skeered for him to know. One time dey was a 
picnic. Hit was a long time back, nigh twenty years ago. 
He was a young man den, en in de middle of de picnic, him 
en he brother en nudder white man I fergit he name dey 
rid up wid dey pistols out en cotch us niggers one at a time 
en burned our collars off. Hit was him dat burnt mine." 

"And you waited all this time and went to all this trouble, 
just to get even with him?" I says. 

"Hit warn't dat," he says, rubbing the rifle with his hand. 
"Hit wuz de collar. Back in dem days a top nigger hand 
made two dollars a week. I paid fo' bits fer dat collar. Hit 
wuz blue, wid a red picture of de race betwixt de Natchez 
en de Robert E. Lee running around hit. He burnt hit up. 
I makes ten dollars a week now. En I jest wish I knowed 
where I could buy another collar like dat un fer half of hit. 
I wish I did." 



Tvuo Soldiers 



ME AND PETE would go down to Old Man Killegrew's and 
listen to his radio. We would wait until after supper, after 
dark, and we would stand outside Old Man Killegrew's par- 
lor window, and we could hear it because Old Man Kille- 
grew's wife was deaf, and so he run the radio as loud as it 
would run, and so me and Pete could hear it plain as Old 
Man Killegrew's wife could, I reckon, even standing outside 
with the window closed. 

And that night I said, "What? Japanese? What's a pearl 
harbor?" and Pete said, "Hush." 

And so we stood there, it was cold, listening to the fellow 
in the radio talking, only I couldn't make no heads nor tails 
neither out of it. Then the fellow said that would be all for 
a while, and me and Pete walked back up the road to home, 
and Pete told me what it was. Because he was nigh twenty 
and he had done finished the Consolidated last June and he 
knowed a heap: about them Japanese dropping bombs on 
Pearl Harbor and that Pearl Harbor was across the water. 

"Across what water?" I said. "Across that Government 
reservoy up at Oxford?" 

"Naw," Pete said. "Across the big water. The Pacific 
Ocean." 

We went home. Maw and pap was already asleep, and me 

Ki 



82 The Country 

and Pete laid in the bed, and I still couldn't understand where 
it was, and Pete told me again the Pacific Ocean. 

"What's the matter with you?" Pete said. "You're going 
on nine years old. You been in school now ever since Sep- 
tember. Ain't you learned nothing yet?" 

"I reckon we ain't got as fer as the Pacific Ocean yet," 
I said. 

We was still sowing the vetch then that ought to been all 
finished by the fifteenth of November, because pap was still 
behind, just like he had been ever since me and Pete had 
knowed him. And we had firewood to git in, too, but every 
night me and Pete would go down to Old Man Killegrew's 
and stand outside his parlor window in the cold and listen to 
his radio; then we would come back home and lay in the 
bed and Pete would tell me what it was. That is, he would 
tell me for a while. Then he wouldn't tell me. It was like he 
didn't want to talk about it no more. He would tell me to 
shut up because he wanted to go to sleep, but he never 
wanted to go to sleep. 

He would lay there, a heap stiller than if he was asleep, 
and it would be something, I could feel it coming out of him, 
like he was mad at me even, only I knowed he wasn't think- 
ing about me, or like he was worried about something, and it 
wasn't that neither, because he never had nothing to worry 
about. He never got behind like pap, let alone stayed behind. 
Pap give him ten acres when he graduated from the Con- 
solidated, and me and Pete both reckoned pap was durn glad 
to get shut of at least ten acres, less to have to worry with 
himself; and Pete had them ten acres all sowed to vetch and 
busted out and bedded for the winter, and so it wasn't that. 
But it was something. And still we would go down to Old 
Man Killegrew's every night and listen to his radio, and they 
was at it in the Philippines now, but General MacArthur 
was holding um. Then we would come back home and lay in 



TIVO Soldiers 83 

the bed, and Pete wouldn't tell me nothing or talk at all. He 
would just lay there still as a ambush and when I would 
touch him, his side or his leg would feel hard and still as iron, 
until after a while I would go to sleep. 

Then one night it was the first time he had said nothing 
to me except to jump on me about not chopping enough 
wood at the wood tree where we was cutting he said, "I 
got to go." 

"Go where? "I said. 

"To that war," Pete said. 

"Before we even finish gettin' in the firewood?" 

"Firewood, hell," Pete said. 

"All right," I said. "When we going to start?" 

But he wasn't even listening. He laid there, hard and still 
as iron in the dark. "I got to go," he said. "I jest ain't going 
to put up with no folks treating the Unity States that way." 

"Yes," I said. "Firewood or no firewood, I reckon we got 
to go." 

This time he heard me. He laid still again, but it was a 
different kind of still. 

"You? "he said. "To a war?" 

"You'll whup the big uns and I'll whup the little uns," 
I said. 

Then he told me I couldn't go. At first I thought he just 
never wanted me tagging after him, like he wouldn't leave me 
go with him when he went sparking them girls of Tull's. 
Then he told me the Army wouldn't leave me go because 
I was too little, and then I knowed he really meant it and 
that I couldn't go nohow noways. And somehow I hadn't 
believed until then that he was going himself, but now I 
knowed he was and that he wasn't going to leave me go with 
him a-tall. 

"I'll chop the wood and tote the water for you-all then!" 
I said. "You got to have wood and water!" 



84 The Country 

Anyway, he was listening to me now. He wasn't like iron 
now. 

He turned onto his side and put his hand on my chest 
because it was me that was laying straight and hard on my 
back now. 

"No," he said. "You got to stay here and help pap." 

"Help him what?" I said. "He ain't never caught up no- 
how. He can't get no further behind. He can sholy take care 
of this little shirttail of a farm while me and you are whup- 
ping them Japanese. I got to go too. If you got to go, then 
so have I." 

"No," Pete said. "Hush now. Hush." And he meant it, 
and I knowed he did. Only I made sho from his own mouth. 
I quit. 

"So I just can't go then," I said. 

"No," Pete said. "You just can't go. You're too little, in 
the first place, and in the second place " 

"All right," I said. "Then shut up and leave me go to 
sleep." 

So he hushed then and laid back. And I laid there like I 
was already asleep, and pretty soon he was asleep and I 
knowed it was the wanting to go to the war that had worried 
him and kept him awake, and now that he had decided to go, 
he wasn't worried any more. 

The next morning he told maw and pap. Maw was all 
right. She cried. 

"No," she said, crying, "I don't want him to go. I would 
rather go myself in his place, if I could. I don't want to save 
the country. Them Japanese could take it and keep it, so long 
as they left me and my family and my children alone. But I 
remember my brother Marsh in that other war. He had to go 
to that one when he wasn't but nineteen, and our mother 
couldn't understand it then any more than I can now. But 
she told Marsh if he had to go, he had to go. And so, if Pete's 



T*wo Soldiers 85 

got to go to this one, he's got to go to it. Jest don't ask me 
to understand why." 

But pap was the one. He was the feller. "To the war?" he 
said. "Why, I just don't see a bit of use in that. You ain't old 
enough for the draft, and the country ain't being invaded. 
Our President in Washington, D. C, is watching the condi- 
tions and he will notify us. Besides, in that other war your ma 
just mentioned, I was drafted and sent clean to Texas and was 
held there nigh eight months until they finally quit fighting. 
It seems to me that that, along with your Uncle Marsh who 
received a actual wound on the battlefields of France, is 
enough for me and mine to have to do to protect the coun- 
try, at least in my lifetime. Besides, what'll I do for help on 
the farm with you gone? It seems to me I'll get mighty far 
behind." 

"You been behind as long as I can remember," Pete said. 
"Anyway, I'm going. I got to." 

"Of course he's got to go," I said. "Them Japanese " 

"You hush your mouth!" maw said, crying. "Nobody's 
talking to you! Go and get me a armful of wood! That's 
what you can do!" 

So I got the wood. And all the next day, while me and 
Pete and pap was getting in as much wood as we could in 
that time because Pete said how pap's idea of plenty of wood 
was one more stick laying against the wall that maw ain't put 
on the fire yet, Maw was getting Pete ready to go. She 
washed and mended his clothes and cooked him a shoe box 
of vittles. And that night me and Pete laid in the bed and 
listened to her packing his grip and crying, until after a 
while Pete got up in his nightshirt and went back there, and 
I could hear them talking, until at last maw said, "You got 
to go, and so I want you to go. But I don't understand it, 
and I won't never, and so don't expect me to." And Pete 
come back and got into the bed again and laid again still and 



86 The Country 

hard as iron on his back, and then tie said, and he wasn't 
talking to me, he wasn't talking to nobody: "I got to go. 
I just got to." 

"Sho you got to," I said. "Them Japanese " He turned 

over hard, he kind of surged over onto his side, looking at 
me in the dark. 

"Anyway, you're all right," he said. "I expected to have 
more trouble with you than with all the rest of them put 
together." 

"I reckon I can't help it neither," I said. "But maybe it will 
run a few years longer and I can get there. Maybe someday 
I will jest walk in on you." 

"I hope not," Pete said. "Folks don't go to wars for fun. 
A man don't leave his maw crying just for fun." 

"Then why are you going?" I said. 

"I got to," he said. "I just got to. Now you go on to sleep. 
I got to ketch that early bus in the morning." 

"All right," I said. "I hear tell Memphis is a big place. How 
will you find where the Army's at?" 

"I'll ask somebody where to go to join it," Pete said. "Go 
on to sleep now." 

"Is that what you'll ask for? Where to join the Army?" 
I said. 

"Yes," Pete said. He turned onto his back again. "Shut up 
and go to sleep." 

We went to sleep. The next morning we et breakfast by 
lamplight because the bus would pass at six o'clock. Maw 
wasn't crying now. She jest looked grim and busy, putting 
breakfast on the table while we et it. Then she finished pack- 
ing Pete's grip, except he never wanted to take no grip to 
the war, but maw said decent folks never went nowhere, not 
even to a war, without a change of clothes and something to 
tote them in. She put in the shoe box of fried chicken and 
biscuits and she put the Bible in, too, and then it was time to 



Two Soldiers 87 

go. We didn't know until then that maw wasn't going to the 
bus. She jest brought Pete's cap and overcoat, and still she 
didn't cry no more, she jest stood with her hands on Pete's 
shoulders and she didn't move, but somehow, and just hold- 
ing Pete's shoulders, she looked as hard and fierce as when 
Pete had turned toward me in the bed last night and tole me 
that anyway I was all right. 

"They could take the country and keep the country, so 
long as they never bothered me and mine," she said. Then 
she said, "Don't never forget who you are. You ain't rich 
and the rest of the world outside of Frenchman's Bend never 
heard of you. But your blood is good as any blood anywhere, 
and don't you never forget it." 

Then she kissed him, and then we was out of the house, 
with pap toting Pete's grip whether Pete wanted him to or 
not. There wasn't no dawn even yet, not even after we had 
stood on the highway by the mailbox, a while. Then we seen 
the lights of the bus coming and I was watching the bus until 
it come up and Pete flagged it, and then, sho enough, there 
was daylight it had started while I wasn't watching. And 
now me and Pete expected pap to say something else foolish, 
like he done before, about how Uncle Marsh getting 
wounded in France and that trip to Texas pap taken in 1918 
ought to be enough to save the Unity States in 1942, but he 
never. He done all right too. He jest said, "Good-by, son. 
Always remember what your ma told you and write her 
whenever you find the time." Then he shaken Pete's hand, 
and Pete looked at me a minute and put his hand on my head 
and rubbed my head durn nigh hard enough to wring my 
neck off and jumped into the bus, and the feller wound the 
door shut and the bus began to hum; then it was moving, 
humming and grinding and whining louder and louder; it 
was going fast, with two little red lights behind it that never 
seemed to get no littler, but just seemed to be running to- 



88 The Country 

gether until pretty soon they would touch and jest be one 
light. But they never did, and then the bus was gone, and 
even like it was, I could have pretty nigh busted out crying, 
nigh to nine years old and all. 

Me and pap went back to the house. All that day we 
worked at the wood tree, and so I never had no good chance 
until about middle of the afternoon. Then I taken my sling- 
shot and I would have liked to took all my bird eggs, too, 
because Pete had give me his collection and he holp me with 
mine, and he would like to git the box out and look at them 
as good as I would, even if he was nigh twenty years old. 
But the box was too big to tote a long ways and have to 
worry with, so I just taken the shikepoke egg, because it was 
the best un, and wropped it up good into a matchbox and hid 
it and the slingshot under the corner of the barn. Then we et 
supper and went to bed, and I thought then how if I would 
'a' had to stayed in that room and that bed like that even for 
one more night, I jest couldn't 'a' stood it. Then I could hear 
pap snoring, but I never heard no sound from maw, whether 
she was asleep or not, and I don't reckon she was. So I taken 
my shoes and drapped them out the window, and then I 
clumb out like I used to watch Pete do when he was still jest 
seventeen and pap held that he was too young yet to be tom- 
catting around at night, and wouldn't leave him out, and I 
put on my shoes and went to the barn and got the slingshot 
and the shikepoke egg and went to the highway. 

It wasn't cold, it was jest durn confounded dark, and that 
highway stretched on in front of me like, without nobody 
using it, it had stretched out half again as fer just like a man 
does when he lays down, so that for a time it looked like full 
sun was going to ketch me before I had finished them twenty- 
two miles to Jefferson. But it didn't. Daybreak was jest start- 
ing when I walked up the hill into town. I could smell break- 
fast cooking in the cabins and I wished I had thought to 



Tivo Soldiers 89 

brought me a cold biscuit, but that was too late now. And 
Pete had told me Memphis was a piece beyond Jefferson, but 
I never knowed it was no eighty miles. So I stood there on 
that empty square, with daylight coming and coming and 
the street lights still burning and that Law looking down at 
me, and me still eighty miles from Memphis, and it had took 
me all night to walk jest twenty-two miles, and so, by the 
time I got to Memphis at that rate, Pete would 'a 7 done 
already started for Pearl Harbor. 

"Where do you come from?" the Law said. 

And I told him again. "I got to get to Memphis. My 
brother's there." 

"You mean you ain't got any folks around here?" the Law 
said. "Nobody but that brother? What are you doing way 
off down here and your brother in Memphis?" 

And I told him again, "I got to get to Memphis. I ain't got 
no time to waste talking about it and I ain't got time to walk 
it. I got to git there today." 

"Come on here," the Law said. 

We went down another street. And there was the bus, 
just like when Pete got into it yestiddy morning, except there 
wasn't no lights on it now and it was empty. There was a 
regular bus dee-po like a railroad dee-po, with a ticket 
counter and a feller behind it, and the Law said, "Set down 
over there," and I set down on the bench, and the Law said, 
"I want to use your telephone," and he talked in the tele- 
phone a minute and put it down and said to the feller behind 
the ticket counter, "Keep your eye on him. I'll be back as 
soon as Mrs. Habersham can arrange to get herself up and 
dressed." He went out. I got up and went to the ticket 
counter. 

"I want to go to Memphis," I said. 

"You bet," the feller said. "You set down on the bench 
now. Mr. Foote will be back in a minute." 



90 The Country 

"I don't know no Mr. Foote," I said. "I want to ride that 
bus to Memphis." 

"You got some money?" he said. "It'll cost you seventy- 
two cents." 

I taken out the matchbox and unwropped the shikepoke 
egg. "I'll swap you this for a ticket to Memphis," I said. 

"What's that? "he said. 

"It's a shikepoke egg," I said. "You never seen one before. 
It's worth a dollar. I'll take seventy-two cents fer it." 

"No," he said, "the fellers that own that bus insist on a 
cash basis. If I started swapping tickets for bird eggs and 
livestock and such, they would fire me. You go and set down 
on the bench now, like Mr. Foote " 

I started for the door, but he caught me, he put one hand 
on the ticket counter and jumped over it and caught up with 
me and reached his hand out to ketch my shirt. I whupped 
out my pocketknife and snapped it open. 

"You put a hand on me and I'll cut it off," I said. 

I tried to dodge him and run at the door, but he could 
move quicker than any grown man I ever see, quick as 
Pete almost. He cut me off and stood with his back against 
the door and one foot raised a little, and there wasn't no 
other way to get out. "Get back on that bench and stay 
there," he said. 

And there wasn't no other way out. And he stood there 
with his back against the door. So I went back to the bench. 
And then it seemed like to me that dee-po was full of folks. 
There was that Law again, and there was two ladies in fur 
coats and their faces already painted. But they still looked 
like they had got up in a hurry and they still never liked it, 
a old one and a young one, looking down at me. 

"He hasn't got a overcoat!" the old one said. "How in 
the world did he ever get down here by himself?" 

"I ask you," the Law said. "I couldn't get nothing out of 



TIVO Soldiers 91 

him except his brother is in Memphis and he wants to get 
back up there." 

"That's right," I said. "I got to git to Memphis today." 

"Of course you must," the old one said. "Are you sure 
you can find your brother when you get to Memphis?" 

"I reckon I can," I said. "I ain't got but one and I have 
knowed him all my life. I reckon I will know him again when 
I see him." 

The old one looked at me. "Somehow he doesn't look like 
he lives in Memphis," she said. 

"He probably don't," the Law said. "You can't tell 
though. He might live anywhere, overhalls or not. This day 

and time they get scattered overnight from he hope to 

breakfast; boys and girls, too, almost before they can walk 
good. He might have been in Missouri or Texas either yes- 
tiddy, for all we know. But he don't seem to have any doubt 
his brother is in Memphis. All I know to do is send him up 
there and leave him look." 

"Yes," the old one said. 

The young one set down on the bench by me and opened 
a hand satchel and taken out a artermatic writing pen and 
some papers. 

"Now, honey," the old one said, "we're going to see that 
you find your brother, but we must have a case history for 
our files first. We want to know your name and your broth- 
er's name and where you were born and when your parents 
died." 

"I don't need no case history neither," I said. "All I want 
is to get to Memphis. I got to get there today." 

"You see?" the Law said. He said it almost like he enjoyed 
it. "That's what I told you." 

"You're lucky, at that, Mrs. Habersham," the bus feller 
said. "I don't think he's got a gun on him, but he can open 
that knife da 1 mean, fast enough to suit any man." 



92 The Country 

But the old one just stood there looking at me. 

"Well," she said. "Well. I really don't know what to do." 

"I do," the bus feller said. "I'm going to give him a ticket 
out of my own pocket, as a measure of protecting the com- 
pany against riot and bloodshed. And when Mr. Foote tells 
the city board about it, it will be a civic matter and they will 
not only reimburse me, they will give me a medal too. Hey, 
Mr. Foote?" 

But never nobody paid him no mind. The old one still 
stood looking down at me. She said "Well," again. Then she 
taken a dollar from her purse and give it to the bus feller. 
"I suppose he will travel on a child's ticket, won't he?" 

"Wellum," the bus feller said, "I just don't know what 
the regulations would be. Likely I will be fired for not crat- 
ing him and marking the crate Poison. But I'll risk it." 

Then they were gone. Then the Law come back with a 
sandwich and give it to me. 

"You're sure you can find that brother?" he said. 

"I ain't yet convinced why not," I said. "If I don't see Pete 
first, he'll see me. He knows me too." 

Then the Law went out for good, too, and I et the sand- 
wich. Then more folks come in and bought tickets, and then 
the bus feller said it was time to go, and I got into the bus 
just like Pete done, and we was gone. 

I seen all the towns. I seen all of them. When the bus got to 
going good, I found out I was jest about wore out for sleep. 
But there was too much I hadn't never saw before. We run 
out of Jefferson and run past fields and woods, then we 
would run into another town and out of that un and past 
fields and woods again, and then into another town with 
stores and gins and water tanks, and we run along by the 
railroad for a spell and I seen the signal arm move, and then 
I seen the train and then some more towns, and I was jest 
about plumb wore out for sleep, but I couldn't resk it. Then 



Two Soldiers 93 

Memphis begun. It seemed like, to me, it went on for miles. 
We would pass a patch of stores and I would think that was 
sholy it and the bus would even stop. But it wouldn't be 
Memphis yet and we would go on again past water tanks and 
smokestacks on top of the mills, and if they was gins and 
sawmills, I never knowed there was that many and I never 
seen any that big, and where they got enough cotton and 
logs to run um I don't know. 

Then I see Memphis. I knowed I was right this time. It 
was standing up into the air. It looked like about a dozen 
whole towns bigger than Jefferson was set up on one edge 
in a field, standing up into the air higher than ara hill in all 
Yoknapatawpha County. Then we was in it, with the bus 
stopping ever' few feet, it seemed like to me, and cars rushing 
past on both sides of it and the street crowded with folks 
from ever'where in town that day, until I didn't see how 
there could 'a' been nobody left in Mis'sippi a-tall to even 
sell me a bus ticket, let alone write out no case histories. 
Then the bus stopped. It was another bus dee-po, a heap 
bigger than the one in Jefferson. And I said, "All right. 
Where do folks join the Army?" 

"What?" the bus feller said. 

And I said it again, "Where do folks join the Army?" 

"Oh," he said. Then he told me how to get there. I was 
afraid at first I wouldn't ketch on how to do in a town big 
as Memphis. But I caught on all right. I never had to ask but 
twice more. Then I was there, and I was durn glad to git out 
of all them rushing cars and shoving folks and all that racket 
for a spell, and I thought, It won't be long now, and I thought 
how if there was any kind of a crowd there that had done 
already joined the Army, too, Pete would likely see me 
before I seen him. And so I walked into the room. And Pete 
wasn't there. 

He wasn't even there. There was a soldier with a big arrer- 



94 The Country 

head on his sleeve, writing, and two fellers standing in front 
of him, and there was some more folks there, I reckon. It 
seems to me I remember some more folks there. 

I went to the table where the soldier was writing, and I 
said, "Where's Pete?" and he looked up and I said, "My 
brother. Pete Grier. Where is he?" 

"What?" the soldier said. "Who?" 

And I told him again. "He joined the Army yestiddy. 
He's going to Pearl Harbor. So am I. I want to ketch him. 
Where you all got him? " Now they were all looking at me, 
but I never paid them no mind. "Come on," I said. "Where 
is he?" 

The soldier had quit writing. He had both hands spraddled 
out on the table. "Oh," he said. "You're going, too, hah?" 

"Yes," I said. "They got to have wood and water. I can 
chop it and tote it. Come on. Where's Pete?" 

The soldier stood up. "Who let you in here?" he said. "Go 
on. Beat it." 

"Durn that," I said. "You tell me where Pete " 

I be dog if he couldn't move faster than the bus feller 
even. He never come over the table, he come around it, he 
was on me almost before I knowed it, so that I jest had time 
to jump back and whup out my pocket-knife and snap it 
open and hit one lick, and he hollered and jumped back and 
grabbed one hand with the other and stood there cussing 
and hollering. 

One of the other fellers grabbed me from behind, and I 
hit at him with the knife, but I couldn't reach him. 

Then both of the fellers had me from behind, and then 
another soldier come out of a door at the back. He had on a 
belt with a britching strop over one shoulder. 

"What the hell is this?" he said. 

"That little son cut me with a knife!" the first sol 
dier hollered. When he said that I tried to get at him again. 



Two Soldiers 95 

but both them fellers was holding me, two against one, and 
the soldier with the backing strop said, "Here, here. Put your 
knife up, feller. None of us are armed. A man don't knife- 
fight folks that are barehanded." I could begin to hear him 
then. He sounded jest like Pete talked to me. "Let him go," 
he said. They let me go. "Now what's all the trouble about?" 
And I told him. "I see," he said. "And you come up to see 
if he was all right before he left." 

"No," I said. "I came to " 

But he had already turned to where the first soldier was 
wropping a handkerchief around his hand. 

"Have you got him?" he said. The first soldier went back 
to the table and looked at some papers. 

"Here he is," he said. "He enlisted yestiddy. He's in a 
detachment leaving this morning for Little Rock." He had a 
watch stropped on his arm. He looked at it. "The train leaves 
in about fifty minutes. If I know country boys, they're prob- 
ably all down there at the station right now." 

"Get him up here," the one with the backing strop said. 
"Phone the station. Tell the porter to get him a cab. And you 
come with me," he said. 

It was another office behind that un, with jest a table and 
some chairs. We set there while the soldier smoked, and it 
wasn't long; I knowed Pete's feet soon as I heard them. Then 
the first soldier opened the door and Pete come in. He never 
had no soldier clothes on. He looked jest like he did when 
he got on the bus yestiddy morning, except it seemed to me 
like it was at least a week, so much had happened, and I had 
done had to do so much traveling. He come in and there he 
was, looking at me like he hadn't never left home, except that 
here we was in Memphis, on the way to Pearl Harbor. 

"What in durnation are you doing here?" he said. 

And I told him, "You got to have wood and water to 
cook with. I can chop it and tote it for you-all." 



96 The Country 

"No," Pete said. "You're going back home." 

"No, Pete," I said. "I got to go too. I got to. It hurts my 
heart, Pete." 

"No," Pete said. He looked at the soldier. "I jest don't 
know what could have happened to him, lootenant," he said. 
"He never drawed a knife on anybody before in his life." 
He looked at me. "What did you do it for? " 

"I don't know," I said. "I jest had to. I jest had to git here* 
I jest had to find you." 

"Well, don't you never do it again, you hear?" Pete said. 
"You put that knife in your pocket and you keep it there. 
If I ever again hear of you drawing it on anybody, I'm com- 
ing back from wherever I am at and whup the fire out of 
you. You hear me?" 

"I would pure cut a throat if it would bring you back to 
stay," I said. "Pete," I said. "Pete." 

"No," Pete said. Now his voice wasn't hard and quick no 
more, it was almost quiet, and I knowed now I wouldn't 
never change him. "You must go home. You must look after 
maw, and I am depending on you to look after my ten acres. 
I want you to go back home. Today. Do you hear?" 

"I hear," I said. 

"Can he get back home by himself?" the soldier said. 

"He come up here by himself," Pete said. 

"I can get back, I reckon," I said. "I don't live in but one 
place. I don't reckon it's moved." 

Pete taken a dollar out of his pocket and give it to me. 
"That'll buy your bus ticket right to our mailbox," he said. 
"I want you to mind the lootenant. He'll send you to the 
bus. And you go back home and you take care of maw and 
look after my ten acres and keep that durn knife in your 
pocket. You hear me?" 

"Yes, Pete," I said. 

"All right," Pete said. "Now I got to go." He put his hand 



Two Soldiers 97 

on my head again. But this time he never wrung my neck. 
He just laid his hand on my head a minute. And then I be 
dog if he didn't lean down and kiss me, and I heard his feet 
and then the door, and I never looked up and that was all, 
me setting there, rubbing the place where Pete kissed me 
and the soldier throwed back in his chair, looking out the 
window and coughing. He reached into his pocket and 
handed something to me without looking around. It was a 
piece of chewing gum. 

"Much obliged," I said. "Well, I reckon I might as well 
start back. I got a right fer piece to go." 

"Wait," the soldier said. Then he telephoned again and I 
said again I better start back, and he said again, "Wait. Re- 
member what Pete told you." 

So we waited, and then another lady come in, old, too, in 
a fur coat, too, but she smelled all right, she never had no 
artermatic writing pen nor no case history neither. She come 
in and the soldier got up, and she looked around quick until 
she saw me, and come and put her hand on my shoulder light 
and quick and easy as maw herself might 'a' done it. 

"Come on," she said. "Let's go home to dinner." 

"Nome," I said. "I got to ketch the bus to Jefferson." 

"I know. There's plenty of time. We'll go home and eat 
dinner first." 

She had a car. And now we was right down in the middle 
of all them other cars. We was almost under the busses, and 
all them crowds of people on the street close enough to 
where I could have talked to them if I had knowed who 
they was. After a while she stopped the car. "Here we are," 
she said, and I looked at it, and if all that was her house, she 
sho had a big family. But all of it wasn't. We crossed a hall 
with trees growing in it and went into a little room without 
nothing in it but a nigger dressed up in a uniform a heap 
shinier than them soldiers had, and the nigger shut the door, 



98 The Country 

and then I hollered, "Look out!" and grabbed, but it was all 
right; that whole little room jest went right on up and 
stopped and the door opened and we was in another hall, 
and the lady unlocked a door and we went in, and there was 
another soldier, a old feller, with a britching strop, too, and 
a silver-colored bird on each shoulder. 

"Here we are," the lady said. "This is Colonel McKellogg. 
Now, what would you like for dinner? " 

"I reckon I'll jest have some ham and eggs and coffee," 
I said. 

She had done started to pick up the telephone. She stopped, 
"Coffee?" she said. "When did you start drinking coffee?" 

"I don't know," I said. "I reckon it was before I could 
remember." 

"You're about eight, aren't you?" she said. 

"Nome," I said. "I'm eight and ten months. Going on 
eleven months." 

She telephoned then. Then we set there and I told them 
how Pete had jest left that morning for Pearl Harbor and I 
had aimed to go with him, but I would have to go back 
home to take care of maw and look after Pete's ten acres, 
and she said how they had a little boy about my size, too, in 
a school in the East. Then a nigger, another one, in a short 
kind of shirttail coat, rolled a kind of wheelbarrer in. It had 
my ham and eggs and a glass of milk and a piece of pie, too, 
and I thought I was hungry. But when I taken the first bite 
I found out I couldn't swallow it, and I got up quick. 

"I got to go," I said. 

"Wait," she said. 

"I got to go," I said. 

"Just a minute," she said. "I've already telephoned for the 
car. It won't be but a minute now. Can't you drink the milk 
even? Or maybe some of your coffee?" 



Two Soldiers 99 

"Nome," I said. "I ain't hungry. Til eat when I git home." 
Then the telephone rung. She never even answered it. 

"There," she said. "There's the car." And we went back 
down in that 'ere little moving room with the dressed-up 
nigger. This time it was a big car with a soldier driving it. 
I got into the front with him. She give the soldier a dollar. 
"He might get hungry," she said. "Try to find a decent 
place for him." 

"O.K., Mrs. McKellogg," the soldier said. 

Then we was gone again. And now I could see Memphis 
good, bright in the sunshine, while we was swinging around 
it. And first thing I knowed, we was back on the same high- 
way the bus run on this morning the patches of stores and 
them big gins and sawmills, and Memphis running on for 
miles, it seemed like to me, before it begun to give out. Then 
we was running again between the fields and woods, run- 
ning fast now, and except for that soldier, it was like I 
hadn't never been to Memphis a-tall. We was going fast now. 
At this rate, before I knowed it we would be home again, and 
I thought about me riding up to Frenchman's Bend in this 
big car with a soldier running it, and all of a sudden I begun 
to cry. I never knowed I was fixing to, and I couldn't stop 
it. I set there by that soldier, crying. We was going fast. 



Shall Not Perish 



WHEN THE MESSAGE came about Pete, Father and I had 
already gone to the field. Mother got it out of the mailbox 
after we left and brought it down to the fence, and she 
already knew beforehand what it was because she didn't 
even have on her sunbonnet, so she must have been watching 
from the kitchen window when the carrier drove up. And 
I already knew what was in it too. Because she didn't speak. 
She just stood at the fence with the little pale envelope that 
didn't even need a stamp on it in her hand, and it was me 
that hollered at Father, from further away across the field 
than he was, so that he reached the fence first where Mother 
waited even though I was already running. "I know what 
it is," Mother said. "But can't open it. Open it." 

"No it ain't!" I hollered, running. "No it ain't!" Then I 
was hollering, "No, Pete! No, Pete!" Then I was hollering, 
"God damn them Japs! God damn them Japs!" and then I 
was the one Father had to grab and hold, trying to hold me, 
having to wrastle with me like I was another man instead of 
just nine. 

And that was all. One day there was Pearl Harbor. And 
the next week Pete went to Memphis, to join the army and 
go there and help them; and one morning Mother stood at the 
field fence with ^ little scrap of paper not even big enough to 
start a fire with, that didn't even need a stamp on the enve- 

10! 



io2 The Country 

lope, saying, A ship 'was. NOIV it is not. Your son 'was one of 
them. And we allowed ourselves one day to grieve, and that 
was all. Because it was April, the hardest middle push of 
planting time, and there was the land, the seventy acres which 
were our bread and fire and keep, which had outlasted the 
Griers before us because they had done right by it, and had 
outlasted Pete because while he was here he had done his part 
to help and would outlast Mother and Father and me if we 
did ours. 

Then it happened again. Maybe we had forgotten that it 
could and was going to, again and again, to people who loved 
sons and brothers as we loved Pete, until the day finally came 
when there would be an end to it. After that day when we 
saw Pete's name and picture in the Memphis paper, Father 
would bring one home with him each time he went to town. 
And we would see the pictures and names of soldiers and 
sailors from other counties and towns in Mississippi and Ar- 
kansas and Tennessee, but there wasn't another from ours, 
and so after a while it did look like Pete was going to be all. 

Then it happened again. It was late July, a Friday. Father 
had gone to town early on Homer Bookwright's cattletruck 
and now it was sundown. I had just come up from the field 
with the light sweep and I had just finished stalling the mule 
and come out of the barn when Homer's truck stopped at the 
mailbox and Father got down and came up the lane, with a 
sack of flour balanced on his shoulder and a package under 
his arm and the folded newspaper in his hand. And I took one 
look at the folded paper and then no more. Because I knew it 
too, even if he always did have one when he came back from 
town. Because it was bound to happen sooner or later; it 
would not be just us out of all Yoknapatawpha County who 
had loved enough to have sole right to grief. So I just met 
him and took part of the load and turned beside him, and we 
entered the kitchen together where our cold supper waited 



Shall Not Perish 103 

on the table and Mother sat in the last of sunset in the open 
door, her hand and arm strong and steady on the dasher of 
the churn. 

When the message came about Pete, Father never touched 
her. He didn't touch her now. He just lowered the flour onto 
the table and went to the chair and held out the folded paper. 
"It's Major de Spain's boy," he said. "In town. The av-aytor. 
That was home last fall in his officer uniform. He run his 
airplane into a Japanese battleship and blowed it up. So they 
knowed where he was at." And Mother didn't stop the churn 
for a minute either, because even I could tell that the butter 
had almost come. Then she got up and went to the sink and 
washed her hands and came back and sat down again. 

"Read it," she said. 

So Father and I found out that Mother not only knew all 
the time it was going to happen again, but that she already 
knew what she was going to do when it did, not only this 
time but the next one too, and the one after that and the one 
after that, until the day finally came when all the grieving 
about the earth, the rich and the poor too, whether they lived 
with ten nigger servants in the fine big painted houses in 
town or whether they lived on and by seventy acres of not 
extra good land like us or whether all they owned was the 
right to sweat today for what they would eat tonight, could 
say, At least this there 'was some point to 'why *we grieved. 

We fed and milked and came back and ate the cold sup- 
per, and I built a fire in the stove and Mother put on the 
kettle and whatever else would heat enough water for two, 
and I fetched in the washtub from the back porch, and while 
Mother washed the dishes and cleaned up the kitchen, Father 
and I sat on the front steps. This was about the time of day 
that Pete and I would walk the two miles down to Old Man 
Killegrew's house last December, to listen to the radio teli 
about Pearl Harbor and Manila. But more than Pearl Harbor 



104 The Country 

and Manila has happened since then, and Pete don't make one 
to listen to it. Nor do I: it's like, since nobody can tell us 
exactly where he was when he stopped being is, instead of 
just becoming *was at some single spot on the earth where 
the people who loved him could weight him down with a 
stone, Pete still is everywhere about the earth, one among all 
the fighters forever, <was or is either. So Mother and Father 
and I don't need a little wooden box to catch the voices of 
them that saw the courage and the sacrifice. Then Mother 
called me back to the kitchen. The water smoked a little in 
the washtub, beside the soap dish and my clean nightshirt and 
the towel Mother made out of our worn-out cotton sacks, 
and I bathe and empty the tub and leave it ready for her, and 
we lie down. 

Then morning, and we rose. Mother was up first, as al- 
ways. My clean white Sunday shirt and pants were waiting, 
along with the shoes and stockings I hadn't even seen since 
frost was out of the ground. But in yesterday's overalls still 
I carried the shoes back to the kitchen where Mother stood 
in yesterday's dress at the stove where not only our breakfast 
was cooking but Father's dinner too, and set the shoes beside 
her Sunday ones against the wall and went to the barn, and 
Father and I fed and milked and came back and sat down and 
ate while Mother moved back and forth between the table 
and the stove till we were done, and she herself sat down. 
Then I got out the blacking-box, until Father came and took 
it away from me the polish and rag and brush and the four 
shoes in succession. "De Spain is rich," he said. "With a 
monkey nigger in a white coat to hold the jar up each time 
he wants to spit. You shine all shoes like you aimed yourself 
to wear them: just the parts that you can see yourself by 
looking down." 

Then we dressed. I put on my Sunday shirt and the pants 
so stiff with starch that they would stand alone, and carried 



Shall Not Perish 105 

my stockings back to the kitchen just as Mother entered, car- 
rying hers, and dressed too, even her hat, and took my stock- 
ings from me and put them with hers on the table beside the 
shined shoes, and lifted the satchel down from the cupboard 
shelf. It was still in the cardboard box it came in, with the 
colored label of the San Francisco drugstore where Pete 
bought it a round, square-ended, water-proof satchel with 
a handle for carrying, so that as soon as Pete saw it in the 
store he must have known too that it had been almost exactly 
made for exactly what we would use it for, with a zipper 
opening that Mother had never seen before nor Father either. 
That is, we had all three been in the drugstore and the ten- 
cent-store in Jefferson but I was the only one who had been 
curious enough to find out how one worked, even though 
even I never dreamed we would ever own one. So it was me 
that zipped it open, with a pipe and a can of tobacco in it for 
Father and a hunting cap with a carbide headlight for me 
and for Mother the satchel itself, and she zipped it shut and 
then open and then Father tried it, running the slide up and 
down the little clicking track until Mother made him stop 
before he wore it out; and she put the satchel, still open, back 
into the box and I fetched in from the barn the empty quart 
bottle of cattle-dip and she scalded the bottle and cork and 
put them and the clean folded towel into the satchel and set 
the box onto the cupboard shelf, the zipper still open because 
when we came to need it we would have to open it first and 
so we would save that much wear on the zipper too. She 
took the satchel from the box and the bottle from the satchel 
and filled the bottle with clean water and corked it and put it 
back into the satchel with the clean towel and put our shoes 
and stockings in and zipped the satchel shut, and we walked 
to the road and stood in the bright hot morning beside the 
mailbox until the bus came up and stopped. 

It was the school bus, the one I rode back and forth to 



io6 The Country 

Frenchman's Bend to school in last winter, and that Pete rode 
in every morning and evening until he graduated, but going 
in the opposite direction now, in to Jefferson, and only on 
Saturday, seen for a long time down the long straight stretch 
of Valley road while other people waiting beside other mail- 
boxes got into it. Then it was our turn. Mother handed the 
two quarters to Solon Quick, who built it and owned it and 
drove it, and we got in too and it went on, and soon there was 
no more room for the ones that stood beside the mailboxes 
and signalled and then it went fast, twenty miles then ten 
then five then one, and up the last hill to where the concrete 
streets began, and we got out and sat on the curb and Mother 
opened the satchel and took our shoes and the bottle of water 
and the towel and we washed our feet and put on our shoes 
and stockings and Mother put the bottle and towel back and 
shut the bag. 

And we walked beside the iron picket fence long enough 
to front a cotton patch; we turned into the yard which was 
bigger than farms I had seen and followed the gravel drive 
wider and smoother than roads in Frenchman's Bend, on to 
the house that to me anyway looked bigger than the court- 
house, and mounted the steps between the stone columns 
and crossed the portico that would have held our whole 
house, galleries and all, and knocked at the door. And then 
it never mattered whether our shoes were shined at all or 
not: the whites of the monkey nigger's eyes for just a second 
when he opened the door for us, the white of his coat for 
just a second at the end of the hall before it was gone too, 
his feet not making any more noise than a cat's leaving us 
to find the right door by ourselves, if we could. And we 
did the rich man's parlor that any woman in Frenchman's 
Bend and I reckon in the rest of the county too could have 
described to the inch but which not even the men who would 
come to Major de Spain after bank-hours or on Sunday to 



Shall Not Perish 107 

ask to have a note extended, had ever seen, with a light 
hanging in the middle of the ceiling the size of our whole 
washtub full of chopped-up ice and a gold-colored harp 
that would have blocked our barn door and a mirror that 
a man on a mule could have seen himself and the mule both 
in, and a table shaped like a coffin in the middle of the floor 
with the Confederate flag spread over it and the photograph 
of Major de Spain's son and the open box with the medal in 
it and a big blue automatic pistol weighting down the flag, 
and Major de Spain standing at the end of the table with his 
hat on until after a while he seemed to hear and recognize 
the name which Mother spoke; not a real major but just 
called that because his father had been a real one in the old 
Confederate war, but a banker powerful in money and 
politics both, that Father said had made governors and sen- 
ators too in Mississippi; an old man, too old you would have 
said to have had a son just twenty- three; too old anyway 
to have had that look on his face. 

"Ha," he said. "I remember now. You too were advised 
that your son poured out his blood on the altar of unpre- 
paredness and inefficiency. What do you want?" 

"Nothing," Mother said. She didn't even pause at the 
door. She went on toward the table. "We had nothing to 
bring you. And I don't think I see anything here we would 
want to take away." 

"You're wrong," he said. "You have a son left. Take what 
they have been advising to me: go back home and pray. 
Not for the dead one: for the one they have so far left you, 
that something somewhere, somehow will save him!" She 
wasn't even looking at him. She never had looked at him 
again. She just went on across that barn-sized room exactly 
as I have watched her set mine and Father's lunch pail into 
the fence corner when there wasn't time to stop the plows 
to eat, and turn back toward the house. 



io8 The Country 

"I can tell you something simpler than that," she said. 
"Weep." Then she reached the table. But it was only her 
body that stopped, her hand going out so smooth and quick 
that his hand only caught her wrist, the two hands locked 
together on the big blue pistol, between the photograph and 
the little hunk of iron medal on its colored ribbon, against 
that old flag that a heap of people I knew had never seen and 
a heap more of them wouldn't recognize if they did, and over 
all of it the old man's voice that ought not to have sounded 
like that either. 

"For his country! He had no country: this one I too re- 
pudiate. His country and mine both was ravaged and polluted 
and destroyed eighty years ago, before even I was born. His 
forefathers fought and died for it then, even though what 
they fought and lost for was a dream. He didn't even have 
a dream. He died for an illusion. In the interests of usury, 
by the folly and rapacity of politicians, for the glory and 
aggrandisement of organized labor!" 

"Yes," Mother said. "Weep." 

"The fear of elective servants for their incumbencies! The 
subservience of misled workingmen for the demagogues who 
misled them! Shame? Grief? How can poltroonery and 
rapacity and voluntary thralldom know shame or grief?" 

"All men are capable of shame," Mother said. "Just as all 
men are capable of courage and honor and sacrifice. And 
grief too. It will take time, but they will learn it. It will take 
more grief than yours and mine, and there will be more. But 
it will be enough." 

"When? When all the young men are dead? What will 
there be left then worth the saving?" 

"I know," Mother said. "I know. Our Pete was too young 
too to have to die." Then I realized that their hands were no 
longer locked, that he was erect again and that the pistol 
was hanging slack in Mother's hand against her side, and for 



Shall Not Perish 109 

a minute I thought she was going to unzip the satchel and 
take the towel out of it. But she just laid the pistol back on 
the table and stepped up to him and took the handkerchief 
from his breast pocket and put it into his hand and stepped 
back. "That's right," she said. "Weep. Not for him: for us, 
the old, who don't know why. What is your Negro's name?" 

But he didn't answer. He didn't even raise the handkerchief 
to his face. He just stood there holding it, like he hadn't 
discovered yet that it was in his hand, or perhaps even what 
it was Mother had put there. "For us, the old," he said. "You 
believe. You have had three months to learn again, to find 
out why; mine happened yesterday. Tell me." 

"I don't know," Mother said. "Maybe women are not 
supposed to know why their sons must die in battle; maybe 
all they are supposed to do is just to grieve for them. But my 
son knew why And my brother went to the war when I was 
a girl, and our mother didn't know why either, but he did. 
And my grandfather was in that old one there too, and I 
reckon his mother didn't know why either, but I reckon 
he did. And my son knew why he had to go to this one, and 
he knew I knew he did even though I didn't, just as he knew 
that this child here and I both knew he would not come back. 
But he knew why, even if I didn't, couldn't, never can. So it 
must be all right, even if I couldn't understand it. Because 
there is nothing in him that I or his father didn't put there. 
What is your Negro's name?" 

He called the name then. And the nigger wasn't so far 
away after all, though when he entered Major de Spain 
had already turned so that his back was toward the door. 
He didn't look around. He just pointed toward the table with 
the hand Mother had put the handkerchief into, and the 
nigger went to the table without looking at anybody and 
without making any more noise on the floor than a cat and 
he didn't stop at all; it looked to me like he had already 



no The Country 

turned and started back before he even reached the table: 
one flick of the black hand and the white sleeve and the 
pistol vanished without me even seeing him touch it and 
when he passed me again going out, I couldn't see what he 
had done with it. So Mother had to speak twice before I 
knew she was talking to me. 
"Come," she said. 

"Wait," said Major de Spain. He had turned again, facing 
us. "What you and his father gave him. You must know 
what that was." 

"I know it came a long way," Mother said. "So it must 
have been strong to have lasted through all of us. It must 
have been all right for him to be willing to die for it after 
that long time and coming that far. Come," she said again. 
"Wait," he said. "Wait. Where did you come from?" 
Mother stopped. "I told you: Frenchman's Bend." 
"I know. How? By wagon? You have no car." 
"Oh," Mother said. "We came in Mr. Quick's bus. He 
comes in every Saturday." 

"And waits until night to go back. I'll send you back in my 
car." He called the nigger's name again. But Mother stopped 
him. "Thank you," she said. "We have already paid Mr. 
Quick. He owes us the ride back home." 

There was an old lady born and raised in Jefferson who 
died rich somewhere in the North and left some money to 
the town to build a museum with. It was a house like a 
church, built for nothing else except to hold the pictures 
she picked out to put in it pictures from all over the United 
States, painted by people who loved what they had seen or 
where they had been born or lived enough to want to paint 
pictures of it so that other people could see it too; pictures 
of men and women and children, and the houses and streets 
and cities and the woods and fields and streams where they 
Worked or lived or pleasured, so that all the people who 



Shall Not Perish 1 1 1 

wanted to, people like us from Frenchman's Bend or from 
littler places even than Frenchman's Bend in our county or 
beyond our state too, could come without charge into the 
cool and the quiet and look without let at the pictures of 
men and women and children who were the same people 
that we were even if their houses and barns were different 
and their fields worked different, with different things grow- 
ing in them. So it was already late when we left the museum, 
and later still when we got back to where the bus waited, 
and later still more before we got started, although at least 
we could get into the bus and take our shoes and stockings 
back off. Because Mrs. Quick hadn't come yet and so Solon 
had to wait for her, not because she was his wife but because 
he made her pay a quarter out of her egg-money to ride to 
town and back on Saturday, and he wouldn't go off and 
leave anybody who had paid him. And so, even though the 
bus ran fast again, when the road finally straightened out into 
the long Valley stretch, there was only the last sunset spok- 
ing out across the sky, stretching all the way across America 
from the Pacific ocean, touching all the places that the men 
and women in the museum whose names we didn't even 
know had loved enough to paint pictures of them, like a 
big soft fading wheel. 

And I remembered how Father used to always prove any 
point he wanted to make to Pete and me, by Grandfather. 
It didn't matter whether it was something he thought we 
ought to have done and hadn't, or something he would have 
stopped us from doing if he had just known about it in 
time. "Now, take your Grandpap," he would say. I could 
remember him too: Father's grandfather even, old, so old 
you just wouldn't believe it, so old that it would seem to 
me he must have gone clean back to the old fathers in 
Genesis and Exodus that talked face to face with God, and 
Grandpap outlived them all except him. It seemed to me he 



ii2 The Country 

must have been too old even to have actually fought in the 
old Confederate war, although that was about all he talked 
about, not only when we thought that maybe he was awake 
but even when we knew he must be asleep, until after a 
while we had to admit that we never knew which one he 
really was. He would sit in his chair under the mulberry in 
the yard or on the sunny end of the front gallery or in his 
corner by the hearth; he would start up out of the chair and 
we still wouldn't know which one he was, whether he never 
had been asleep or whether he hadn't ever waked even when 
he jumped up, hollering, "Look out! Look out! Here they 
come!" He wouldn't even always holler the same name; 
they wouldn't even always be on the same side or even 
soldiers: Forrest, or Morgan, or Abe Lincoln, or Van Dorn, 
or Grant or Colonel Sartoris himself, whose people still 
lived in our county, or Mrs. Rosa Millard, Colonel Sartoris's 
mother-in-law who stood off the Yankees and carpetbaggers 
too for the whole four years of the war until Colonel Sartoris 
could get back home. Pete thought it was just funny. Father 
and I were ashamed. We didn't know what Mother thought 
nor even what it was, until the afternoon at the picture show. 
It was a continued picture, a Western; it seemed to me 
that it had been running every Saturday afternoon for years. 
Pete and Father and I would go in to town every Saturday 
to see it, and sometimes Mother would go too, to sit there 
in the dark while the pistols popped and snapped and the 
horses galloped and each time it would look like they were 
going to catch him but you knew they wouldn't quite, that 
there would be some more of it next Saturday and the one 
after that and the one after that, and always the week in 
between for me and Pete to talk about the villain's pearl- 
handled pistol that Pete wished was his and the hero's spotted 
horse that I wished was mine. Then one Saturday Mother 
decided to take Grandpap. He sat between her and me, 



Shall Not Perish 113 

already asleep again, so old now that he didn't even have 
to snore, until the time came that you could have set a watch 
by every Saturday afternoon: when the horses all came 
plunging down the cliff and whirled around and came boil- 
ing up the gully until in just one more jump they would 
come clean out of the screen and go galloping among the 
little faces turned up to them like corn shucks scattered 
across a lot. Then Grandpap waked up. For about five 
seconds he sat perfectly still. I could even feel him sitting 
still, he sat so still so hard. Then he said, "Cavalry!" Then 
he was on his feet. "Forrest!" he said. "Bedford Forrest! Get 
out of here! Get out of the way!" clawing and scrabbling 
from one seat to the next one whether there was anybody 
in them or not, into the aisle with us trying to follow and 
catch him, and up the aisle toward the door still hollering, 
"Forrest! Forrest! Here he comes! Get out of the way!" 
and outside at last, with half the show behind us and Grand- 
pap blinking and trembling at the light and Pete propped 
against the wall by his arms like he was being sick, laughing, 
and father shaking Grandpap's arm and saying, "You old 
fool! You old fool!" until Mother made him stop. And we 
half carried him around to the alley where the wagon was 
hitched and helped him in and Mother got in and sat by him s 
holding his hand until he could begin to stop shaking. "Go 
get him a bottle of beer," she said. 

"He don't deserve any beer," Father said. "The old fool, 
having the whole town laughing. . . ." 

"Go get him some beer!" Mother said. "He's going to sit 
right here in his own wagon and drink it. Go on!" And 
Father did, and Mother held the bottle until Grandpap got 
a good hold on it, and she sat holding his hand until he got 
a good swallow down him. Then he begun to stop shaking. 
He said, "Ah-h-h," and took another swallow and said, 



ii4 The Country 

"Ah-h-h," again and then he even drew his other hand out 
of Mother's and he wasn't trembling now but just a little, 
taking little darting sips at the bottle and saying "Hah! " and 
taking another sip and saying "Hah!" again, and not just 
looking at the bottle now but looking all around, and his 
eyes snapping a little when he blinked. "Fools yourselves! " 
Mother cried at Father and Pete and me. "He wasn't running 
from anybody! He was running in front of them, hollering 
at all clods to look out because better men than they were 
coming, even seventy-five years afterwards, still powerful, 
still dangerous, still coming!" 

And I knew them too. I had seen them too, who had 
never been further from Frenchman's Bend than I could 
return by night to sleep. It was like the wheel, like the sun- 
set itself, hubbed at that little place that don't even show 
on a map, that not two hundred people out of all the earth 
know is named Frenchman's Bend or has any name at all, 
and spoking out in all the directions and touching them all, 
never a one too big for it to touch, never a one too little to 
be remembered: the places that men and women have 
lived in and loved whether they had anything to paint pic- 
tures of them with or not, all the little places quiet enough 
to be lived in and loved and the names of them before they 
were quiet enough, and the names of the deeds that made 
them quiet enough and the names of the men and the women 
who did the deeds, who lasted and endured and fought the 
battles and lost them and fought again because they didn't 
even know they had been whipped, and tamed the wilder- 
ness and overpassed the mountains and deserts and died and 
still went on as the shape of the United States grew and 
went on. I knew them too: the men and women still power- 
ful seventy-five years and twice that and twice that again 
afterward, still powerful and still dangerous and still com- 



Shall Not Perish 1 1 5 

ing, North and South and East and West, until the name of 
what they did and what they died for became just one single 
word, louder than any thunder. It was America, and it 
covered all the western earth. 



II THE VILLAGE 



A Rose for Emily 
Hair 

Centaur in Brass 

Dry September 

Death Drag 

Elly 

Uncle Willy 

Mule in the Yard 

That Will Be Fine 

That Evening Sun 



A Rose for Emily 



i 

WHEN Miss Emily Grierson died, our whole town went to 
her funeral: the men through a sort of respectful affection 
for a fallen monument, the women mostly out of curiosity 
to see the inside of her house, which no one save an old man- 
servant a combined gardener and cook had seen in at 
least ten years. 

It was a big, squarish frame house that had once been 
white, decorated with cupolas and spires and scrolled bal* 
conies in the heavily lightsome style of the seventies, set on 
what had once been our most select street. But garages and 
cotton gins had encroached and obliterated even the august 
names of that neighborhood; only Miss Emily's house was 
left, lifting its stubborn and coquettish decay above the 
cotton wagons and the gasoline pumps an eyesore among 
eyesores. And now Miss Emily had gone to join the repre- 
sentatives of those august names where they lay in the cedar- 
bemused cemetery among the ranked and anonymous 
graves of Union and Confederate soldiers who fell at the 
battle of Jefferson. 

Alive, Miss Emily had been a tradition, a duty, and a care; 
a sort of hereditary obligation upon the town, dating from 
that day in 1 894 when Colonel Sartoris, the mayor he who 
fathered the edict that no Negro woman should appear on 

119 



120 The Village 

the streets without an apron remitted her taxes, the dis- 
pensation dating from the death of her father on into 
perpetuity. Not that Miss Emily would have accepted 
charity. Colonel Sartoris invented an involved tale to the 
effect that Miss Emily's father had loaned money to the 
town, which the town, as a matter of business, preferred 
this way of repaying. Only a man of Colonel Sartoris' gen- 
eration and thought could have invented it, and only a 
woman could have believed it. 

When the next generation, with its more modern ideas, 
became mayors and aldermen, this arrangement created 
some little dissatisfaction. On the first of the year they mailed 
her a tax notice. February came, and there was no reply. 
They wrote her a formal letter, asking her to call at the 
sheriff's office at her convenience. A week later the mayor 
wrote her himself, offering to call or to send his car for her, 
and received in reply a note on paper of an archaic shape, 
in a thin, flowing calligraphy in faded ink, to the effect that 
she no longer went out at all. The tax notice was also en- 
closed, without comment. 

They called a special meeting of the Board of Aldermen. 
A deputation waited upon her, knocked at the door through 
which no visitor had passed since she ceased giving china- 
painting lessons eight or ten years earlier. They were ad- 
mitted by the old Negro into a dim hall from which a 
stairway mounted into still more shadow. It smelled of dust 
and disuse a close, dank smell. The Negro led them into 
the parlor. It was furnished in heavy, leather-covered furni- 
ture. When the Negro opened the blinds of one window, 
they could see that the leather was cracked; and when they 
sat down, a faint dust rose sluggishly about their thighs, 
spinning with slow motes in the single sun-ray. On a tar- 
nished gilt easel before the fireplace stood a crayon portrait 
of Miss Emily's father. 



A Rose for Emily i z i 

They rose when she entered a small, fat woman in 
black, with a thin gold chain descending to her waist and 
vanishing into her belt, leaning on an ebony cane with a 
tarnished gold head. Her skeleton was small and spare; per- 
haps that was why what would have been merely plumpness 
in another was obesity in her. She looked bloated, like a body 
long submerged in motionless water, and of that pallid hue. 
Her eyes, lost in the fatty ridges of her face, looked like 
two small pieces of coal pressed into a lump of dough as they 
moved from one face to another while the visitors stated 
their errand. 

She did not ask them to sit. She just stood in the door and 
listened quietly until the spokesman came to a stumbling 
halt. Then they could hear the invisible watch ticking at 
the end of the gold chain. 

Her voice was dry and cold. "I have no taxes in Jefferson. 
Colonel Sartoris explained it to me. Perhaps one of you can 
gain access to the city records and satisfy yourselves." 

"But we have. We are the city authorities, Miss Emily. 
Didn't you get a notice from the sheriff, signed by him?" 

"I received a paper, yes," Miss Emily said. "Perhaps he 
considers himself the sheriff ... I have no taxes in Jefferson." 

"But there is nothing on the books to show that, you see. 
We must go by the " 

"See Colonel Sartoris. I have no taxes in Jefferson." 

"But, Miss Emily" 

"See Colonel Sartoris." (Colonel Sartoris had been dead 
almost ten years.) "I have no taxes in Jefferson. Tobe!" The 
Negro appeared. "Show these gentlemen out." 

II 

So SHE vanquished them, horse and foot, just as she had 
vanquished their fathers thirty years before about the smelL 



122 The Village 

That was two years after her father's death and a short rime 
after her sweetheart the one we believed would marry her 
had deserted her. After her father's death she went out 
very little; after her sweetheart went away, people hardly 
saw her at all. A few of the ladies had the temerity to call, 
but were not received, and the only sign of life about the 
place was the Negro man a young man then going in 
and out with a market basket. 

"Just as if a man any man could keep a kitchen prop- 
erly," the ladies said; so they were not surprised when the 
smell developed. It was another link between the gross, 
teeming world and the high and mighty Griersons. 

A neighbor, a woman, complained to the mayor, Judge 
Stevens, eighty years old. 

"But what will you have me do about it, madam?" he said. 

"Why, send her word to stop it," the woman said. "Isn't 
there a law?" 

"I'm sure that won't be necessary," Judge Stevens said. 
"It's probably just a snake or a rat that nigger of hers killed 
in the yard. I'll speak to him about it." 

The next day he received two more complaints, one from 
a man who came in diffident deprecation. "We really must 
do something about it, Judge. I'd be the last one in the world 
to bother Miss Emily, but we've got to do something." That 
night the Board of Aldermen met three graybeards and 
one younger man, a member of the rising generation. 

"It's simple enough," he said. "Send her word to have her 
place cleaned up. Give her a certain time to do it in, and if 
she don't . . ." 

"Dammit, sir," Judge Stevens said, "will you accuse a 
lady to her face of smelling bad?" 

So the next night, after midnight, four men crossed Miss 
Emily's lawn and slunk about the house like burglars, sniffing 
along the base of the brickwork and at the cellar openings 



A Rose for Emily 1 2 3 

while one of them performed a regular sowing motion with 
his hand out of a sack slung from his shoulder. They broke 
open the cellar door and sprinkled lime there, and in all the 
outbuildings. As they recrossed the lawn, a window that 
had been dark was lighted and Miss Emily sat in it, the light 
behind her, and her upright torso motionless as that of an 
idol. They crept quietly across the lawn and into the shadow 
of the locusts that lined the street. After a week or two the 
smell went away. 

That was when people had begun to feel really sorry for 
her. People in our town, remembering how old lady Wyatt, 
her great-aunt, had gone completely crazy at last, believed 
that the Griersons held themselves a little too high for what 
they really were. None of the young men were quite good 
enough for Miss Emily and such. We had long thought of 
them as a tableau, Miss Emily a slender figure in white in 
the background, her father a spraddled silhouette in the 
foreground, his back to her and clutching a horsewhip, the 
two of them framed by the back-flung front door. So when 
she got to be thirty and was still single, we were not pleased 
exactly, but vindicated; even with insanity in the family 
she wouldn't have turned down all of her chances if they 
had really materialized. 

When her father died, it got about that the house was 
all that was left to her; and in a way, people were glad. At 
last they could pity Miss Emily. Being left alone, and a 
pauper, she had become humanized. Now she too would 
know the old thrill and the old despair of a penny more or 
less. 

The day after his death all the ladies prepared to call at 
the house and offer condolence and aid, as is our custom. 
Miss Emily met them at the door, dressed as usual and with 
no trace of grief on her face. She told them that her father 
was not dead. She did that for three days, with the ministers 



124 The Village 

calling on her, and the doctors, trying to persuade her to 
let them dispose of the body. Just as they were about to 
resort to law and force, she broke down, and they buried 
her father quickly. 

We did not say she was crazy then. We believed she had 
to do that. We remembered all the young men her father 
had driven away, and we knew that with nothing left, she 
would have to cling to that which had robbed her, as people 
will. 



Ill 

SHE WAS SICK for a long time. When we saw her again, her 
hair was cut short, making her look like a girl, with a vague 
resemblance to those angels in colored church windows 
sort of tragic and serene. 

The town had just let the contracts for paving the side- 
walks, and in the summer after her father's death they began 
the work. The construction company came with niggers and 
mules and machinery, and a foreman named Homer Barron, 
a Yankee a big, dark, ready man, with a big voice and eyes 
lighter than his face. The little boys would follow in groups 
to hear him cuss the niggers, and the niggers singing in time 
to the rise and fall of picks. Pretty soon he knew every- 
body in town. Whenever you heard a lot of laughing any- 
where about the square, Homer Barron would be in the 
center of the group. Presently we began to see him and Miss 
Emily on Sunday afternoons driving in the yellow-wheeled 
buggy and the matched team of bays from the livery stable. 

At first we were glad that Miss Emily would have an 
interest, because the ladies all said, "Of course a Grierson 
would not think seriously of a Northerner, a day laborer.'* 
But there were still others, older people, who said that even 
grief could not cause a real lady to forget noblesse oblige 



A Rose for Emily 125 

without calling it noblesse oblige. They just said, "Poor 
Emily. Her kinsfolk should come to her." She had some kin 
in Alabama; but years ago her father had fallen out with 
them over the estate of old lady Wyatt, the crazy woman, 
and there was no communication between the two families. 
They had not even been represented at the funeral. 

And as soon as the old people said, "Poor Emily," the 
whispering began. "Do you suppose it's really so?" they said 
to one another. "Of course it is. What else could . . ." This 
behind their hands; rustling of craned silk and satin behind 
jalousies closed upon the sun of Sunday afternoon as the 
thin, swift clop-clop-clop of the matched team passed: "Poor 
Emily." 

She carried her head high enough even when we believed 
that she was fallen. It was as if she demanded more than ever 
the recognition of her dignity as the last Grierson; as if it 
had wanted that touch of earthiness to reaffirm her imper- 
viousness. Like when she bought the rat poison, the arsenic. 
That was over a year after they had begun to say "Poor 
Emily," and while the two female cousins were visiting her. 

"I want some poison," she said to the druggist. She was 
over thirty then, still a slight woman, though thinner than 
usual, with cold, haughty black eyes in a face the flesh of 
which was strained across the temples and about the eye- 
sockets as you imagine a lighthouse-keeper's face ought to 
look. "I want some poison," she said. 

"Yes, Miss Emily. What kind? For rats and such? I'd 
recom " 

"I want the best you have. I don't care what kind." 

The druggist named several. "They'll kill anything up 
to an elephant. But what you want is " 

"Arsenic," Miss Emily said. "Is that a good one?" 

"Is . . . arsenic? Yes, ma'am. But what you want " 

"I want arsenic." 



The Village 

The druggist looked down at her. She looked back at him, 
erect, her face like a strained flag. "Why, of course," the 
druggist said. "If that's what you want. But the law requires 
you to tell what you are going to use it for." 

Miss Emily just stared at him, her head tilted back in 
order to look him eye for eye, until he looked away and 
went and got the arsenic and wrapped it up. The Negro 
delivery boy brought her the package; the druggist didn't 
come back. When she opened the package at home there 
was written on the box, under the skull and bones: "For 
rats." 



IV 

So THE NEXT day we all said, "She will kill herself"; and we 
said it would be the best thing. When she had first begun 
to be seen with Homer Barron, we had said, "She will marry 
him." Then we said, "She will persuade him yet," because 
Homer himself had remarked he liked men, and it was 
known that he drank with the younger men in the Elks' 
Club that he was not a marrying man. Later we said, 
"Poor Emily" behind the jalousies as they passed on Sunday 
afternoon in the glittering buggy, Miss Emily with her head 
high and Homer Barron with his hat cocked and a cigar in 
his teeth, reins and whip in a yellow glove. 

Then some of the ladies began to say that it was a disgrace 
to the town and a bad example to the young people. The 
men did not want to interfere, but at last the ladies forced 
the Baptist minister Miss Emily's people were Episcopal 
to call upon her. He would never divulge what happened 
during that interview, but he refused to go back again. The 
next Sunday they again drove about the streets, and the 
following day the minister's wife wrote to Miss Emily's 
relations in Alabama. 



A Rose for Emily 127 

So she had blood-kin under her roof again and we sat 
back to watch developments. At first nothing happened. 
Then we were sure that they were to be married. We learned 
that Miss Emily had been to the jeweler's and ordered a 
man's toilet set in silver, with the letters H. B. on each piece. 
Two days later we learned that she had bought a complete 
outfit of men's clothing, including a nightshirt, and we said, 
"They are married." We were really glad. We were glad 
because the two female cousins were even more Grierson 
than Miss Emily had ever been. 

So we were not surprised when Homer Barron the 
streets had been finished some time since was gone. We 
were a little disappointed that there was not a public blow- 
ing-off , bur we believed that he had gone on to prepare for 
Miss Emily's coming, or to give her a chance to get rid of 
the cousins. (By that time it was a cabal, and we were all 
Miss Emily's allies to help circumvent the cousins.) Sure 
enough, after another week they departed. And, as we had 
expected all along, within three days Homer Barron was 
back in town. A neighbor saw the Negro man admit him at 
the kitchen door at dusk one evening. 

And that was the last we saw of Homer Barron. And of 
Miss Emily for some time. The Negro man went in and out 
with the market basket, but the front door remained closed. 
Now and then we would see her at a window for a moment, 
as the men did that night when they sprinkled the lime, but 
for almost six months she did not appear on the streets. Then 
we knew that this was to be expected too; as if that quality 
of her father which had thwarted her woman's life so many 
times had been too virulent and too furious to die. 

When we next saw Miss Emily, she had grown fat and 
her hair was turning gray. During the next few years it 
grew grayer and grayer until it attained an even pepper-and- 
salt iron-gray, when it ceased turning. Up to the dav of her 



ii8 The Village 

death at seventy-four it was still that vigorous iron-gray, 
like the hair of an active man. 

From that time on her front door remained closed, save 
for a period of six or seven years, when she was about forty, 
during which she gave lessons in china-painting. She fitted 
up a studio in one of the downstairs rooms, where the 
daughters and granddaughters of Colonel Sartoris' contem- 
poraries were sent to her with the same regularity and in the 
same spirit that they were sent to church on Sundays with 
a twenty-five-cent piece for the collection plate. Meanwhile 
her taxes had been remitted. 

Then the newer generation became the backbone and 
the spirit of the town, and the painting pupils grew up and 
fell away and did not send their children to her with boxes 
of color and tedious brushes and pictures cut from the 
ladies' magazines. The front door closed upon the last one 
and remained closed for good. When the town got free 
postal delivery, Miss Emily alone refused to let them fasten 
the metal numbers above her door and attach a mailbox to 
it. She would not listen to them. 

Daily, monthly, yearly we watched the Negro grow grayer 
and more stooped, going in and out with the market basket 
Each December we sent her a tax notice, which would be 
returned by the post office a week later, unclaimed. Now and 
then we would see her in one of the downstairs windows 
she had evidently shut up the top floor of the house like 
the carven torso of an idol in a niche, looking or not looking 
at us, we could never tell which. Thus she passed from gen- 
eration to generation dear, inescapable, impervious, tran- 
quil, and perverse. 

And so she died. Fell ill in the house filled with dust and 
shadows, with only a doddering Negro man to wait on her. 
We did not even know she was sick; we had long since 
given up trying to get any information from the Negro 



A Rose for Emily 129 

He talked to no one, probably not even to her, for his voice 
had grown harsh and rusty, as if from disuse. 

She died in one of the downstairs rooms, in a heavy 
walnut bed with a curtain, her gray head propped on a pillow 
yellow and moldy with age and lack of sunlight. 

V 

THE NEGRO met the first of the ladies at the front door and 
let them in, with their hushed, sibilant voices and their quick, 
curious glances, and then he disappeared. He walked right 
through the house and out the back and was not seen again. 

The two female cousins came at once. They held the 
funeral on the second day, with the town coming to look 
at Miss Emily beneath a mass of bought flowers, with the 
crayon face of her father musing profoundly above the bier 
and the ladies sibilant and macabre; and the very old men 
some in their brushed Confederate uniforms on the porch 
and the lawn, talking of Miss Emily as if she had been a con- 
temporary of theirs, believing that they had danced with 
her and courted her perhaps, confusing time with its math- 
ematical progression, as the old do, to whom all the past is 
not a diminishing road but, instead, a huge meadow which 
no winter ever quite touches, divided from them now by the 
narrow bottle-neck of the most recent decade of years. 

Already we knew that there was one room in that region 
above stairs which no one had seen in forty years, and which 
would have to be forced. They waited until Miss Emily 
was decently in the ground before they opened it. 

The violence of breaking down the door seemed to fill 
this room with pervading dust. A thin, acrid pall as of the 
tomb seemed to lie everywhere upon this room decked and 
furnished as for a bridal: upon the valance curtains of faded 
rose color, upon the rose-shaded lights, upon the dressing 



130 The Village 

table, upon the delicate array of crystal and the man's toilet 
things backed with tarnished silver, silver so tarnished that 
the monogram was obscured. Among them lay a collar and 
tie, as if they had just been removed, which, lifted, left upon 
the surface a pale crescent in the dust. Upon a chair hung 
the suit, carefully folded; beneath it the two mute shoes 
and the discarded socks. 

The man himself lay in the bed. 

For a long while we just stood there, looking down at the 
profound and fleshless grin. The body had apparently once 
lain in the attitude of an embrace, but now the long sleep 
that outlasts love, that conquers even the grimace of love, 
had cuckolded him. What was left of him, rotted beneath 
what was left of the nightshirt, had become inextricable 
from the bed in which he lay; and upon him and upon the 
pillow beside him lay that even coating of the patient and 
biding dust. 

Then we noticed that in the second pillow was the inden- 
tation of a head. One of us lifted something from it, and 
leaning forward, that faint and invisible dust dry and acrid 
in the nostrils, we saw a long strand of iron-gray hair. 



Hair 



THIS GIRL, this Susan Reed, was an orphan. She lived with 
a family named Burchett, that had some more children, two 
or three more. Some said that Susan was a niece or a cousin 
or something; others cast the usual aspersions on the char- 
acter of Burchett and even of Mrs. Burchett: you know. 
Women mostly, these were. 

She was about five when Hawkshaw first came to town. 
It was his first summer behind that chair in Maxey's barber 
shop that Mrs Burchett brought Susan in for the first time. 
Maxey told me about how him and the other barbers watched 
Mrs Burchett trying for three days to get Susan (she was 
a thin little girl then, with big scared eyes and this straight, 
soft hair not blonde and not brunette) into the shop. And 
Maxey told how at last it was Hawkshaw that went out 
into the street and worked with the girl for about fifteen 
minutes until he got her into the shop and into his chair 
him that hadn't never said more than Yes or No to any man 
or woman in the town that anybody ever saw. "Be durn if 
it didn't look like Hawkshaw had been waiting for her to 
come along," Maxey told me. 

That was her first haircut. Hawkshaw gave it to her, and 
her sitting there under the cloth like a little scared rabbit. 
But six months after that she was coming to the shop by 



132 The Village 

herself and letting Hawkshaw cut her hair, still looking like 
a little old rabbit, with her scared face and those big eyes 
and that hair without any special name showing above the 
cloth. If Hawkshaw was busy, Maxey said she would come 
in and sit on the waiting bench close to his chair with her 
legs sticking straight out in front of her until Hawkshaw 
got done. Maxey says they considered her Hawkshaw's client 
the same as if she had been a Saturday night shaving cus- 
tomer. He says that one time the other barber, Matt Fox, 
offered to wait on her, Hawkshaw being busy, and that 
Hawkshaw looked up like a flash. "I'll be done in a minute," 
he says. "Pll tend to her." Maxey told me that Hawkshaw 
had been working for him for almost a year then, but that 
was the first time he ever heard him speak positive about 
anything. 

That fall the girl started to school. She would pass the 
barber shop each morning and afternoon. She was still shy, 
walking fast like little girls do, with that yellow-brown head 
of hers passing the window level and fast like she was on 
skates. She was always by herself at first, but pretty soon 
her head would be one of a clump of other heads, all talking, 
not looking toward the window at all, and Hawkshaw stand- 
ing there in the window, looking out. Maxey said him and 
Matt would not have to look at the clock at all to tell when 
five minutes to eight and to three o'clock came, because they 
could tell by Hawkshaw. It was like he would kind of drift 
up to the window without watching himself do it, and be 
looking out about the time for the school children to begin 
to pass. When she would come to the shop for a haircut, 
Hawkshaw would give her two or three of those pepper- 
mints where he would give the other children just one, 
Maxey told me. 

No; it was Matt Fox, the other barber, told me that. He 
was the one who told me about the doll Hawkshaw gave her 



Hair 1 3 3 

on Christmas. I don't know how he found it out. Hawkshaw 
never told him. But he knew some way; he knew more about 
Hawkshaw than Maxey did. He was a married man himself, 
Matt was. A kind of fat, flabby fellow, with a pasty face 
and eyes that looked tired or sad something. A funny 
fellow, and almost as good a barber as Hawkshaw. He never 
talked much either, and I don't know how he could have 
known so much about Hawkshaw when a talking man 
couldn't get much out of him. I guess maybe a talking man 
hasn't got the time to ever learn much about anything except 
words. 

Anyway, Matt told me about how Hawkshaw gave her 
a present every Christmas, even after she got to be a big girl. 
She still came to him, to his chair, and him watching her 
every morning and afternoon when she passed to and from 
school. A big girl, and she wasn't shy any more. 

You wouldn't have thought she was the same girl. She 
got grown fast. Too fast. That was the trouble. Some said it 
was being an orphan and all. But it wasn't that. Girls are 
different from boys. Girls are born weaned and boys don't 
ever get weaned. You see one sixty years old, and be damned 
if he won't go back to the perambulator at the bat of an eye. 

It's not that she was bad. There's not any such thing as a 
woman born bad, because they are all born bad, born with 
the badness in them. The thing is, to get them married before 
the badness comes to a natural head. But we try to make 
them conform to a system that says a woman can't be mar- 
ried until she reaches a certain age. And nature don't pay 
any attention to systems, let alone women paying any atten- 
tion to them, or to anything. She just grew up too fast. She 
reached the point where the badness came to a head before 
the system said it was time for her to. I think they can't help 
it. I have a daughter of my own, and I say that. 

So there she was. Matt told me they figured up and she 



134 The Village 

couldn't have been more than thirteen when Mrs Burchett 
whipped her one day for using rouge and paint, and during 
that year, he said, they would see her with two or three 
other girls giggling and laughing on the street at all hours 
when they should have been in school; still thin, with that 
hair still not blonde and not brunette, with her face caked 
with paint until you would have thought it would crack 
like dried mud when she laughed, with the regular simple 
gingham and such dresses that a thirteen-year-old child 
ought to wear pulled and dragged to show off what she 
never had yet to show off, like the older girls did with their 
silk and crepe and such. 

Matt said he watched her pass one day, when all of a 
sudden he realized she never had any stockings on. He said 
he thought about it and he said he could not remember that 
she ever did wear stockings in the summer, until he realized 
that what he had noticed was not the lack of stockings, but 
that her legs were like a woman's legs: female. And her only 
thirteen. 

I say she couldn't help herself. It wasn't her fault. And 
it wasn't Burchett's fault, either. Why, nobody can be as 
gentle with them, the bad ones, the ones that are unlucky 
enough to come to a head too soon, as men. Look at the 
way they all the men in town treated Hawkshaw. Even 
after folks knew, after all the talk began, there wasn't a man 
of them talked before Hawkshaw. I reckon they thought 
he knew too, had heard some of the talk, but whenever they 
talked about her in the shop, it was while Hawkshaw was 
not there. And I reckon the other men were the same, be- 
cause there was not a one of them that hadn't seen Hawk- 
shaw at the window, looking at her when she passed, or 
looking at her on the street; happening to kind of be passing 
the picture show when it let out and she would come out 
with some fellow, having begun to go with them before she 



Hair 135 

was fourteen. Folks said how she would have to slip out and 
meet them and slip back into the house again with Mrs 
Burchett thinking she was at the home of a girl friend. 

They never talked about her before Hawkshaw. They 
would wait until he was gone, to dinner, or on one of those 
two- weeks' vacations of his in April that never anybody 
could find out about; where he went or anything. But he 
would be gone, and they would watch the girl slipping 
around, skirting trouble, bound to get into it sooner or later, 
even if Burchett didn't hear something first. She had quit 
school a year ago. For a year Burchett and Mrs Burchett 
thought that she was going to school every day, when she 
hadn't been inside the building even. Somebody one of the 
high-school boys maybe, but she never drew any lines: 
schoolboys, married men, anybody would get her a report 
card every month and she would fill it out herself and take 
it home for Mrs Burchett to sign. It beats the devil how the 
folks that love a woman will let her fool them. 

So she quit school and went to work in the ten-cent store. 
She would come to the shop for a haircut, all painted up, 
in some kind of little flimsy off-color clothes that showed 
her off, with her face watchful and bold and discreet all at 
once, and her hair gummed and twisted about her face. But 
even the stuff she put on it couldn't change that brown- 
yellow color. Her hair hadn't changed at all. She wouldn't 
always go to Hawkshaw's chair. Even when his chair was 
empty, she would sometimes take one of the others, talking 
to the barbers, filling the whole shop with noise and perfume 
and her legs sticking out from under the cloth. Hawkshaw 
wouldn't look at her then. Even when he wasn't busy, he 
had a way of looking the same: intent and down-looking 
like he was making out to be busy, hiding behind the mak- 
ing-out. 

That was how it was when he left two weeks ago on that 



136 The Village 

April vacation of his, that secret trip that folks had given up 
trying to find where he went ten years ago. I made Jefferson 
a couple of days after he left, and I was in the shop. They 
were talking about him and her. 

"Is he still giving her Christmas presents?" I said. 

"He bought her a wrist watch two years ago," Matt Fox 
said. "Paid sixty dollars for it." 

Maxey was shaving a customer. He stopped, the razor in 
his hand, the blade loaded with lather. "Well, I'll be durned," 
he said. "Then he must You reckon he was the first one, 
the one that " 

Matt hadn't looked around. "He aint give it to her yet," 
he said. 

"Well, durn his tight-fisted time," Maxey said. "Any old 
man that will fool with a young girl, he's pretty bad. But a 
fellow that will trick one and then not even pay her noth- 
ing-" 

Matt looked around now; he was shaving a customer too. 
"What would you say if you heard that the reason he aint 
give it to her is that he thinks she is too young to receive 
jewelry from anybody that aint kin to her?" 

"You mean, he dont know? He dont know what every- 
body else in this town except maybe Mr and Mrs Burchett 
has knowed for three years?" 

Matt went back to work again, his elbow moving steady, 
the razor moving in little jerks. "How would he know? 
Aint anybody but a woman going to tell him. And he dont 
know any women except Mrs Cowan. And I reckon she 
thinks he's done heard." 

"That's a fact," Maxey says. 

That was how things were when he went off on his vaca- 
tion two weeks ago. I worked Jefferson in a day and a half, 
and went on. In the middle of the next week I reached 



Hair 137 

Division. I didn't hurry. I wanted to give him time. It was 
on a Wednesday morning I got there. 

II 

IF THERE HAD BEEN love once, a man would have said that 
Hawkshaw had forgotten her. Meaning love, of course. 
When I first saw him thirteen years ago (I had just gone on 
the road then, making North Mississippi and Alabama with 
a line of work shirts and overalls) behind a chair in the 
barber shop in Porterfield, I said, "Here is a bachelor born. 
Here is a man who was born single and forty years old." 

A little, sandy-complected man with a face you would 
not remember and would not recognize again ten minutes 
later, in a blue serge suit and a black bow tie, the kind that 
snaps together in the back, that you buy already tied in the 
store. Maxey told me he was still wearing that serge suit and 
tie when he got off the south-bound train in Jefferson a 
year later, carrying one of these imitation leather suitcases. 
And when I saw him again in Jefferson in the next year, 
behind a chair in Maxey 's shop, if it had not been for the 
chair I wouldn't have recognized him at all. Same face, same 
tie; be damned if it wasn't like they had picked him up, 
chair, customer and all, and set him down sixty miles away 
without him missing a lick. I had to look back out the win- 
dow at the square to be sure I wasn't in Porterfield myself 
any time a year ago. And that was the first time I realized 
that when I had made Porterfield about six weeks back, he 
had not been there. 

It was three years after that before I found out about him. 
I would make Division about five times a year a store and 
four or five houses and a sawmill on the State line between 
Mississippi and Alabama. I had noticed a house there. It was 
a good house, one of the best there, and it was always closed. 



138 The Village 

When I would make Division in the late spring or the early 
summer there would always be signs of work around the 
house. The yard would be cleaned up of weeds, and the 
flower beds tended to and the fences and roof fixed. Then 
when I would get back to Division along in the fall or the 
winter, the yard would be grown up in weeds again, and 
maybe some of the pickets gone off the fence where folks 
had pulled them off to mend their own fences or maybe for 
firewood; I dont know. And the house would be always 
closed; never any smoke at the kitchen chimney. So one day 
I asked the storekeeper about it and he told me. 

It had belonged to a man named Starnes, but the family 
was all dead. They were considered the best folks, because 
they owned some land, mortgaged. Starnes was one of these 
lazy men that was satisfied to be a landowner as long as he 
had enough to eat and a little tobacco. They had one daugh- 
ter that went and got herself engaged to a young fellow, 
son of a tenant farmer. The mother didn't like the idea, but 
Starnes didn't seem to object. Maybe because the young 
fellow (his name was Stribling) was a hard worker; maybe 
because Starnes was just too lazy to object. Anyway, they 
were engaged and Stribling saved his money and went to 
Birmingham to learn barbering. Rode part of the way in 
wagons and walked the rest, coming back each summer to 
see the girl. 

Then one day Starnes died, sitting in his chair on the 
porch; they said that he was too lazy to keep on breathing, 
and they sent for Stribling. I heard he had built up a good 
trade of his own in the Birmingham shop, saving his money; 
they told me he had done picked out the apartment and 
paid down on the furniture and all, and that they were to be 
married that summer. He came back. All Starnes had ever 
raised was a mortgage, so Stribling paid for the burial. It 
cost a right smart, more than Starnes was worth, but Mrs 



Hair 139 

Starnes had to be suited. So Stribling had to start saving 
again. 

But he had already leased the apartment and paid down 
on the furniture and the ring and he had bought the wedding 
license when they sent for him again in a hurry. It was the 
girl this time. She had some kind of fever. These backwoods 
folks: you know how it is. No doctors, or veterinaries, if 
they are. Cut them and shoot them: that's all right. But let 
them get a bad cold and maybe they'll get well or maybe 
they'll die two days later of cholera. She was delirious when 
Stribling got there. They had to cut all her hair off. Strib- 
ling did that, being an expert you might say; a professional 
in the family. They told me she was one of these thin, un- 
healthy girls anyway, with a lot of straight hair not brown 
and not yellow. 

She never knew him, never knew who cut off her hair. 
She died so, without knowing anything about it, without 
knowing even that she died, maybe. She just kept on saying, 
"Take care of maw. The mortgage. Paw wont like it to be 
left so. Send for Henry (That was him: Henry Stribling; 
Hawkshaw: I saw him the next year in Jefferson. "So you're 
Henry Stribling," I said). The mortgage. Take care of maw. 
Send for Henry. The mortgage. Send for Henry." Then 
she died. There was a picture of her, the only one they had. 
Hawkshaw sent it, with a lock of the hair he had cut off, to 
an address in a farm magazine, to have the hair made into 
a frame for the picture. But they both got lost, the hair and 
the picture, in the mail somehow. Anyway he never got 
either of them back. 

He buried the girl too, and the next year (he had to go 
back to Birmingham and get shut of the apartment which he 
had engaged and let the furniture go so he could save again) 
he put a headstone over her grave. Then he went away 
again and they heard how he had quit the Birmingham shop. 



140 The Village 

He just quit and disappeared, and they all saying how in 
time he would have owned the shop. But he quit, and next 
April, just before the anniversary of the girl's death, he 
showed up again. He came to see Mrs Starnes and went 
away again in two weeks. 

After he was gone they found out how he had stopped 
at the bank at the county seat and paid the interest on the 
mortgage. He did that every year until Mrs Starnes died. 
She happened to die while he was there. He would spend 
about two weeks cleaning up the place and fixing it so she 
would be comfortable for another year, and she letting him, 
being as she was better born than him; being as he was one 
of these parveynoos. Then she died too. "You know what 
Sophie said to do," she says. "That mortgage. Mr Starnes 
will be worried when I see him." 

So he buried her too. He bought another headstone, to 
suit her. Then he begun to pay the principal on the mort- 
gage. Starnes had some kin in Alabama. The folks in Divi- 
sion expected the kin to come and claim the place. But maybe 
the kin were waiting until Hawkshaw had got the mortgage 
cleared. He made the payment each year, coming back and 
cleaning up the place. They said he would clean up that 
house inside like a woman, washing and scrubbing it. It 
would take him two weeks each April. Then he would go 
away again, nobody knew where, returning each April to 
make the payment at the bank and clean up that empty 
house that never belonged to him. 

He had been doing that for about five years when I saw 
him in Maxey's shop in Jefferson, the year after I saw him 
in a shop in Porterfield, in that serge suit and that black 
bow tie. Maxey said he had them on when he got off the 
south-bound train that day in Jefferson, carrying that paper 
suitcase. Maxey said they watched him for two days about 
the square, him not seeming to know anybody or to have 



Hair 141 

any business or to be in any hurry; just walking about the 
square like he was just looking around. 

It was the young fellows, the loafers that pitch dollars all 
day long in the clubhouse yard, waiting for the young girls 
to come giggling down to the post office and the soda foun- 
tain in the late afternoon, working their hips under their 
dresses, leaving the smell of perfume when they pass, that 
gave him his name. They said he was a detective, maybe 
because that was the last thing in the world anybody would 
suspect him to be. So they named him Hawkshaw, and 
Hawkshaw he remained for the twelve years he stayed in 
Jefferson, behind that chair in Maxey's shop. He told Maxey 
he was from Alabama. 

"What part?" Maxey said. "Alabama's a big place. 
Birmingham?" Maxey said, because Hawkshaw looked like 
he might have come from almost anywhere in Alabama 
except Birmingham. 

"Yes," Hawkshaw said. "Birmingham." 

And that was all they ever got out of him until I hap- 
pened to notice him behind the chair and to remember him 
back in Porterfield. 

"Porterfield?" Maxey said. "My brother-in-law owns that 
shop. You mean you worked in Porterfield last year?" 

"Yes," Hawkshaw said. "I was there." 

Maxey told me about the vacation business. How Hawk- 
shaw wouldn't take his summer vacation; said he wanted 
two weeks in April instead. He wouldn't tell why. Maxey 
said April was too busy for vacations, and Hawkshaw 
offered to work until then, and quit. "Do you want to quit 
then?" Maxey said that was in the summer, after Mrs 
Burchett had brought Susan Reed to the shop for the first 
time. 

"No," Hawkshaw said. "I like it here. I just want two 
weeks off in April." 



142 The Village 

"On business?" Maxey said. 

"On business," Hawkshaw said. 

When Maxey took his vacation, he went to Porterfield to 
visit his brother-in-law; maybe shaving his brother-in-law's 
customers, like a sailor will spend his vacation in a rowboat 
on an artificial lake. The brother-in-law told him Hawkshaw 
had worked in his shop, would not take a vacation until 
April, went off and never came back. "He'll quit you the 
same way," the brother-in-law said. "He worked in a shop 
in Bolivar, Tennessee, and in one in Florence, Alabama, for 
a year and quit the same way. He wont come back. You 
watch and see." 

Maxey said he came back home and he finally got it out 
of Hawkshaw how he had worked for a year each in six or 
eight different towns in Alabama and Tennessee and Missis- 
sippi. "Why did you quit them?" Maxey said. "You are a 
good barber; one of the best children's barbers I ever saw. 
Why did you quit?" 

"I was just looking around," Hawkshaw said. 

Then April came, and he took his two weeks. He shaved 
himself and packed up that paper suitcase and took the 
north-bound train. 

"Going on a visit, I reckon," Maxey said. 

"Up the road a piece," Hawkshaw said. 

So he went away, in that serge suit and black bow tie. 
Maxey told me how, two days later, it got out how Hawk- 
shaw had drawn from the bank his year's savings. He 
boarded at Mrs Cowan's and he had joined the church and 
he spent no money at all. He didn't even smoke. So Maxey 
and Matt and I reckon everybody else in Jefferson thought 
that he had saved up steam for a year and was now bound 
on one of these private sabbaticals among the fleshpots of 
Memphis. Mitch Ewing, the depot freight agent, lived at 
Mrs Cowan's too. He told how Hawkshaw had bought his 



Hair 143 

ticket only to the junction-point. "From there he can go to 
either Memphis or Birmingham or New Orleans," Mitch 
said. 

"Well, he's gone, anyway," Maxey said. "And mark my 
words, that's the last you'll see of that fellow in this town." 

And that's what everybody thought until two weeks later. 
On the fifteenth day Hawkshaw came walking into the shop 
at his regular time, like he hadn't even been out of town, 
and took off his coat and begun to hone his razors. He never 
told anybody where he had been. Just up the road a piece. 

Sometimes I thought I would tell them. I would make 
Jefferson and find him there behind that chair. He didn't 
change, grow any older in the face, any more than that Reed 
girl's hair changed, for all the gum and dye she put on it. 
But there he would be, back from his vacation "up the road 
a piece," saving his money for another year, going to church 
on Sunday, keeping that sack of peppermints for the children 
that came to him to be barbered, until it was time to take 
that paper suitcase and his year's savings and go back to 
Division to pay on the mortgage and clean up the house. 

Sometimes he would be gone when I got to Jefferson, and 
Maxey would tell me about him cutting that Reed girl's 
hair, snipping and snipping it and holding the mirror up for 
her to see like she was an actress. "He dont charge her," 
Matt Fox said. "He pays the quarter into the register out of 
his own pocket." 

"Well, that's his business," Maxey said. "All I want is the 
quarter. I dont care where it comes from." 

Five years later maybe I would have said, "Maybe that's 
her price." Because she got in trouble at last. Or so they 
said. I dont know, except that most of the talk about girls, 
women, is envy or retaliation by the ones that dont dare to 
and the ones that failed to. But while he was gone one April 



144 The Village 

they were whispering how she had got in trouble at last 
and had tried to doctor herself with turpentine and was bad 
sick. 

Anyhow, she was off the streets for about three months; 
some said in a hospital in Memphis, and when she came into 
the shop again she took Matt's chair, though Hawkshaw's 
was empty at the time, like she had already done before to 
devil him, maybe. Maxey said she looked like a painted 
ghost, gaunt and hard, for all her bright dress and such, 
sitting there in Matt's chair, filling the whole shop with her 
talking and her laughing and her perfume and her long, 
naked-looking legs, and Hawkshaw making out he was busy 
at his empty chair. 

Sometimes I thought I would tell them. But I never told 
anybody except Gavin Stevens. He is the district attorney, 
a smart man: not like the usual pedagogue lawyer and office 
holder. He went to Harvard, and when my health broke 
down (I used to be a bookkeeper in a Gordonville bank and 
my health broke down and I met Stevens on a Memphis 
train when I was coming home from the hospital) it was 
him that suggested I try the road and got me my position 
with this company. I told him about it two years ago. "And 
now the girl has gone bad on him, and he's too old to hunt 
up another one and raise her," I said. "And some day he'll 
have the place paid out and those Alabama Starnes can come 
and take it, and he'll be through. Then what do you think 
he will do?" 

"I dont know," Stevens said. 

"Maybe he'll just go off and die," I said. 

"Maybe he will," Stevens said. 

"Well," I said, "he wont be the first man to tilt at wind- 
mills." 

"He wont be the first man to die, either," Stevens said. 



Hair 145 

III 

So LAST WEEK I went on to Division. I got there on a 
Wednesday. When I saw the house, it had just been painted. 
The storekeeper told me that the payment Hawkshaw had 
made was the last one; that Starnes' mortgage was clear. 
"Them Alabama Starnes can come and take it now," he said. 

"Anyway, Hawkshaw did what he promised her, prom- 
ised Mrs Starnes," I said. 

"Hawkshaw?" he said. "Is that what they call him? Well, 
I'll be durned. Hawkshaw. Well, I'll be durned." 

It was three months before I made Jefferson again. When 
I passed the barber shop I looked in without stopping. And 
there was another fellow behind Hawkshaw's chair, a young 
fellow. "I wonder if Hawk left his sack of peppermints," I 
said to myself. But I didn't stop. I just thought, 'Well, he's 
gone at last/ wondering just where he would be when old 
age got him and he couldn't move again; if he would prob- 
ably die behind a chair somewhere in a little three-chair 
country shop, in his shirt sleeves and that black tie and those 
serge pants. 

I went on and saw my customers and had dinner, and in 
the afternoon I went to Stevens' office. "I see you've got a 
new barber in town," I said. 

"Yes," Stevens said. He looked at me a while, then he said, 
"You haven't heard?" 

"Heard what?" I said. Then he quit looking at me. 

"I got your letter," he said, "that Hawkshaw had paid off 
the mortgage and painted the house. Tell me about it." 

So I told him how I got to Division the day after Hawk- 
shaw had left. They were talking about him on the porch 
of the store, wondering just when those Alabama Starnes 
would come in. He had painted the house himself, and he 
had cleaned up the two graves; I dont reckon he wanted to 



146 The Village 

disturb Starnes by cleaning his. I went up to see them. He 
had even scrubbed the headstones, and he had set out an 
apple shoot over the girl's grave. It was in bloom, and what 
with the folks all talking about him, I got curious too, to 
see the inside of that house. The storekeeper had the key, 
and he said he reckoned it would be all right with Hawk- 
shaw. 

It was clean inside as a hospital. The stove was polished 
and the woodbox filled. The storekeeper told me Hawkshaw 
did that every year, filled the woodbox before he left. 
"Those Alabama kinsfolk will appreciate that," I said. We 
went on back to the parlor. There was a melodeon in the 
corner, and a lamp and a Bible on the table. The lamp was 
clean, the bowl empty and clean too; you couldn't even 
smell oil on it. That wedding license was framed, hanging 
above the mantel like a picture. It was dated April 4, 1905. 

"Here's where he keeps that mortgage record," the store- 
keeper (his name is Bidwell) said. He went to the table and 
opened the Bible. The front page was the births and deaths, 
two columns. The girl's name was Sophie. I found her name 
in the birth column, and on the death side it was next to the 
last one. Mrs Starnes had written it. It looked like it might 
have taken her ten minutes to write it down. It looked like 
this: 

Sofy starnes Dide april 16 th 1905 

Hawkshaw wrote the last one himself; it was neat and 
well written, like a bookkeeper's hand: 

Mrs Will Starnes. April 23, 1916. 

"The record will be in the back," Bidwell said. 

We turned to the back. It was there, in a neat column, in 
Hawkshaw's hand. It began with April 16, 1917, $200.00. 
The next one was when he made the next payment at the 



Hair 147 

bank: April 16, 1918, $200.00; and April 16, 1919, $200.00; 
and April 16, 1920, $200.00; and on to the last one: April 
1 6, 1930, $200.00. Then he had totaled the column and 
written under it: 

"Paid in full. April 16, 1930." 

It looked like a sentence written in a copy book in the old- 
time business colleges, like it had flourished, the pen had, in 
spite of him. It didn't look like it was written boastful; it 
just flourished somehow, the end of it, like it had run out 
of the pen somehow before he could stop it. 

"So he did what he promised her he would," Stevens said. 

"That's what I told Bidwell," I said. 

Stevens went on like he wasn't listening to me much. 

"So the old lady could rest quiet. I guess that's what the 
pen was trying to say when it ran away from him: that 
now she could lie quiet. And he's not much over forty-five. 
Not so much anyway. Not so much but what, when he wrote 
'Paid in full' under that column, time and despair rushed as 
slow and dark under him as under any garlanded boy or 
crownless and crestless girl." 

"Only the girl went bad on him," I said. "Forty-five's 
pretty late to set out to find another. He'll be fifty-five at 
least by then." 

Stevens looked at me then. "I didn't think you had heard," 
he said. 

"Yes," I said. "That is, I looked in the barber shop when 
I passed. But I knew he would be gone. I knew all the time 
he would move on, once he had that mortgage cleared. 
Maybe he never knew about the girl, anyway. Or likely he 
knew and didn't care." 

"You think he didn't know about her?" 

"I dont see how he could have helped it. But I dont know. 
What do you think?" 



148 The Village 

"I dont know. I dont think I want to know. I know some- 
thing so much better than that." 

"What's that?" I said. He was looking at me. "You keep 
on telling me I haven't heard the news. What is it I haven't 
heard?" 

"About the girl," Stevens said. He looked at me. 

"On the night Hawkshaw came back from his last vaca- 
tion, they were married. He took her with him this time." 



Centaur in Brass 



IN OUR TOWN Flem Snopes now has a monument to himself v 
a monument of brass, none the less enduring for the fact that, 
though it is constantly in sight of the whole town and visible 
from three or four points miles out in the country, only four 
people, two white men and two Negroes, know that it is his 
monument, or that it is a monument at all. 

He came to Jefferson from the country, accompanied by 
his wife and infant daughter and preceded by a reputation for 
shrewd and secret dealing. There lives in our county a sew- 
ing-machine agent riamed Suratt, who used to own a half 
interest in a small back-street restaurant in town himself 
no mean hand at that technically unassailable opportunism 
which passes with country folks and town folks, too for 
honest shrewdness. 

He travels about the county steadily and constantly, and 
it was through him that Snope's doings first came to our ears: 
how first, a clerk in a country store, Snopes one day and to 
everyone's astonishment was married to the store owner's 
daughter, a young girl who was the belle of the countryside. 
They were married suddenly, on the same day upon which 
three of the girl's erstwhile suitors left the county and were 
seen no more. 

Soon after the wedding Snopes and his wife moved to 
Texas, from where the wif e returned a year later with a well- 

149 



150 The Village 

grown baby. A month later Snopes himself returned, ac- 
companied by a broad-hatted stranger and a herd of half- 
wild mustang ponies, which the stranger auctioned off, 
collected the money, and departed. Then the purchasers dis- 
covered that none of the ponies had ever had a bridle on. But 
they never learned if Snopes had had any part in the business, 
or had received any part of the money. 

The next we heard of him was when he appeared one day 
in a wagon laden with his family and household goods, and 
with a bill-of-sale for Suratt's half of the restaurant. How he 
got the bill-of-sale, Suratt never told, and we never learned 
more than that there was somehow involved in the affair a 
worthless piece of land which had been a portion of Mrs. 
Snopes's dowry. But what the business was even Suratt, a 
humorous, talkative man who was as ready to laugh at a joke 
on himself as at one on anyone else, never told. But when he 
mentioned Snopes's name after that, it was in a tone of sav- 
age and sardonic and ungrudging admiration. 

"Yes, sir," he said, "Flem Snopes outsmarted me. And the 
man that can do that, I just wish I was Jiim, with this whole 
State of Mississippi to graze on." 

In the restaurant business Snopes appeared to prosper. 
That is, he soon eliminated his partner, and presently he was 
out of the restaurant himself, with a hired manager to run it, 
and we began to believe in the town that we knew what was 
the mainspring of his rise and luck. We believed that it was 
his wife; we accepted without demur the evil which such 
little lost towns like ours seem to foist even upon men who 
are of good thinking despite them. She helped in the restau- 
rant at first. We could see her there behind the wooden 
counter worn glass-smooth by elbows in their eating genera- 
tions: young, with the rich coloring of a calendar; a face 
smooth, unblemished by any thought or by anything else: 
an appeal immediate and profound and without calculation 



Centaur in Brass 1 5 1 

or shame, with (because of its unblemishment and not its 
size) something of that vast, serene, impervious beauty of a 
snowclad virgin mountain flank, listening and not smiling 
while Major Hoxey, the town's lone rich middle-aged bach- 
elor, graduate of Yale and soon to be mayor of the town, in- 
congruous there among the collarless shirts and the overalls 
and the grave, country-eating faces, sipped his coffee and 
talked to her. 

Not impregnable: impervious. That was why it did not 
need gossip when we watched Snopes's career mount beyond 
the restaurant and become complement with Major Hoxey 's 
in city affairs, until less than six months after Hoxey's inau- 
guration Snopes, who had probably never been close to any 
piece of machinery save a grindstone until he moved to town, 
was made superintendent of the municipal power plant. Mrs. 
Snopes was born one of those women the deeds and fortunes 
of whose husbands alone are the barometers of their good 
name; for to do her justice, there was no other handle for 
gossip save her husband's rise in Hoxey's administration. 

But there was still that intangible thing: partly something 
in her air, her face; partly what we had already heard about 
Flem Snopes's methods. Or perhaps what we knew or be- 
lieved about Snopes was all; perhaps what we thought to be 
her shadow was merely his shadow falling upon her. But 
anyway, when we saw Snopes and Hoxey together we would 
think of them and of adultery in the same instant, and we 
would think of the two of them walking and talking in ami- 
cable cuckoldry. Perhaps, as I said, this was the fault of the 
town. Certainly it was the fault of the town that the idea of 
their being on amicable terms outraged us more than the idea 
of the adultery itself. It seemed foreign, decadent, perverted: 
we could have accepted, if not condoned, the adultery had 
they only been natural and logical and enemies. 

But they were not. Yet neither could they have been called 



152 The Village 

friends. Snopes had no friends; there was no man nor woman 
among us, not even Hoxey or Mrs. Snopes, who we believed 
could say, "I know his thought" least of all, those among 
whom we saw him now and then, sitting about the stove in 
the rear of a certain smelly, third-rate grocery, listening and 
not talking, for an hour or so two or three nights a week. 
And so we believed that, whatever his wife was, she was not 
fooling him. It was another woman who did that: a Negro 
woman, the new young wife of Tom-Tom, the day fireman 
in the power plant. 

Tom-Tom was black: a big bull of a man weighing two 
hundred pounds and sixty years old and looking about forty. 
He had been married about a year to his third wife, a young 
woman whom he kept with the strictness of a Turk in a 
cabin two miles from town and from the power plant where 
he spent twelve hours a day with shovel and bar. 

One afternoon he had just finished cleaning the fires and 
he was sitting in the coal-bunker, resting and smoking his 
pipe, when Snopes, his superintendent, employer and boss, 
came in. The fires were clean and the steam was up again, 
and the safety valve on the middle boiler was blowing off. 

Snopes entered: a potty man of no particular age, broad 
and squat, in a clean though collarless white shirt and a plaid 
cap. His face was round and smooth, either absolutely impen- 
etrable or absolutely empty. His eyes were the color of stag- 
nant water; his mouth was a tight, lipless seam. Chewing 
steadily, he looked up at the whistling safety valve. 

"How much does that whistle weigh?" he said after a time. 

"Must weight ten pound, anyway," Tom-Tom said. 

"Is it solid brass?" 

"If it ain't, I ain't never seed no brass what is solid," Tom- 
Tom said. 

Snopes had not once looked at Tom-Tom. He continued 
to look upward toward the thin, shrill, excruciating sound of 
the valve. Then he spat, and turned and left the boiler-room. 



Centaur in Brass 153 

II 

HE BUILT HIS monument slowly. But then, it is always strange 
to what involved and complex methods a man will resort in 
order to steal something. It's as though there were some in- 
tangible and invisible social force that mitigates against him, 
confounding his own shrewdness with his own cunning, dis- 
torting in his judgment the very value of the object of his 
greed, which in all probability, had he but picked it up and 
carried it openly away, nobody would have remarked or 
cared. But then, that would not have suited Snopes, since he 
apparently had neither the high vision of a confidence man 
nor the unrecking courage of a brigand. 

His vision at first, his aim, was not even that high; it was 
no higher than that of a casual rramp who pauses in passing 
to steal three eggs from beneath a setting hen. Or perhaps he 
was merely not certain yet that there really was a market for 
brass. Because his next move was five months after Harker, 
the night engineer, came on duty one evening and found the 
three safety whistles gone and the vents stopped with one- 
inch steel screw plugs capable of a pressure of a thousand 
pounds. 

"And them three boiler heads you could poke a hole 
through with a soda straw!" Harker said. "And that damn 
black night fireman, Turl, that couldn't even read a clock 
face, still throwing coal into them! When I looked at the 
gauge on the first boiler, I never believed I would get to the 
last boiler in time to even reach the injector. 

"So when I finally got it into Turl's head that that 100 on 
that dial meant where Turl would not only lose his job, he 
would lose it so good they wouldn't even be able to find the 
job to give it to the next misbegotten that believed that live 
steam was something you blowed on a window pane in cold 
weather, I got settled down enough to ask him where them 
safety valves had gone to. 



The 

" 'Mr. Snopes took urn off,' Turl says. 

"'What in the hell for?' 

" 'I don't know. I just telling you what Tom-Tom told me. 
He say Mr. Snopes say the shut-off float in the water tank 
ain't heavy enough. Say that tank start leaking some day, and 
so he going to fasten them three safety valves on the float 
and make it heavier.' 

" 'You mean ' I says. That's as far as I could get: 'You 
mean ' 

" 'That what Tom-Tom say. I don't know nothing about 
it.' 

"But they were gone. Up to that night, me and Turl had 
been catching forty winks or so now and then when we got 
caught up and things was quiet. But you can bet we never 
slept none that night. Me and him spent that whole night, 
time about, on that coal pile, where we could watch them 
three gauges. And from midnight on, after the load went oflf , 
we never had enough steam in all three of them boilers put 
together to run a peanut parcher. And even when I was in 
bed, at home, I couldn't sleep. Time I shut my eyes I would 
begin to see a steam gauge about the size of a washtub, with 
a red needle big as a shovel moving up toward a hundred 
pounds, and I would wake myself up hollering and 
sweating." 

But even that wore away after a while, and then Turl and 
Harker were catching their forty winks or so again. Perhaps 
they decided that Snopes had stolen his three eggs and was 
done. Perhaps they decided that he had frightened himself 
with the ease with which he had got the eggs. Because it was 
five months before the next act took place. 

Then one afternoon, with his fires cleaned and steam up 
again, Tom-Tom, smoking his pipe on the coal pile, saw 
Snopes enter, carrying in his hand an object which Tom- 
Tom said later he thought was a mule shoe. He watched 



Centaur in Brass 155 

Snopes retire into a dim corner behind the boilers, where 
there had accumulated a miscellaneous pile of metal junk, all 
covered with dirt: fittings, valves, rods and bolts and such, 
and, kneeling there, begin to sort the pieces, touching them 
one by one with the mule shoe and from time to time remov- 
ing one piece and tossing it behind him, into the runway. 
Tom-Tom watched him try with the magnet every loose 
piece of metal in the boiler-room, sorting out the iron from 
the brass: then Snopes ordered Tom-Tom to gather up the 
segregated pieces of brass and bring them in to his office. 

Tom-Tom gathered the pieces into a box. Snopes was 
waiting in the office. He glanced once into the box, then he 
spat. "How do you and Turl get along?" he said. Turl, I had 
better repeat, was the night fireman; a Negro too, though he 
was saddle-colored where Tom-Tom was black, and in place 
of Tom-Tom's two hundred pounds Turl, even with his 
laden shovel, would hardly have tipped a hundred and fifty. 

"I tends to my business," Tom-Tom said. "What Turl 
does wid hisn ain't no trouble of mine." 

"That ain't what Turl thinks," Snopes said, chewing, 
watching Tom-Tom, who looked at Snopes as steadily in 
turn; looked down at him. "Turl wants me to give him your 
day shift. He says he's tired firing at night." 

"Let him fire here long as I is, and he can have it," Tom- 
Torn said. 

"Turl don't want to wait that long," Snopes said, chewing, 
watching Tom-Tom's face. Then he told Tom-Tom how 
Turl was planning to steal some iron from the plant and lay 
it at Tom-Tom's door and so get Tom-Tom fired. And 
Tom-Tom stood there, huge, hulking, with his hard round 
little head. "That's what he's up to," Snopes said. "So I want 
you to take this stuff out to your house and hide it where 
Turl can't find it. And as soon as I get enough evidence on 
Turl, I'm going to fire him." 



1 56 The Village 

Tom-Tom waited until Snopes had finished, blinking his 
eyes slowly. Then he said immediately: "I knows a better 
way than that/' 

"What way?" Snopes said. Tom-Tom didn't answer. He 
stood, big, humorless, a little surly; quiet; more than a little 
implacable though heatless. "No, no," Snopes said. "That 
won't do. You have any trouble with Turl, and I'll fire you 
both. You do like I say, unless you are tired of your job and 
want Turl to have it. Are you tired of it?" 

"Ain't no man complained about my pressure yet," Tom- 
Tom said sullenly. 

"Then you do like I say. Yovi take that stuff out home with 
you tonight. Don't let nobody see you; not even your wife. 
And if you don't want to do it, just say so. I reckon I can get 
somebody that will do it." 

And that's what Tom-Tom did. And he kept his own 
counsel too, even when afterward, as discarded fittings and 
such accumulated again, he would watch Snopes test them 
one by one with the magnet and sort him out another batch 
to take out home and hide. Because he had been firing those 
boilers for forty years, ever since he was a man. At that time 
there was but one boiler, and he had got twelve dollars a 
month for firing it, but now there were three, and he got 
sixty dollars a month; and now he was sixty, and he owned 
his little cabin and a little piece of corn, and a mule and a 
wagon in which he rode into town to church twice each Sun- 
day, with his new young wife beside him and a gold watch 
and chain. 

And Marker didn't know then, either, even though he 
would watch the junked metal accumulate in the corner and 
then disappear over night until it came to be his nightly joke 
to enter with his busy, bustling air and say to Turl: "Well, 
Turl, I notice that little engine is still running. There's a right 
smart of brass in them bushings and wrist pins, but I reckon 



Centaur in Brass 157 

it's moving too fast to hold that magnet against it." Then 
more soberly; quite soberly, in fact, without humor or irony 
at all, since there was some of Suratt in Harker too: "That 
durn fellow! I reckon he'd sell the boilers too, if he knowed 
of any way you and Tom-Tom could keep steam up without 
them." 

And Turl didn't answer. Because by that time Turl had 
his own private temptations and worries, the same as Tom- 
Tom, of which Harker was also unaware. 

In the meantime, the first of the year came and the city 
was audited. 

"They come down here," Harker said, "two of them, in 
glasses. They went over the books and they poked around 
everywhere, counting everything in sight and writing it 
down. Then they went back to the office and they was still 
there at six o'clock when I come on. It seems that there was 
something wrong; it seems like there was some old brass parts 
wrote down in the books, only the brass seemed to be miss- 
ing or something. It was on the books all right, and the new 
valves and things it had been replaced with was there. But be 
durn if they could find a one of them old pieces except one 
busted bib that had got mislaid under the work-bench some- 
way or other. It was right strange. So I went back with them 
and held the light while they looked again in all the corners, 
getting a right smart of soot and grease on them, but that 
brass just naturally seemed to be plumb missing. So they 
went away. 

"And the next morning early they come back. They had 
the city clerk with them this time and they beat Mr. Snopes 
down here and so they had to wait till he come in in his check 
cap and his chew, chewing and looking at them while they 
told him. They was right sorry; they hemmed and hawed a 
right smart, being sorry. But it wasn't nothing else they could 
do except to come back on him, long as he was the superin- 



158 The Village 

tendent; and did he want me and Turl and Tom-Tom 
arrested right now, or would tomorrow do? And him stand- 
ing there, chewing, with them eyes like two gobs of cup 
grease on a hunk of raw dough, and them still telling him 
how sorry they was. 

" 'How much does it come to?' he says. 

" 'Three hundred and four dollars and fifty-two cents, Mr. 
Snopes.' 

" 'Is that the full amount?' 

" 'We checked our figures twice, Mr. Snopes.' 

" 'All right,' he says. And he reaches down and hauls out 
the money and pays them the three hundred and four dollars 
and fifty-two cents in cash, and asks for a receipt." 

Ill 

THEN THE NEXT Summer came, with Harker still laughing at 
and enjoying what he saw, and seeing so little, thinking how 
they were all fooling one another while he looked on, when 
it was him who was being fooled. For in that Summer the 
thing ripened, came to a head. Or maybe Snopes just decided 
to cut his first hay crop; clean the meadow for reseeding. Be- 
cause he could never have believed that on the day when he 
sent for Turl, he had set the capital on his monument and 
had started to tear the scaffolding down. 

It was in the evening; he returned to the plant after supper 
and sent for Turl; again two of them, white man and Negro, 
faced one another in the office. 

"What's this about you and Tom-Tom?" Snopes said. 

" 'Bout me and which?" Turl said. "If Tom-Tom depend- 
ing on me for his trouble, he sho' done quit being a fireman 
and turned waiter. It take two folks to have trouble, and 
Tom-Tom ain't but one, I don't care how big he is." 



Centaur in Brass 159 

Snopes watched Turl. "Tom-Tom thinks you want to fire 
the day shift." 

Turl looked down. He looked briefly at Snopes's face; at 
the still eyes, the slow unceasing jaw, and down again. "I 
can handle as much coal as Tom-Tom," he said. 

Snopes watched him: the smooth, brown, aside-looking 
face. "Tom-Tom knows that, too. He knows he's getting 
old. But he knows there ain't nobody else can crowd him but 
you." Then, watching Turl's face, Snopes told him how for 
two years Tom-Tom had been stealing brass from the plant, 
in order to lay it on Turl and get him fired; how only that 
day Tom-Tom had told him that Turl was the thief. 

Turl looked up. "That's a lie," he said. "Can't no nigger 
accuse me of stealing when I ain't, I don't care how big he 
is." 

"Sho'," Snopes said. "So the thing to do is to get that brass 
back." 

"If Tom-Tom got it, I reckon Mr. Buck Conner the man 
to get it back," Turl said. Buck Conner was the city marshal. 

"Then you'll go to jail, sure enough. Tom-Tom'll say he 
didn't know it was there. You'll be the only one that knew 
it was there. So what you reckon Buck Conner'll think? 
You'll be the one that knew where it was hid at, and Buck 
Conner'll know that even a fool has got more sense than to 
steal something and hide it in his corn-crib. The only thing 
you can do is to get that brass back. Go out there in the 
daytime, while Tom-Tom is at work, and get it and bring it 
to me and I'll put it away somewhere to use as evidence on 
Tom-Tom. Unless maybe you don't want that day shift. Just 
say so, if you don't. I reckon I can find somebody else that 
does." 

And Turl agreed to do that. He hadn't fired any boilers 
for forty years. He hadn't done anything at all for as long as 
forty years, since he was just past thirty. But even if he v/ere 



160 The Village 

a hundred, no man could ever accuse him of having done 
anything that would aggregate forty years net. "Unless 
Turl's night prowling might add up that much," Harker said. 
"If Turl ever gets married, he wan't need no front door 
a-tall; he wouldn't know what it was for. If he couldn't come 
tom-catting in through the back window, he wouldn't know 
what he come after. Would you, Turl?" 

So from here on it is simple enough, since a man's mistakes, 
like his successes, usually are simple. Particularly the success. 
Perhaps that's why it is so often missed: it was just over- 
looked. 

"His mistake was in picking out Turl to pull his chestnuts," 
Harker said. "But even Turl wasn't as bad as the second mis- 
take he made at the same time without knowing it. And that 
was, when he forgot about that high yellow wife of Tom- 
Tom's. When I found out how he had picked out Turl, out 
of all the niggers in Jefferson, that's prowled at least once 
(or tried to) every gal within ten miles of town, to go out to 
Tom-Tom's house knowing all the time how Tom-Tom 
would be down here wrastling coal until seven o'clock and 
then have two miles to walk home, and expect Turl to spend 
his time out there hunting for anything that ain't hid in Tom- 
Tom's bed, and when I would think about Tom-Tom down 
here, wrastling them boilers with this same amical cuckoldry 
like the fellow said about Mr. Snopes and Colonel Hoxey > 
stealing brass so he can keep Turl from getting his job away 
from him, and Turl out yonder tending to Tom-Tom's home 
business at the same time, sometimes I think I will die. 

"It was bound to not last. The question was, which would 
happen first: if Tom-Tom would catch Turl, or if Mr. 
Snopes would catch Turl, or if I would bust a blood vessel 
laughing some night. Well, it was Turl. He seemed to be 
having too much trouble locating that brass; he had been 
hunting it for three weeks alreadv, coming in a little late 



Centaur in Brass 161 

almost every night now, with Tom-Tom having to wait 
until Turl come before he could start home. Maybe that was 
it. Or maybe Mr. Snopes was out there himself one day, hid 
in the bushes too, waiting for it to get along toward dark (it 
was already April then); him on one side of Tom-Tom's 
house and Turl creeping up through the corn patch on the 
other. Anyway, he come back down here one night and he 
was waiting when Turl come in about a half hour late, as 
usual, and Tom-Tom all ready to go home soon as Turl got 
here. Mr. Snopes sent for Turl and asked him if he had found 
it. 

" 'Find it when?' Turl says. 

" 'While you was out there hunting for it about dusk to- 
night,' Mr. Snopes says. And there's Turl, wondering just 
how much Mr. Snopes knows, and if he can risk saying how 
he has been at home in bed since six-thirty this morning, or 
maybe up to Mottstown on business. 'Maybe you are still 
looking for it in the wrong place,' Mr. Snopes says, watching 
Turl, and Turl not looking at Mr. Snopes except maybe now 
and then. 'If Tom-Tom had hid that iron in his bed, you 
ought to done found it three weeks ago,' Mr. Snopes says. 
'So suppose you look in that corn-crib where I told you to 
look.' 

"So Turl went out to look one more time. But he couldn't 
seem to find it in the corn-crib neither. Leastways, that's 
what he told Mr. Snopes when Mr. Snopes finally run him 
down back here about nine o'clock one night. Turl was on a 
kind of a spot, you might say. He would have to wait until 
along toward dark to go up to the house, and already Tom- 
Tom had been grumbling some about how Turl was getting 
later and later about coming to work every night. And once 
he found that brass, he would have to begin getting back to 
the plant at seven o'clock, and the days getting longer all 
the time. 



1 62 The Village 

"So Turl goes back to give one more go-round for that 
brass evidence. But still he can't find it. He must have looked 
under every shuck and thread in Tom-Tom's bed tick, but 
without no more success than them two audits had. He just 
couldn't seem to find that evidence nohow. So then Mr. 
Snopes says he will give Turl one more chance, and if he 
don't find that evidence this time, Mr. Snopes is going to tell 
Tom-Tom how there is a strange tom-cat on his back fence. 
And whenever a nigger husband in Jefferson hears that, he 
finds out where Turl is at before he even sharpens his razor: 
ain't that so, Turl? 

"So the next evening Turl goes out to look again. To do 
or die this time. He comes creeping up out of the woods 
about sundown, the best time of day for brass hunting, spe- 
cially as there is a moon that night. So here he comes, creep- 
ing up through the corn patch to the back porch, where the 
cot is, and pretty soon he can make out somebody in a white 
nightgown laying on the cot. But Turl don't rise up and walk 
even then; that ain't Turl's way. Turl plays by the rules. He 
creeps up it's dust-dark by then, and the moon beginning 
to shine a little all careful and quiet, and tom-cats up on to 
the back porch and stoops over the cot and puts his hand on 
nekkid meat and says, 'Honeybunch, papa's done arrived.' " 

IV 

IN THE VERY QUIET hearing of it I seemed to partake for the 
instant of Turl's horrid surprise. Because it was Tom-Tom 
on the cot; Tom-Tom, whom Turl believed to be at the mo- 
ment two miles away, waiting for Turl to come and take 
over from him at the power plant. 

The night before, on his return home Tom-Tom had 
brought with him a last year's watermelon which the local 
butcher had kept all Winter in cold storage and which he 



Centaur in Brass 163 

had given to Tom-Tom, being himself afraid to eat it, and a 
pint of whiskey. Tom-Tom and his wife consumed them and 
went to bed, where an hour later she waked Tom-Tom by 
her screaming. She was violently ill, and she was afraid that 
she was dying. She was too frightened to let Tom-Tom go 
for help, and while he dosed her as he could, she confessed to 
him about herself and Turl. As soon as she told it she became 
easier and went off to sleep, either before she had time to 
realize the enormity of what she had done, or while she was 
still too occupied in being alive to care. 

But Tom-Tom wasn't. The next morning, after he con- 
vinced himself that she was all right, he reminded her of it. 
She wept some, and tried to retract; she ran the gamut of 
tears to anger, through denial and cajolery back to tears 
again. But she had Tom-Tom's face to look at all the while, 
and so after a time she hushed and she just lay there, watching 
him as he went methodically about cooking breakfast, her 
own and his, saying no word, apparently oblivious of even 
her presence. Then he fed her, made her eat, with the same 
detachment, implacable and without heat. She was waiting 
for him to leave for work; she was doubtless then and had 
been all the while inventing and discarding practical expe- 
dients; so busy that it was mid-morning before she realized 
that he had no intention of going to town, though she did not 
know that he had arranged to get word to the plant by seven 
that morning that he would take the day off. 

So she lay there in the bed, quite quiet, her eyes a little 
wide, still as an animal, while he cooked their dinner and fed 
her again with that clumsy and implacable care. And just 
before sundown he locked her in the bedroom, she still saying 
no word, not asking him what he was about, just watching 
with her quiet, still eyes the door until it closed and the key 
clicked. Then Tom-Tom put on one of her nightgowns and 
with a naked butcher knife beside him, he lay down on the 



1 64 The Village 

cot on the back porch. And there he was, without having 
moved for almost an hour, when Turl crept on to the porch 
and touched him. 

In the purely reflex action of Turl's turning to flee, Tom- 
Tom rose, clutching the knife, and sprang at Turl. He leaped 
astride of TurPs neck and shoulders; his weight was the impe- 
tus which sent Turl off the porch, already running when 
his feet touched earth, carrying with him on the retina of his 
fear a single dreadful glint of moonlight on the blade of the 
lifted knife, as he crossed the back lot and, with Tom-Tom 
on his back, entered the trees the two of them a strange 
and furious beast with two heads and a single pair of legs like 
an inverted centaur speeding phantomlike just ahead of the 
boardlike streaming of Tom-Tom's shirt-tail and just beneath 
the silver glint of the lifted knife, through the moony April 
woods. 

"Tom-Tom big buck man," Turl said. "Make three of me. 
But I sho' toted him. And whenever I would see the moon 
glint that butcher knife, I could a picked up two more like 
him without even stopping." He said that at first he just ran; 
it was only when he found himself among the trees that it 
occurred to him that his only hope was to rake Tom-Tom off 
against a tree trunk. "But he helt on so tight with that one 
arm that whenever I busted him into a tree, I had to bust into 
the tree too. And then we'd bounce off and I'd catch that 
moonglint in that nekkid knife, and I could a picked up two 
more Tom-Toms. 

" 'Bout that time was when Tom-Tom started squalling. 
He was holding on with both hands then, so I knowed that I 
had done outrun that butcher knife anyhow. But I was good 
started then; my feets never paid Tom-Tom no more mind 
when he started squalling to stop and let him off than they 
did me. Then Tom-Tom grabbed my head with both hands 
and begun to haul it around like I was a runaway bareback 



Centaur in Brass 165 

mule, and then I seed the ditch. It was about forty foot deep 
and it looked a solid mile across, but it was too late then. My 
feets never even slowed up. They run far as from here to that 
door yonder out into nekkid air before us even begun to fall. 
And they was still clawing that moonlight when me and 
Tom-Tom hit the bottom." 

The first thing I wanted to know was, what Tom-Tom 
used in lieu of the butcher knife which he had dropped. He 
didn't use anything. He and Turl just sat there in the ditch 
and talked. Because there is a sanctuary beyond despair for 
any beast which has dared all, which even its mortal enemy 
respects. Or maybe it was just nigger nature. Anyway, it was 
perfectly plain to both of them as they sat there, perhaps 
panting a little while they talked, that Tom-Tom's home had 
been outraged, not by Turl, but by Flem Snopes; that Turl's 
life and limbs had been endangered, not by Tom-Tom, but 
by Flem Snopes. 

That was so plain to them that they sat there quietly in the 
ditch, getting their wind back, talking a little without heat 
like two acquaintances meeting in the street; so plain that 
they made their concerted plan without recourse to definite 
words on the subject. They merely compared notes; perhaps 
they laughed a little at themselves. Then they climbed out of 
the ditch and returned to Tom-Tom's cabin, where Tom- 
Tom unlocked his wife, and he and Turl sat before the hearth 
while the woman prepared a meal for them, which they ate 
as quietly but without loss of time: the two grave, scratched 
faces leaned to the same lamp, above the same dishes, while 
in the background the woman watched them, shadowy and 
covert and unspeaking. 

Tom-Tom took her to the barn with them to help load the 
brass into the wagon, where Turl spoke for the first time 
since they climbed together out of the ditch in Harker's 



1 66 The Village 

"amical" cuckoldry: "Great God, man, how long did it take 
you to tote all this stuff out here?" 

"Not long," Tom-Tom said. "Been working at it 'bout 
two years." 

It required four trips in the wagon; it was daybreak when 
the last load was disposed of, and the sun was rising when 
Turl entered the power plant, eleven hours late. 

"Where in hell you been?" Harker said. 

Turl glanced up at the three gauges, his scratched face 
wearing an expression of monkeylike gravity. "Been helping 
a friend of mine." 

"Helping what friend of yours?" 

"Boy named Turl," Turl said, squinting at the gauges. 

V 

"AND THAT WAS all he said," Harker said. "And me looking at 
that scratched face of hisn, and at the mate of it that Tom- 
Tom brought in at six o'clock. But Turl didn't tell me then. 
And I ain't the only one he never told nothing that morning. 
Because Mr. Snopes got there before six o'clock, before Turl 
had got away. He sent for Turl and asked him if he had 
found that brass and Turl told him no. 

" 'Why didn't you find it?' Mr. Snopes said. 

"Turl didn't look away, this time. 'Because it ain't no brass 
there. That's the main reason.' 

" 'How do you know there ain't?' Mr. Snopes says. 

"And Turl looked him straight in them eyes. 'Because 
Tom-Tom say it ain't,' Turl says. 

"Maybe he ought to knew then. But a man will go to any 
length to fool himself; he will tell himself stuff and believe it 
that he would be downright mad with a fellow he had done 
trimmed for believing it. So now he sends for Tom-Tom. 

" 'I ain't got no brass,' Tom-Tom says. 



Centaur in Brass 167 

"Where is it, then?' 

" 'It's where you said you wanted it.' 

" 'Where I said I wanted it when?' 

" 'When you took them whistle valves off the boilers,' 
Tom-Tom says. 

"That's what whipped him. He didn't dare to fire neither 
one of them, you see. And so he'd have to see one of them 
there all day long every day, and know that the other one 
was there all night long every night; he would have to know 
that during every twenty-four hours that passed, one or the 
other of them was there, getting paid paid, mind you, by 
the hour for living half their lives right there under that 
tank with them four loads of brass in it that now belonged to 
him by right of purchase and which he couldn't claim now 
because now he had done waited too late. 

"It sure was too late. But next New Year it got later. Come 
New Year's and the town got audited again; again them two 
spectacled fellows come down here and checked the books 
and went away and come back with not only the city clerk, 
but with Buck Conner too, with a warrant for Turl and 
Tom-Tom. And there they were, hemming and hawing, 
being sorry again, pushing one another in front to talk. It 
seems how they had made a mistake two years ago, and 
instead of three-hundred-and-four-fifty-two of this here 
evaporating brass, there was five-hundred-and-twenty-five 
dollars worth, leaving a net of over two-hundred-and-twenty 
dollars. And there was Buck Conner with the warrant, all 
ready to arrest Turl and Tom-Tom when he give the word, 
and it so happening that Turl and Tom-Tom was both in the 
boiler-room at that moment, changing shifts. 

"So Snopes paid them. Dug down and hauled out the 
money and paid them the two-hundred-and-twenty and got 
his receipt. And about two hours later I happened to pass 
through the office. At first I didn't see nobody^ because the 



1 68 The Village 

light was off. So I thought maybe the bulb was burned out, 
seeing as that light burned all the time. But it wasn't burned 
out; it was just turned out. Only before I turned it on I saw 
him, setting there. So I didn't turn the light on. I just went 
on out and left him setting there, setting right still." 

VI 

IN THOSE DAYS Snopes lived in a new little bungalow on the 
edge of town, and, when shortly after that New Year he 
resigned from the power plant, as the weather warmed into 
Spring they would see him quite often in his tiny grassless 
and treeless side yard. It was a locality of such other hopeless 
little houses inhabited half by Negroes, and washed clay gul- 
lies and ditches filled with scrapped automobiles and tin cans, 
and the prospect was not pleasing. Yet he spent quite a lot 
of his time there, sitting on the steps, not doing anything. 
And so they wondered what he could be looking at there, 
since there was nothing to see above the massed trees which 
shaded the town itself except the low smudge of the power 
plant, and the water tank. And it too was condemned now, 
for the water had suddenly gone bad two years ago and the 
town now had a new reservoir underground. But the tank 
was a stout one and the water was still good to wash the 
streets with, and so the town let it stand, refusing at one time 
a quite liberal though anonymous offer to purchase and re- 
move it. 

So they wondered what Snopes was looking at. They 
didn't know that he was contemplating his monument: that 
shaft taller than anything in sight and filled with transient and 
symbolical liquid that was not even fit to drink, but which, 
for the very reason of its impermanence, was more enduring 
through its fluidity and blind renewal than the brass which 
poisoned it, than columns of basalt or of lead. 



Dry September 



i 

THROUGH THE BLOODY September twilight, aftermath of 
sixty-two rainless days, it had gone like a fire in dry grass 
the rumor, the story, whatever it was. Something about Miss 
Minnie Cooper and a Negro. Attacked, insulted, frightened: 
none of them, gathered in the barber shop on that Saturday 
evening where the ceiling fan stirred, without freshening it, 
the vitiated air, sending back upon them, in recurrent surges 
of stale pomade and lotion, their own stale breath and odors, 
knew exactly what had happened. 

"Except it wasn't Will Mayes," a barber said. He was a 
man of middle age; a thin, sand-colored man with a mild 
face, who was shaving a client. "I know Will Mayes. He's 
a good nigger. And I know Miss Minnie Cooper, too." 

"What do you know about her?" a second barber said. 

"Who is she?" the client said. "A young girl?" 

"No," the barber said. ' r She's about forty, I reckon. She 
aint married. That's why I dont believe " 

"Believe, hell!" a hulking youth in a sweat-stained silk 
shirt said. "Wont you take a white woman's word before a 
nigger's?" 

"I dont believe Will Mayes did it," the barber said. "I 
know Will Mayes." 

169 



170 The Village 

"Maybe you know who did it, then. Maybe you already 
got him out of town, you damn niggerlover." 

"I dont believe anybody did anything. I dont believe any- 
thing happened. I leave it to you fellows if them ladies that 
get old without getting married dont have notions that a 



man cant " 



"Then you are a hell of a white man," the client said. He 
moved under the cloth. The youth had sprung to his feet. 

"You dont?" he said. "Do you accuse a white woman of 
lying?" 

The barber held the razor poised above the half-risen 
client. He did not look around. 

"It's this durn weather," another said. "It's enough to 
make a man do anything. Even to her." 

Nobody laughed. The barber said in his mild, stubborn 
tone: "I aint accusing nobody of nothing. I just know and 
you fellows know how a woman that never " 

"You damn niggerlover!" the youth said. 

"Shut up, Butch," another said. "We'll get the facts in 
plenty of time to act." 

"Who is? Who's getting them?" the youth said. "Facts, 
hell! I" 

"You're a fine white man," the client said. "Aint you?" 
In his frothy beard he looked like a desert rat in the moving 
pictures. "You tell them, Jack," he said to the youth. "If 
there aint any white men in this town, you can count on 
me, even if I aint only a drummer and a stranger." 

"That's right, boys," the barber said. "Find out the truth 
first. I know Will Mayes." 

"Well, by God!" the youth shouted. "To think that a 
white man in this town " 

"Shut up, Butch," the second speaker said. "We got 
plenty of time." 

The client sat up. He looked at the speaker. "Do you 



Dry September 171 

claim that anything excuses a nigger attacking a white 
woman? Do you mean to tell me you are a white man and 
you'll stand for it? You better go back North where you 
came from. The South dont want your kind here." 

"North what?" the second said. "I was born and raised in 
this town." 

"Well, by God!" the youth said. He looked about with 
a strained, baffled gaze, as if he was trying to remember what 
it was he wanted to say or to do. He drew his sleeve across 
his sweating face. "Damn if I'm going to let a white 
woman " 

"You tell them, Jack," the drummer said. "By God, if 
they" 

The screen door crashed open. A man stood in the floor, 
his feet apart and his heavy-set body poised easily. His white 
shirt was open at the throat; he wore a felt hat. His hot, 
bold glance swept the group. His name was McLendon. He 
had commanded troops at the front in France and had been 
decorated for valor. 

"Well," he said, "are you going to sit there and let a black 
son rape a white woman on the streets of Jefferson?" 

Butch sprang up again. The silk of his shirt clung flat to 
his heavy shoulders. At each armpit was a dark halfmoon, 
"That's what I been telling them! That's what I " 

"Did it really happen?" a third said. "This aint the first 
man scare she ever had, like Hawkshaw says. Wasn't there 
something about a man on the kitchen roof, watching her 
undress, about a year ago?" 

"What?" the client said. "What's that?" The barber had 
been slowly forcing him back into the chair; he arrested 
himself reclining, his head lifted, the barber still pressing him 
down. 

McLendon whirled on the third speaker. "Happen? What 



1 72 The Village 

the hell difference does it make? Are you going to let the 
black sons get away with it until one really does it?'* 

"That's what I'm telling them!" Butch shouted. He cursed, 
long and steady, pointless. 

"Here, here," a fourth said. "Not so loud. Dont talk so 
loud." 

"Sure," McLendon said; "no talking necessary at all. I've 
done my talking. Who's with me?" He poised on the balls 
of his feet, roving his gaze. 

The barber held the drummer's face down, the razor 
poised. "Find out the facts first, boys. I know Willy Mayes. 
It wasn't him. Let's get the sheriff and do this thing right." 

McLendon whirled upon him his furious, rigid face. The 
barber did not look away. They looked like men of different 
races. The other barbers had ceased also above their prone 
clients. "You mean to tell me," McLendon said, "that you'd 
take a nigger's word before a white woman's? Why, you 
damn niggerloving " 

The third speaker rose and grasped McLendon's arm; he 
too had been a soldier. "Now, now. Let's figure this thing 
out. Who knows anything about what really happened?" 

"Figure out hell!" McLendon jerked his arm free. "All 
that're with me get up from there. The ones that aint " 
He roved his gaze, dragging his sleeve across his face. 

Three men rose. The drummer in the chair sat up. "Here," 
he said, jerking at the cloth about his neck; "get this rag off 
me. I'm with him. I dont live here, but by God, if our 
mothers and wives and sisters " He smeared the cloth over 
his face and flung it to the floor. McLendon stood in the 
floor and cursed the others. Another rose and moved toward 
him. The remainder sat uncomfortable, not looking at one 
another, then one by one they rose and joined him. 

The barber picked the cloth from the floor. He began to 



Dry September 173 

fold it neatly. "Boys, dont do that. Will Mayes never done 
it. I know." 

"Come on," McLendon said. He whirled. From his hip 
pocket protruded the butt of a heavy automatic pistol. They 
went out. The screen door crashed behind them reverberant 
in the dead air. 

The barber wiped the razor carefully and swiftly, and 
put it away, and ran to the rear, and took his hat from the 
wall. "I'll be back as soon as I can," he said to the other 
barbers. "I cant let " He went out, running. The two other 
barbers followed him to the door and caught it on the re- 
bound, leaning out and looking up the street after him. The 
air was flat and dead. It had a metallic taste at the base of the 
tongue. 

"What can he do?" the first said. The second one was 
saying "Jees Christ, Jees Christ" under his breath. "I'd just 
as lief be Will Mayes as Hawk, if he gets McLendon riled." 

"Jees Christ, Jees Christ," the second whispered. 

"You reckon he really done it to her?" the first said. 

II 

SHE WAS thirty-eight or thirty-nine. She lived in a small 
frame house with her invalid mother and a thin, sallow, un- 
flagging aunt, where each morning between ten and eleven 
she would appear on the porch in a lace-trimmed boudoir 
cap, to sit swinging in the porch swing until noon. After 
dinner she lay down for a while, until the afternoon began 
to cool. Then, in one of the three or four new voile dresses 
which she had each summer, she would go downtown to 
spend the afternoon in the stores with the other ladies, where 
they would handle the goods and haggle over the prices in 
cold, immediate voices, without any intention of buying. 
She was of comfortable people not the best in Jefferson, 



174 The Village 

but good people enough and she was still on the slender 
side of ordinary looking, with a bright, faintly haggard man- 
ner and dress. When she was young she had had a slender, 
nervous body and a sort of hard vivacity which had enabled 
her for a time to ride upon the crest of the town's social life 
as exemplified by the high school party and church social 
period of her contemporaries while still children enough to 
be unclassconscious. 

She was the last to realize that she was losing ground; that 
those among whom she had been a little brighter and louder 
flame than any other were beginning to learn the pleasure of 
snobbery male and retaliation female. That was when 
her face began to wear that bright, haggard look. She still 
carried it to parties on shadowy porticoes and summer lawns, 
like a mask or a flag, with that bafflement of furious repudia- 
tion of truth in her eyes. One evening at a party she heard 
a boy and two girls, all schoolmates, talking. She never ac- 
cepted another invitation. 

She watched the girls with whom she had grown up as 
they married and got homes and children, but no man ever 
called on her steadily until the children of the other girls 
had been calling her "aunty" for several years, the while 
their mothers told them in bright voices about how popular 
Aunt Minnie had been as a girl. Then the town began to see 
her driving on Sunday afternoons with the cashier in the 
bank. He was a widower of about forty a high-colored 
man, smelling always faintly of the barber shop or of whisky. 
He owned the first automobile in town, a red runabout; 
Minnie had the first motoring bonnet and veil the town ever 
saw. Then the town began to say: "Poor Minnie." "But she 
is old enough to take care of herself," others said. That was 
when she began to ask her old schoolmates that their chil- 
dren call her "cousin" instead of "aunty." 

It was twelve vears now since she had been relegated into 



Dry September 175 

adultery by public opinion, and eight years since the cashier 
had gone to a Memphis bank, returning for one day each 
Christmas, which he spent at an annual bachelors' party at 
a hunting club on the river. From behind their curtains the 
neighbors would see the party pass, and during the over-the- 
way Christmas day visiting they would tell her about him, 
about how well he looked, and how they heard that he was 
prospering in the city, watching with bright, secret eyes her 
haggard, bright face. Usually by that hour there would be 
the scent of whisky on her breath. It was supplied her by a 
youth, a clerk at the soda fountain: "Sure; I buy it for the 
old gal. I reckon she's entitled to a little fun." 

Her mother kept to her room altogether now; the gaunt 
aunt ran the house. Against that background Minnie's bright 
dresses, her idle and empty days, had a quality of furious 
unreality. She went out in the evenings only with women 
now, neighbors, to the moving pictures. Each afternoon she 
dressed in one of the new dresses and went downtown alone, 
where her young "cousins" were already strolling in the late 
afternoons with their delicate, silken heads and thin, awk- 
ward arms and conscious hips, clinging to one another or 
shrieking and giggling with paired boys in the soda fountain 
when she passed and went on along the serried store fronts, 
in the doors of which the sitting and lounging men did not 
even follow her with their eyes any more. 

Ill 

THE BARBER WENT SWIFTLY up the street where the sparse 
lights, insect-swirled, glared in rigid and violent suspension 
in the lifeless air. The day had died in a pall of dust; above 
the darkened square, shrouded by the spent dust, the sky 
was as clear as the inside of a brass bell. Below the east was 
a rumor of the twice-waxed moon. 



176 The Village 

When he overtook them McLendon and three others were 
getting into a car parked in an alley. McLendon stooped his 
thick head, peering out beneath the top, "Changed your 
mind, did you?" he said. "Damn good thing; by God, to- 
morrow when this town hears about how you talked to- 
night" 

"Now, now," the other ex-soldier said. "Hawkshaw's all 
right. Come on, Hawk; jump in." 

"Will Mayes never done it, boys," the barber said. "If 
anybody done it. Why, you all know well as I do there aint 
any town where they got better niggers than us. And you 
know how a lady will kind of think things about men when 
there aint any reason to, and Miss Minnie anyway " 

"Sure, sure," the soldier said. "We're just going to talk 
to him a little; that's all." 

"Talk hell!" Butch said. "When we're through with 
the" 

"Shut up, for God's sake!" the soldier said. "Do you want 
everybody in town " 

"Tell them, by God!" McLendon said. "Tell every one 
of the sons that'll let a white woman " 

"Let's go; let's go: here's the other car." The second car 
slid squealing out of a cloud of dust at the alley mouth. 
McLendon started his car and took the lead. Dust lay like 
fog in the street. The street lights hung nimbused as in 
water. They drove on out of town. 

A rutted lane turned at right angles. Dust hung above it 
too, and above all the land. The dark bulk of the ice plant, 
where the Negro Mayes was night watchman, rose against 
the sky. "Better stop here, hadn't we?" the soldier said. 
McLendon did not reply. He hurled the car up and slammed 
to a stop, the headlights glaring on the blank wall. 

"Listen here, boys," the barber said; "if he's here, dont 
that prove he never done it? Dont it? If it was him, he 



Dry September 177 

would run. Dont you see he would?" The second car came 
up and stopped. McLendon got down; Butch sprang down 
beside him. "Listen, boys," the barber said. 

"Cut the lights off!" McLendon said. The breathless dark 
rushed down. There was no sound in it save their lungs as 
they sought air in the parched dust in which for two months 
they had lived; then the diminishing crunch of McLendon's 
and Dutch's feet, and a moment later McLendon's voice: 

"Will! . . . Will!" 

Below the east the wan hemorrhage of the moon increased. 
It heaved above the ridge, silvering the air, the dust, so that 
they seemed to breathe, live, in a bowl of molten lead. There 
was no sound of nightbird nor insect, no sound save their 
breathing and a faint ticking of contracting metal about the 
cars. Where their bodies touched one another they seemed 
to sweat dryly, for no more moisture came. "Christ!" a 
voice said; "let's get out of here." 

But they didn't move until vague noises began to grow 
out of the darkness ahead; then they got out and waited 
tensely in the breathless dark. There was another sound: a 
blow, a hissing expulsion of breath and McLendon cursing 
in undertone. They stood a moment longer, then they ran 
forward. They ran in a stumbling clump, as though they 
were fleeing something. "Kill him, kill the son," a voice 
whispered. McLendon flung them back. 

"Not here," he said. "Get him into the car." "Kill him, 
kill the black son!" the voice murmured. They dragged the 
Negro to the car. The barber had waited beside the car. He 
could feel himself sweating and he knew he was going to be 
sick at the stomach. 

"What is it, captains?" the Negro said. "I aint done noth- 
ing. Tore God, Mr John." Someone produced handcuffs. 
They worked busily about the Negro as though he were a 
post, quiet, intent, getting in one another's way. He sub- 



178 The Village 

mitted to the handcuffs, looking swiftly and constantly from 
dim face to dim face. "Who's here, captains?" he said, lean- 
ing to peer into the faces until they could feel his breath 
and smell his sweaty reek. He spoke a name or two. "What 
you all say I done, Mr John?" 

McLendon jerked the car door open. "Get in!" he said. 

The Negro did not move. "What you all going to do with 
me, Mr John? I aint done nothing. White folks, captains, I 
aint done nothing: I swear 'fore God." He called another 
name. 

"Get in!" McLendon said. He struck the Negro. The 
others expelled their breath in a dry hissing and struck him 
with random blows and he whirled and cursed them, and 
swept his manacled hands across their faces and slashed the 
barber upon the mouth, and the barber struck him also. 
"Get him in there," McLendon said. They pushed at him. 
He ceased struggling and got in and sat quietly as the others 
took their places. He sat between the barber and the soldier, 
drawing his limbs in so as not to touch them, his eyes going 
swiftly and constantly from face to face. Butch clung to the 
running board. The car moved on. The barber nursed his 
mouth with his handkerchief. 

"What's the matter, Hawk?" the soldier said. 

"Nothing," the barber said. They regained the highroad 
and turned away from town. The second car dropped back 
out of the dust. They went on, gaining speed; the final 
fringe of houses dropped behind. 

"Goddamn, he stinks!" the soldier said. 

"We'll fix that," the drummer in front beside McLendon 
said. On the running board Butch cursed into the hot rush 
of air. The barber leaned suddenly forward and touched 
McLendon's arm. 

"Let me out, John," he said. 

"Jump out, niggerlover," McLendon said without turning 



Dry September 179 

his head. He drove swiftly. Behind them the sourceless lights 
of the second car glared in the dust. Presently McLendon 
turned into a narrow road. It was rutted with disuse. It led 
back to an abandoned brick kiln a series of reddish mounds 
and weed- and vine-choked vats without bottom. It had been 
used for pasture once, until one day the owner missed one 
of his mules. Although he prodded carefully in the vats with 
a long pole, he could not even find the bottom of them. 

"John," the barber said. 

"Jump out, then," McLendon said, hurling the car along 
the ruts. Beside the barber the Negro spoke: 

"Mr Henry." 

The barber sat forward. The narrow tunnel of the road 
rushed up and past. Their motion was like an extinct furnace 
blast: cooler, but utterly dead. The car bounded from rut 
to rut. 

"Mr Henry," the Negro said. 

The barber began to tug furiously at the door. "Look out, 
there!" the soldier said, but the barber had already kicked 
the door open and swung onto the running board. The 
soldier leaned across the Negro and grasped at him, but he 
had already jumped. The car went on without checking 
speed. 

The impetus hurled him crashing through dust-sheathed 
weeds, into the ditch. Dust puffed about him, and in a thin, 
vicious crackling of sapless stems he lay choking and retch- 
ing until the second car passed and died away. Then he rose 
and limped on until he reached the highroad and turned 
toward town, brushing at his clothes with his hands. The 
moon was higher, riding high and clear of the dust at last, 
and after a while the town began to glare beneath the dust. 
He went on, limping. Presently he heard cars and the glow 
of them grew in the dust behind him and he left the road 
and crouched again in the weeds until they passed. Me- 



i8o The Village 

Lendon's car came last now. There were four people in it 
and Butch was not on the running board. 

They went on; the dust swallowed them; the glare and 
the sound died away. The dust of them hung for a while, 
but soon the eternal dust absorbed it again. The barber 
climbed back onto the road and limped on toward town. 



IV 

As SHE DRESSED for supper on that Saturday evening, her 
own flesh felt like fever. Her hands trembled among the 
hooks and eyes, and her eyes had a feverish look, and her 
hair swirled crisp and crackling under the comb. While she 
was still dressing the friends called for her and sat while she 
donned her sheerest underthings and stockings and a new 
voile dress. "Do you feel strong enough to go out?" they 
said, their eyes bright too, with a dark glitter. "When you 
have had time to get over the shock, you must tell us what 
happened. What he said and did; everything." 

In the leafed darkness, as they walked toward the square, 
she began to breathe deeply, something like a swimmer pre- 
paring to dive, until she ceased trembling, the four of them 
walking slowly because of the terrible heat and out of 
solicitude for her. But as they neared the square she began 
to tremble again, walking with her head up, her hands 
clenched at her sides, their voices about her murmurous, also 
with that feverish, glittering quality of their eyes. 

They entered the square, she in the center of the group, 
fragile in her fresh dress. She was trembling worse. She 
walked slower and slower, as children eat ice cream, her 
head up and her eyes bright in the haggard banner of her 
face, passing the hotel and the coatless drummers in chairs 
along the curb looking around at her: "That's the one: see? 
The one in pink in the middle." "Is that her? What did they 



Dry September 181 

do with the nigger? Did they?" "Sure. He's all right." 
"All right, is he?" "Sure. He went on a little trip." Then the 
drug store, where even the young men lounging in the door- 
way tipped their hats and followed with their eyes the 
motion of her hips and legs when she passed. 

They went on, passing the lifted hats of the gentlemen, 
the suddenly ceased voices, deferent, protective. "Do you 
see?" the friends said. Their voices sounded like long, hover- 
ing sighs of hissing exultation. "There's not a Negro on the 
square. Not one." 

They reached the picture show. It was like a miniature 
fairyland with its lighted lobby and colored lithographs of 
life caught in its terrible and beautiful mutations. Her lips 
began to tingle. In the dark, when the picture began, it 
would be all right; she could hold back the laughing so it 
would not waste away so fast and so soon. So she hurried on 
before the turning faces, the undertones of low astonish- 
ment, and they took their accustomed places where she could 
see the aisle against the silver glare and the young men and 
girls coming in two and two against it. 

The lights flicked away; the screen glowed silver, and 
soon life began to unfold, beautiful and passionate and sad, 
while still the young men and girls entered, scented and 
sibilant in the half dark, their paired backs in- silhouette deli- 
cate and sleek, their slim, quick bodies awkward, divinely 
young, while beyond them the silver dream accumulated, 
inevitably on and on. She began to laugh. In trying to sup- 
press it, it made more noise than ever; heads began to turn. 
Still laughing, her friends raised her and led her out, and 
she stood at the curb, laughing on a high, sustained note, 
until the taxi came up and they helped her in. 

They removed the pink voile and the sheer underthings 
and the stockings, and put her to bed, and cracked ice for 
her temples, and sent for the doctor. He was hard to locate, 



1 82 The Village 

so they ministered to her with hushed ejaculations, renew- 
ing the ice and fanning her. While the ice was fresh and 
cold she stopped laughing and lay still for a time, moaning 
only a little. But soon the laughing welled again and her 
voice rose screaming. 

"Shhhhhhhhhhh! Shhhhhhhhhhhhhh!" they said, fresh- 
ening the icepack, smoothing her hair, examining it for gray; 
"poor girl!" Then to one another: "Do you suppose any- 
thing really happened?" their eyes darkly aglitter, secret and 
passionate. "Shhhhhhhhhh! Poor girl! Poor Minnie!" 

V 

IT WAS MIDNIGHT when McLendon drove up to his neat new 
house. It was trim and fresh as a birdcage and almost as 
small, with its clean, green-and-white paint. He locked the 
car and mounted the porch and entered. His wife rose from 
a chair beside the reading lamp. McLendon stopped in the 
floor and stared at her until she looked down. 

"Look at that clock," he said, lifting his arm, pointing. 
She stood before him, her face lowered, a magazine in her 
hands. Her face was pale, strained, and weary-looking. 
"Haven't I told you about sitting up like this, waiting to 
see when I come in?" 

"John," she said. She laid the magazine down. Poised on 
the balls of his feet, he glared at her with his hot eyes, his 
sweating face. 

"Didn't I tell you?" He went toward her. She looked up 
then. He caught her shoulder. She stood passive, looking at 
him. 

"Don't, John. I couldn't sleep . . . The heat; something. 
Please, John. You're hurting me." 

"Didn't I tell you?" He released her and half struck, half 
flung her across the chair, and she lay there and watched 
him quietly as he left the room. 



Dry September 183 

He went on through the house, ripping off his shirt, and 
on the dark, screened porch at the rear he stood and mopped 
his head and shoulders with the shirt and flung it away. He 
took the pistol from his hip and laid it on the table beside 
the bed, and sat on the bed and removed his shoes, and rose 
and slipped his trousers off. He was sweating again already, 
and he stooped and hunted furiously for the shirt. At last 
he found it and wiped his body again, and, with his body 
pressed against the dusty screen, he stood panting. There 
was no movement, no sound, not even an insect. The dark 
world seemed to lie stricken beneath the cold moon and the 
lidless stars. 



Death Drag 



THE AIRPLANE appeared over town with almost the abrupt- 
ness of an apparition. It was travelling fast; almost before we 
knew it was there it was already at the top of a loop; still 
over the square, in violation of both city and government 
ordinance. It was not a good loop either, performed viciously 
and slovenly and at top speed, as though the pilot were 
either a very nervous man or in a hurry, or (and this queerly: 
there is in our town an ex-army aviator. He was coming out 
of the post office when the airplane appeared going south; he 
watched the hurried and ungraceful loop and he made the 
comment) as though the pilot were trying to make the min- 
imum of some specified manoeuvre in order to save gasoline. 
The airplane came over the loop with one wing down, as 
though about to make an Immelmann turn. Then it did a half 
roll, the loop three-quarters complete, and without any break 
in the whine of the full-throttled engine and still at top speed 
and with that apparition-like suddenness, it disappeared east- 
ward toward our airport. When the first small boys reached 
the field, the airplane was on the ground, drawn up into a 
fence corner at the end of the field. It was motionless and 
empty. There was no one in sight at all. Resting there, empty 
and dead, patched and shabby and painted awkwardly with a 
single thin coat of dead black, it gave again that illusion of 
ghostliness, as though it might have flown there and made 
rhat loop and landed by itself. 



1 86 The Village 

Our field is still in an embryonic state. Our town is built 
upon hills, and the field, once a cotton field, is composed of 
forty acres of ridge and gully, upon which, by means of 
grading and filling, we managed to build an X-shaped run- 
way into the prevailing winds. The runways are long enough 
in themselves, but the field, like our town, is controlled by 
men who were of middle age when younger men first began 
to fly, and so the clearance is not always good. On one side 
is a grove of trees which the owner will not permit to be 
felled; on another is the barnyard of a farm: sheds and 
houses, a long barn with a roof of rotting shingles, a big hay- 
cock. The airplane had come to rest in the fence corner near 
the barn. The small boys and a Negro or two and a white 
man, descended from a halted wagon in the road, were stand- 
ing quietly about it when two men in helmets and lifted 
goggles emerged suddenly around the corner of the barn. 
One was tall, in a dirty coverall. The other was quite 
short, in breeches and puttees and a soiled, brightly patterned 
overcoat which looked as if he had got wet in it and it had 
shrunk on him. He walked with a decided limp. 

They had stopped at the corner of the barn. Without ap- 
pearing to actually turn their heads, they seemed to take in at 
one glance the entire scene, quickly. The tall man spoke. 
"What town is this?" 

One of the small boys told him the name of the town. 

"Who lives here?" the tall man said. 

"Who lives here?" the boy repeated. 

"Who runs this field? Is it a private field?" 

"Oh. It belongs to the town. They run it." 

"Do they all live here? The ones that run it?" 

The white man, the Negroes, the small boys, all watched 
the tall man. 

"What I mean, is there anybody in this town that flies, 
that owns a ship? Any strangers here that fly?" 



Death Drag 187 

"Yes," the boy said. "There's a man lives here that flew in 
the war, the English army." 

"Captain Warren was in the Royal Flying Corps," a sec- 
ond boy said. 

"That's what I said," the first boy said. 

"You said the English army," the second boy said. 

The second man, the short one with the limp, spoke. He 
spoke to the tall man, quietly, in a dead voice, in the diction 
of Weber and Fields in vaudeville, making his iv^s into v's 
and his ttfs into d's. "What does that mean?" he said. 

"It's all right," the tall man said. He moved forward. "I 
think I know him." The short man followed, limping, ter- 
rific, crablike. The tall man had a gaunt face beneath a two- 
days' stubble. His eyeballs looked dirty, too, with a strained, 
glaring expression. He wore a dirty helmet of cheap, thin 
cloth, though it was January. His goggles were worn, but 
even we could tell that they were good ones. But then every- 
body quit looking at him to look at the short man; later, when 
we older people saw him, we said among ourselves that he 
had the most tragic face we had ever seen; an expression of 
outraged and convinced and indomitable despair, like that of 
a man carrying through choice a bomb which, at a certain 
hour each day, may or may not explode. He had a nose 
which would have been out of proportion to a man six feet 
tall. As shaped by his close helmet, the entire upper half of his 
head down to the end of his nose would have fitted a six-foot 
body. But below that, below a lateral line bisecting his head 
from the end of his nose to the back of his skull, his jaw, the 
rest of his face, was not two inches deep. His jaw was a long, 
flat line clapping-to beneath his nose like the jaw of a shark, so 
that the tip of his nose and the tip of his jaw almost touched. 
His goggles were merely flat pieces of window-glass held in 
felt frames. His helmet was leather. Down the back of it, 
from the top to the hem, was a long savage tear, held together 



1 88 The Village 

top and bottom by strips of adhesive tape almost black with 
dirt and grease. 

From around the corner of the barn there now appeared a 
third man, again with that abrupt immobility, as though he 
had materialized there out of thin air; though when they saw 
him he was already moving toward the group. He wore an 
overcoat above a neat civilian suit; he wore a cap. He was a 
little taller than the limping man, and broad, heavily built. 
He was handsome in a dull, quiet way; from his face, a man 
of infrequent speech. When he came up the spectators saw 
that he, like the limping man, was also a Jew. That is, they 
knew at once that two of the strangers were of a different 
race from themselves, without being able to say what the 
difference was. The boy who had first spoken probably re- 
vealed by his next speech what they thought the difference 
was. He, as well as the other boys, was watching the man 
who limped. 

"Were you in the war?" the boy said. "In the air war?" 

The limping man did not answer. Both he and the tall man 
were watching the gate. The spectators looked also and saw 
a car enter the gate and come down the edge of the field 1 
toward them. Three men got out of the car and approached. 
Again the limping man spoke quietly to the tall man: "Is that 
one?" 

"No," the tall man said, without looking at the other. He 
watched the newcomers, looking from face to face. He spoke 
to the oldest of the three. "Morning," he said. "You run this 
field?" 

"No," the newcomer said. "You want the secretary of the 
Fair Association. He's in town." 

"Any charge to use it?" 

"I don't know. I reckon they'll be glad to have you use it." 

"Go on and pay them," the limping man said. 

The three newcomers looked at the airplane with that 
blank, knowing, respectful air of groundlings. It reared on its 



Death Drag 189 

muddy wheels, the propeller motionless, rigid, with a quality 
immobile and poised and dynamic. The nose was big with 
engine, the wings taut, the fuselage streaked with oil behind 
the rusting exhaust pipes. "Going to do some business here?" 
the oldest one said. 

"Put you on a show," the tall man said. 

"What kind of show?" 

"Anything you want. Wing-walking; death-drag." 

"What's that? Death-drag?" 

"Drop a man onto the top of a car and drag him off again. 
Bigger the crowd, the more you'll get." 

"You will get your money's worth," the limping man said. 

The boys still watched him. "Were you in the war?" the 
first boy said. 

The third stranger had not spoken up to this time. He now 
said: "Let's get on to town." 

"Right," the tall man said. He said generally, in his flat, 
dead voice, the same voice which the three strangers all 
seemed to use, as though it were their common language: 
"Where can we get a taxi? Got one in town?" 

"We'll take you to town," the men who had come up in 
the car said. 

"We'll pay," the limping man said. 

"Glad to do it," the driver of the car said. "I won't charge 
you anything. You want to go now?" 

"Sure," the tall man said. The three strangers got into the 
back seat, the other three in front. Three of the boys fol- 
lowed them to the car. 

"Lemme hang on to town, Mr. Black?" one of the boys 
said. 

"Hang on," the driver said. The boys got onto the running 
boards. The car returned to town. The three in front could 
hear the three strangers talking in the back. They talked 
quietly, in low, dead voices, somehow quiet and urgent, dis- 
cussing something among themselves, the tall man and the 



I 9 o The Village 

handsome one doing most of the talking. The three in front 
heard only one speech from the limping man: "I won't take 
less . . ." 

"Sure," the tall man said. He leaned forward and raised his 
voice a little: "Where '11 1 find this Jones, this secretary?" 

The driver told him. 

"Is the newspaper or the printing shop near there? I want 
some handbills." 

"I'll show you," the driver said. "I'll help you get fixed 
up." 

"Fine," the tall man said. "Come out this afternoon and 
Til give you a ride, if I have time." 

The car stopped at the newspaper office. "You can get 
your handbills here," the driver said. 

"Good," the tall man said. "Is Jones's office on this street?" 

"I'll take you there, too," the driver said. 

"You see about the editor," the tall man said. "I can find 
Jones, I guess." They got out of the car. "I'll come back 
here," the tall man said. He went on down the street, swiftly, 
in his dirty coverall and helmet. Two other men had joined 
the group before the newspaper office. They all entered, the 
limping man leading, followed by the three boys. 

"I want some handbills," the limping man said. "Like this 
one." He took from his pocket a folded sheet of pink paper. 
He opened it; the editor, the boys, the five men, leaned to 
see it. The lettering was black and bold: 

DEMON DUNCAN 
DAREDEVIL OF THE AIR 

DEATH DEFYING SHOW WILL BE GIVEN 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF 

THIS P.M. AT TWO P.M. 

COME ONE COME ALL AND SEE DEMON DUNCAN 
DEFY DEATH IN DEATH DROP & DRAG OF DEATH 



Death Drag 191 

"I want them in one hour," the limping man said. 

"What you want in this blank space?" the editor said. 

"What you got in this town?" 

"What we got?" 

"What auspices? American Legion? Rotary Club? Cham- 
ber of Commerce?" 

"We got all of them." 

"I'll tell you which one in a minute, then," the limping 
man said. "When my partner gets back." 

"You have to have a guarantee before you put on the 
show, do you?" the editor said. 

"Why, sure. Do you think I should put on a daredevil 
without auspices? Do you think I should for a nickel maybe 
jump off the airplane?" 

"Who's going to jump?" one of the later comers said; he 
was a taxi-driver. 

The limping man looked at him. "Don't you worry about 
that," he said. "Your business is just to pay the money. We 
will do all the jumping you want, if you pay enough." 

"I just asked which one of you all was the jumper." 

"Do I ask you whether you pay me in silver or in green- 
backs?" the limping man said. "Do I ask you?" 

"No," the taxi-driver said. 

"About these bills," the editor said. "You said you wanted 
them in an hour." 

"Can't you begin on them, and leave that part out until 
my partner comes back?" 

"Suppose he don't come before they are finished?" 

"Well, that won't be my fault, will it?" 

"All right," the editor said. "Just so you pay for them." 

"You mean, I should pay without a auspices on the hand- 
bill?" 

"I ain't in this business for fun," the editor said. 

"We'll wait," the limping man said. 



192 The Village 

They waited. 

"Were you a flyer in the war, Mister?" the boy said. 

The limping man turned upon the boy his long, misshapen, 
tragic face. "The war? Why should I fly in a war?" 

"I thought maybe because of your leg. Captain Warren 
limps, and he flew in the war. I reckon you just do it for 
fun?" 

"For fun? What for fun? Fly? Gruss Gott. I hate it, I wish 
the man what invented them was here; I would put him into 
that machine yonder and I would print on his back, Do not 
do it, one thousand times." 

"Why do you do it, then?" the man who had entered with 
the taxi-driver said. 

"Because of that Republican Coolidge. I was in business, 
and that Coolidge ruined business; ruined it. That's why. 
For fun? Gruss Gott." 

They looked at the limping man. "I suppose you have a 
license?" the second late-comer said. 

The limping man looked at him. "A license?" 

"Don't you have to have a license to fly?" 

"Oh; a license. For the airplane to fly; sure, I understand. 
Sure. We got one. You want to see it?" 

"You're supposed to show it to anybody that wants to see 
it, aren't you?" 

"Why, sure. You want to see it?" 

"Where is it?" 

"Where should it be? It's nailed to the airplane, where the 
government put it. Did you thought maybe it was nailed to 
me? Did you thought maybe I had a engine on me and maybe 
wings? It's on the airplane. Call a taxi and go to the airplane 
and look at it." 

"I run a taxi," the driver said. 

"Well, run it. Take this gentleman out to the field where 
he can look at the license on the airplane." 



Death Drag 193 

"It'll be a quarter," the driver said. But the limping man 
was not looking at the driver. He was leaning against the 
counter. They watched him take a stick of gum from his 
pocket and peel it. They watched him put the gum into his 
mouth. "I said it'll be a quarter, Mister," the driver said. 

"Was you talking to me?" the limping man said. 

"I thought you wanted a taxi out to the airport." 

"Me? What for? What do I want to go out to the airport 
for? I just come from there. I ain't the one that wants to see 
that license. I have already seen it. I was there when the 
government nailed it onto the airplane." 

II 

CAPTAIN WARREN, the ex-army flyer, was coming out of the 
store, where he met the tall man in the dirty coverall. Cap- 
tain Warren told about it in the barber shop that night, when 
the airplane was gone. 

"I hadn't seen him in fourteen years, not since I left Eng- 
land for the front in '17. 'So it was you that rolled out of 
that loop with two passengers and a twenty model Hisso 
smokepot?' I said. 

" 'Who else saw me?' he said. So he told me about it, stand- 
ing there, looking over his shoulder every now and then. He 
was sick; a man stopped behind him to let a couple of ladies 
pass, and Jock whirled like he might have shot the man if 
he'd had a gun, and while we were in the cafe some one 
slammed a door at the back and I thought he would come 
out of his monkey suit. It's a little nervous trouble I've got,' 
he told me. Tm all right.' I had tried to get him to come out 
home with me for dinner, but he wouldn't. He said that he 
had to kind of jump himself and eat before he knew it, sort 
of. We had started down the street and we were passing the 
restaurant when he said: I'm going to eat,' and he turned 



194 The Village 

and ducked in like a rabbit and sat down with his back to 
the wall and told Vernon to bring him the quickest thing he 
had. He drank three glasses of water and then Vernon 
brought him a milk bottle full and he drank most of that 
before the dinner came up from the kitchen. When he took off 
his helmet, I saw that his hair was pretty near white, and he 
is younger than I am. Or he was, up there when we were in 
Canada training. Then he told me what the name of his 
nervous trouble was. It was named Ginsfarb. The little one; 
the one that jumped off the ladder." 

"What was the trouble?" we asked. "What were they 
afraid of?" 

"They were afraid of inspectors," Warren said. "They 
had no licenses at all." 

"There was one on the airplane." 

"Yes. But it did not belong to that airplane. That one had 
been grounded by an inspector when Ginsfarb bought it. 
The license was for another airplane that had been wrecked, 
and some one had helped Ginsfarb compound another felony 
by selling the license to him. Jock had lost his license about 
two years ago when he crashed a big plane full of Fourth- 
of-July holidayers. Two of the engines quit, and he had to 
land. The airplane smashed up some and broke a gas line, 
but even then they would have been all right if a passenger 
hadn't got scared (it was about dusk) and struck a match. 
Jock was not so much to blame, but the passengers all burned 
to death, and the government is strict. So he couldn't get a 
license, and he couldn't make Ginsfarb even pay to take out 
a parachute rigger's license. So they had no license at all; if 
they were ever caught, they'd all go to the penitentiary." 

"No wonder his hair was white," some one said. 

"That wasn't what turned it white," Warren said. "I'll 
tell you about that. So they'd go to little towns like this one, 
fast, find out if there was anybody that might catch them, 



Death Drag 195 

and if there wasn't, they'd put on the show and then clear 
out and go to another town, staying away from the cities. 
They'd come in and get handbills printed while Jock and 
the other one would try to get underwritten by some local 
organization. They wouldn't let Ginsfarb do this part, 
because he'd stick out for his price too long and they'd be 
afraid to risk it. So the other two would do this, get what 
they could, and if they could not get what Ginsfarb told 
them to, they'd take what they could and then try to keep 
Ginsfarb fooled until it was too late. Well, this time Ginsfarb 
kicked up. I guess they had done it too much on him. 

"So I met Jock on the street. He looked bad; I offered 
him a drink, but he said he couldn't even smoke any more. 
All he could do was drink water; he said he usually drank 
about a gallon during the night, getting up for it. 

" 'You look like you might have to jump yourself to 
sleep, too,' I said. 

" 'No, I sleep fine. The trouble is, the nights aren't long 
enough. I'd like to live at the North Pole from September 
to April, and at the South Pole from April to September. 
That would just suit me.' 

" 'You aren't going to last long enough to get there,' I 
said. 

" 'I guess so. It's a good engine. I see to that.' 

" 'I mean, you'll be in jail.' 

"Then he said: 'Do you think so? Do you guess I could?' 

"We went on to the cafe. He told me about the racket, 
and showed me one of those Demon Duncan handbills. 
'Demon Duncan?' I said. 

" 'Why not? Who would pay to see a man named Gins- 
farb jump from a ship?' 

" 'I'd pay to see that before I'd pay to see a man named 
Duncan do it,' I said. 

"He hadn't thought of that. Then he began to drink water, 



196 The Village 

and he told me that Ginsfarb had wanted a hundred dollars 
for the stunt, but that he and the other fellow only got sixty. 

" 'What are you going to do about it? ' I said. 

" 'Try to keep him fooled and get this thing over and get 
to hell away from here,' he said. 

" 'Which one is Ginsfarb?' I said. 'The little one that looks 
like a shark?' 

"Then he began to drink water. He emptied my glass too 
at one shot and tapped it on the table. Vernon brought him 
another glass. 'You must be thirsty,' Vernon said. 

" 'Have you got a pitcher of it?' Jock said. 

" 'I could fill you a milk bottle.' 

" 'Let's have it,' Jock said. 'And give me another glass 
while I'm waiting.' Then he told me about Ginsfarb, why 
his hair had turned gray. 

" 'How long have you been doing this?' I said. 

" 'Ever since the 2 6th of August.' 

" 'This is just January,' I said. 

"'What about it?' 

" 'The 2 6th of August is not six months past.' " 

He looked at me. Vernon brought the bottle of water. 
Jock poured a glass and drank it. He began to shake, sitting 
there, shaking and sweating, trying to fill the glass again. 
Then he told me about it, talking fast, filling the glass and 
drinking. 

"Jake (the other one's name is Jake something; the good- 
looking one) drives the car, the rented car. Ginsfarb swaps 
onto the car from the ladder. Jock said he would have to fly 
the ship into position over a Ford or a Chevrolet running on 
three cylinders, trying to keep Ginsfarb from jumping from 
twenty or thirty feet away in order to save gasoline in the 
ship and in the rented car. Ginsfarb goes out on the bottom 
wing with his ladder, fastens the ladder onto a strut, hooks 
himself into the other end of the ladder, and drops off; every- 
body on the ground thinks that he has done what they all 



Death Drag 197 

came to see: fallen off and killed himself. That's what he 
calls his death-drop. Then he swaps from the ladder onto the 
top of the car, and the ship comes back and he catches the 
ladder and is dragged off again. That's his death-drag. 

"Well, up till the day when Jock's hair began to turn 
white, Ginsfarb, as a matter of economy, would do it all at 
once; he would get into position above the car and drop off 
on his ladder and then make contact with the car, and some- 
times Jock said the ship would not be in the air three min- 
utes. Well, on this day the rented car was a bum or some- 
thing; anyway, Jock had to circle the field four or five times 
while the car was getting into position, and Ginsfarb, seeing 
his money being blown out the exhaust pipes, finally refused 
to wait for Jock's signal and dropped off anyway. It was all 
right, only the distance between the ship and the car was not 
as long as the rope ladder. So Ginsfarb hit on the car, and 
Jock had just enough soup to zoom and drag Ginsfarb, still 
on the ladder, over a high-power electric line, and he held 
the ship in that climb for twenty minutes while Ginsfarb 
climbed back up the ladder with his leg broken. He held the 
ship in a climb with his knees, with the throttle wide open 
and the engine revving about eleven hundred, while he 
reached back and opened that cupboard behind the cockpit 
and dragged out a suitcase and propped the stick so he could 
get out on the wing and drag Ginsfarb back into the ship. 
He got Ginsfarb in the ship and on the ground again and 
Ginsfarb says: 'How far did we go?' and Jock told him they 
had flown with full throttle for thirty minutes and Ginsfarb 
says: 'Will you ruin me yet?' " 



III 

THE REST of this is composite. It is what we (groundlings, 
dwellers in and backbone of a small town interchangeable 
with and duplicate of ten thousand little dead clottings of 



198 The Village 

human life about the land) saw, refined and clarified by the 
expert, the man who had himself seen his own lonely and 
scudding shadow upon the face of the puny and remote 
earth. 

The three strangers arrived at the field, in the rented car. 
When they got out of the car, they were arguing in tense, 
dead voices, the pilot and the handsome man against the man 
who limped. Captain Warren said they were arguing about 
the money. 

"I want to see it," Ginsfarb said. They stood close; the 
handsome man took something from his pocket. 

"There. There it is. See?" he said. 

"Let me count it myself," Ginsfarb said. 

"Come on, come on," the pilot hissed, in his dead, tense 
voice. "We tell you we got the money! Do you want an 
inspector to walk in and take the money and the ship too and 
put us in jail? Look at all these people waiting." 

"You fooled me before," Ginsfarb said. 

"All right," the pilot said. "Give it to him. Give him his 
ship too. And he can pay for the car when he gets back to 
town. We can get a ride in; there's a train out of here in 
fifteen minutes." 

"You fooled me once before," Ginsfarb said. 

"But we're not fooling you now. Come on. Look at all 
these people." 

They moved toward the airplane, Ginsfarb limping ter- 
rifically, his back stubborn, his face tragic, outraged, cold. 
There was a good crowd: country people in overalls; the 
men a general dark clump against which the bright dresses 
of the women, the young girls, showed. The small boys and 
several men were already surrounding the airplane. We 
watched the limping man begin to take objects from the body 
of it: a parachute, a rope ladder. The handsome man went 
to the propeller. The pilot got into the back seat. 



Death Drag 199 

"Off!" he said, sudden and sharp. "Stand back, folks. 
We're going to wring the old bird's neck." 

They tried three times to crank the engine. 

"I got a mule, Mister," a countryman said. "How much'll 
you pay for a tow?" 

The three strangers did not laugh. The limping man was 
busy attaching the rope ladder to one wing. 

"You can't tell me," a countrywoman said. "Even he ain't 
that big a fool." 

The engine started then. It seemed to lift bodily from the 
ground a small boy who stood behind it and blow him aside 
like a leaf. We watched it turn and trundle down the field. 

"You can't tell me that thing's flying," the countrywoman 
said. "I reckon the Lord give me eyes. I can see it ain't flying. 
You folks have been fooled." 

"Wait," another voice said. "He's got to turn into the 
wind." 

"Ain't there as much wind right there or right here as 
there is down yonder?" the woman said. But it did fly. It 
turned back toward us; the noise became deafening. When 
it came broadside on to us, it did not seem to be going f A, 
yet we could see daylight beneath the wheels and the earth. 
But it was not going fast; it appeared rather to hang gently 
just above the earth until we saw that, beyond and beneath 
it, trees and earth in panorama were fleeing backward at 
dizzy speed, and then it tilted and shot skyward with a noise 
like a circular saw going into a white oak log. "There ain't 
nobody in it!" the countrywoman said. "You can't tell me!" 

The third man, the handsome one in the cap, had got into 
the rented car. We all knew it: a battered thing which the 
owner would rent to any one who would make a deposit of 
ten dollars. He drove to the end of the field, faced down the 
runwav, and stopped. We looked back at the airplane. It 



2oo The Village 

was high, coming back toward us; some one cried suddenly, 
his voice puny and thin: "There! Out on the wing! See?'' 

"It ain't!" the countrywoman said. "I don't believe it!" 

"You saw them get in it," some one said. 

"I don't believe it!" the woman said. 

Then we sighed; we said, "Aaahhhhhhh"; beneath the 
wing of the airplane there was a falling dot. We knew it was 
a man. Some way we knew that that lonely, puny, falling 
shape was that of a living man like ourselves. It fell. It 
seemed to fall for years, yet when it checked suddenly up 
without visible rope or cord, it was less far from the airplane 
than was the end of the delicate pen-slash of the profiled 
wing. 

"It ain't a man!" the woman shrieked. 

"You know better," the man said. "You saw him get in it." 

"I don't care!" the woman cried. "It ain't a man! You 
take me right home this minute!" 

The rest is hard to tell. Not because we saw so little; we 
saw everything that happened, but because we had so little 
in experience to postulate it with. We saw that battered 
rented car moving down the field, going faster, jouncing in 
the broken January mud, then the sound of the airplane 
blotted it, reduced it to immobility; we saw the dangling 
ladder and the shark-faced man swinging on it beneath the 
death-colored airplane. The end of the ladder raked right 
across the top of the car, from end to end, with the limping 
man on the ladder and the capped head of the handsome 
man leaning out of the car. And the end of the field was 
coming nearer, and the airplane was travelling faster than the 
car, passing it. And nothing happened. "Listen!" some one 
cried. "They are talking to one another!" 

Captain Warren told us what they were talking about, the 
two Jews yelling back and forth at one another: the shark- 



Death Drag 201 

faced man on the dangling ladder that looked like a cobweb, 
the other one in the car; the fence, the end of the field, com- 
ing closer. 

"Come on!" the man in the car shouted. 

"What did they pay?" 

"Jump!" 

"If they didn't pay that hundred, I won't do it." 

Then the airplane zoomed, roaring, the dangling figure on 
the gossamer ladder swinging beneath it. It circled the field 
twice while the man got the car into position again. Again 
the car started down the field; again the airplane came down 
with its wild; circular-saw drone which died into a splutter 
as the ladder and the clinging man swung up to the car from 
behind; again we heard the two puny voices shrieking at one 
another with a quality at once ludicrous and horrible: the 
one coming out of the very air itself, shrieking about some- 
thing sweated out of the earth and without value anywhere 
else: 

"How much did you say?" 

"Jump!" 

"What? How much did they pay?" 

"Nothing! Jump!" 

"Nothing?" the man on the ladder wailed in a fading, out- 
raged shriek. "Nothing?" Again the airplane was dragging 
the ladder irrevocably past the car, approaching the end of 
the field, the fences, the long barn with its rotting roof. Sud- 
denly we saw Captain Warren beside us; he was using words 
we had never heard him use. 

"He's got the stick between his knees," Captain Warren 
said. "Exalted suzerain of mankind; saccharine and sacred 
symbol of eternal rest." We had forgot about the pilot, the 
man still in the airplane. We saw the airplane, tilted upward, 
the pilot standing upright in the back seat, leaning over the 
side and shaking both hands at the man on the ladder. We 



202 The Village 

could hear him yelling now as again the man on the ladder 
was dragged over the car and past it, shrieking: 

"I won't do it! I won't do it!" He was still shrieking when 
the airplane zoomed; we saw him, a diminishing and shriek- 
ing spot against the sky above the long roof of the barn: "I 
won't do it! I won't do it!" Before, when the speck left the 
airplane, falling, to be snubbed up by the ladder, we knew 
that it was a living man; again, when the speck left the lad- 
der, falling, we knew that it was a living man, and we knew 
that there was no ladder to snub him up now. We saw hin? 
falling against the cold, empty January sky until the sil- 
houette of the barn absorbed him; even from here, his atti- 
tude froglike, outraged, implacable. From somewhere in the 
crowd a woman screamed, though the sound was blotted out 
by the sound of the airplane. It reared skyward with its wild, 
tearing noise, the empty ladder swept backward beneath it. 
The sound of the engine was like a groan, a groan of relief 
and despair. 

IV 

CAPTAIN WARREN told us in the barber shop on that Satur- 
day night. 

"Did he really jump off, onto that barn?" we asked him. 

"Yes. He jumped. He wasn't thinking about being killed, 
or even hurt. That's why he wasn't hurt. He was too mad, 
too in a hurry to receive justice. He couldn't wait to fly back 
down. Providence knew that he was too busy and that he 
deserved justice, so Providence put that barn there with the 
rotting roof. He wasn't even thinking about hitting the barn; 
if he'd tried to, let go of his belief in a cosmic balance to 
bother about landing, he would have missed the barn and 
killed himselfe" 

It didr\ hurt him at all, save for a long scratch on his face 



Death Drag 205 

that bled a lot, and his overcoat was torn completely down 
the back, as though the tear down the back of the helmet had 
run on down the overcoat. He came out of the barn running 
before we got to it. He hobbled right among us, with his 
bloody face, his arms waving, his coat dangling from either 
shoulder. 

"Where is that secretary?" he said. 

"What secretary?" 

"That American Legion secretary." He went on, limping 
fast, toward where a crowd stood about three women who 
had fainted. "You said you would pay a hundred dollars to 
see me swap to that car. We pay rent on the car and all, and 
now you would " 

"You got sixty dollars," some one said. 

The man looked at him. "Sixty? I said one hundred. Then 
you would let me believe it was one hundred and it was 
just sixty; you would see me risk my life for sixty dollars. 
. . ." The airplane was down; none of us were aware of it 
until the pilot sprang suddenly upon the man who limped. 
He jerked the man around and knocked him down before 
we could grasp the pilot. We held the pilot, struggling, 
crying, the tears streaking his dirty, unshaven face. Captain 
Warren was suddenly there, holding the pilot. 

"Stop it! "he said. "Stop it!" 

The pilot ceased. He stared at Captain Warren, then he 
slumped and sat on the ground in his thin, dirty garment, 
with his unshaven face, dirty, gaunt, with his sick eyes, 
crying. "Go away," Captain Warren said. "Let him alone 
for a minute." 

We went away, back to the other man, the one who 
limped. They had lifted him and he drew the two halves 
of his overcoat forward and looked at them. Then he said: 
"I want some chewing gum." 

Some one gave him a stick. Another offered him a ciga- 



204 The Village 

rette. "Thanks," he said. "I don't burn up no money. I ain't 
got enough of it yet." He put the gum into his mouth. "You 
would take advantage of me. If you thought I would risk 
my life for sixty dollars, you fool yourself." 

"Give him the rest of it," some one said. "Here's my 
share." 

The limping man did not look around. "Make it up to 
a hundred, and I will swap to the car like on the handbill," 
he said. 

Somewhere a woman screamed behind him. She began 
to laugh and to cry at the same time. "Don't . . ." she said, 
laughing and crying at the same time. "Don't let . . ." until 
they led her away. Still the limping man had not moved. 
He wiped his face on his cuff and he was looking at his 
bloody sleeve when Captain Warren came up. 

"How much is he short?" \Varren said. They told Warren. 
He took out some money and gave it to the limping man. 

"You want I should swap to the car?" he said. 

"No," Warren said. "You get that crate out of here quick 
as you can." 

"Well, that's your business," the limping man said. "I got 
witnesses I offered to swap." He moved; we made way and 
watched him, in his severed and dangling overcoat, approach 
the airplane. It was on the runway, the engine running. The 
third man was already in the front seat. We watched the 
limping man crawl terrifically in beside him. They sat there, 
looking forward. 

The pilot began to get up. Warren was standing beside 
him. "Ground it," Warren said. "You are coming home 
with me." 

"I guess we'd better get on," the pilot said. He did not 
look at Warren. Then he put out his hand. "Well . . ." he 
said. 

Warren did not take his hand. "You come on home with 
me," he said. 



Death Drag 205 

"Who'd take care of that bastard?" 

"Who wants to?" 

"I'll get him right, some day. Where I can beat hell out 
of him." 

"Jock," Warren said. 

"No," the other said. 

"Have you got an overcoat?" 

"Sure I have." 

"You're a liar." Warren began to pull off his overcoat. 

"No," the other said; "I don't need it." He went on toward 
the machine. "See you some time," he said over his shoulder. 
We watched him get in, heard an airplane come to life, come 
alive. It passed us, already off the ground. The pilot jerked 
his hand once, stiffly; the two heads in the front seat did not 
turn nor move. Then it was gone, the sound was gone. 

Warren turned. "What about that car they rented?" he 
said. 

"He give me a quarter to take it back to town," a boy said. 

"Can you drive it?" 

"Yes, sir. I drove it out here. I showed him where to 



rent it." 



"The one that jumped?" 

"Yes, sir." The boy looked a little aside. "Only I'm a little 
scared to take it back. I don't reckon you could come with 
me." 

"Why, scared?" Warren said. 

"That fellow never paid nothing down on it, like Mr. 
Harris wanted. He told Mr. Harris he might not use it, but 
if he did use it in his show, he would pay Mr. Harris twenty 
dollars for it instead of ten like Mr. Harris wanted. He told 
me to take it back and tell Mr. Harris he never used the car, 
And I don't know if Mr. Harris will like it. He might gel 
mad." 



Elly 



BORDERING THE SHEER DROP of the precipice, the wooden 
railing looked like a child's toy. It followed the curving 
road in thread-like embrace, passing the car in a flimsy blur. 
Then it flicked behind and away like a taut ribbon cut with 
scissors. 

Then they passed the sign, the first sign, Mills City. 6 mi 
and Elly thought, with musing and irrevocable astonishment, 
'Now we are almost there. It is too late now'; looking at 
Paul beside her, his hands on the wheel, his face in profile 
as he watched the fleeing road. She said, * Well. What can I 
do to make you marry me, Paul?" thinking 'There was a 
man plowing in that field, watching us when we came out 
of those woods with Paul carrying the motor-robe, and got 
back into the car,' thinking this quietly, with a certain de- 
tachment and inattention, because there was something else 
about to obliterate it. 'Something dreadful that I have for- 
gotten about/ she thought, watching the swift and increasing 
signs which brought Mills City nearer and nearer. 'Some- 
thing terrible that I shall remember in a minute,' saying 
aloud, quietly: "There's nothing else I can do now, is there?" 

Still Paul did not look at her. "No," he said. "There's 
nothing else you can do." 

Then she remembered what it was she had forgotten. She 
remembered her grandmother, thinking of the old woman 

207 



2o8 The Village 

with her dead hearing and her inescapable cold eyes waiting 
at Mills City, with amazed and quiet despair: 'How could 
I have ever forgot about her? How could I have? How 
could I?' 

She was eighteen. She lived in Jefferson, two hundred 
miles away, with her father and mother and grandmother, 
in a biggish house. It had a deep veranda with screening 
vines and no lights. In this shadow she half lay almost nightly 
with a different man youths and young men of the town 
at first, but later with almost anyone, any transient in the 
small town whom she met by either convention or by 
chance, provided his appearance was decent. She would 
never ride in their cars with them at night, and presently 
they all believed that they knew why, though they did not 
always give up hope at once until the courthouse clock 
struck eleven. Then for perhaps five minutes longer they 
(who had been practically speechless for an hour or more) 
would talk in urgent whispers: 

"You must go now." 

"No. Not now." 

"Yes. Now." 

"Why?" 

"Because. I'm tired. I want to go to bed." 

"I see. So far, and no mother. Is that it?" 

"Maybe." In the shadow now she would be alert, cool, 
already fled, without moving, beyond some secret reserve 
of laughter. And he would leave, and she would enter the 
dark house and look up at the single square of light which 
fell upon the upper hallway, and change completely. Wearily 
now, with the tread almost of an old woman, she would 
mount the stairs and pass the open door of the lighted room 
where her grandmother sat, erect, an open book in her 
hands, facing the hall. Usually she did not look into the 
room when she passed. But now *nd then she did. Then 



Elly 209 

for an instant they would look full at one another: the old 
woman cold, piercing; the girl weary, spent, her face, her 
dark dilated eyes, filled with impotent hatred. Then she 
would go on and enter her own room and lean for a time 
against the door, hearing the grandmother's light click off 
presently, sometimes crying silently and hopelessly, whis- 
pering, "The old bitch. The old bitch." Then this would 
pass. She would undress and look at her face in the mirror, 
examining her mouth now pale of paint and heavy, flattened 
(so she would believe) and weary and dulled with kissing, 
thinking 'My God. Why do I do it? What is the matter 
with me?' thinking of how tomorrow she must face the old 
woman again with the mark of last night upon her mouth 
like bruises, with a feeling of the pointlessness and emptiness 
of life more profound than the rage or the sense of perse- 
cution. 

Then one afternoon at the home of a girl friend she met 
Paul de Montigny. After he departed the two girls were 
alone. Now they looked at one another quietly, like two 
swordsmen, with veiled eyes. 

"So you like him, do you?" the friend said. "You've got 
queer taste, haven't you?" 

"Like who?" Elly said. "I don't know who you are talk- 
ing about." 

"Oh yeah?" the friend said. "You didn't notice his hair 
then. Like a knitted cap. And his lips. Blubber, almost." Elly 
looked at her. 

"What are you talking about?" Elly said. 

"Nothing," the other said. She glanced toward the hall, 
then she took a cigarette from the front of her dress and lit 
it. "I don't know anything about it. I just heard it, too. How 
his uncle killed a man once that accused him of having nigger 
blood." 

"You're lying," Elly said. 



210 The Village 

The other expelled smoke. "All right. Ask your grand- 
mother about his family. Didn't she used to live in Louisiana 
too?" 

"What about you?" Elly said. "You invited him into your 
house." 

"I wasn't hid in the cloak closet, kissing him, though." 

"Oh, yeah?" Elly said. "Maybe you couldn't." 

"Not till you got your face out of the way, anyhow," the 
other said. 

That night she and Paul sat on the screened and shadowed 
veranda. But at eleven o'clock it was she who was urgent 
and tense: "No! No! Please. Please." 

"Oh, come on. What are you afraid of?" 

"Yes. I'm afraid. Go, please. Please." 

"Tomorrow, then?" 

"No. Not tomorrow or any time." 

"Yes. Tomorrow." 

This time she did not look in when she passed her grand- 
mother's door. Neither did she lean against her own door 
to cry. But she was panting, saying aloud against the door 
in thin exultation: "A nigger. A nigger. I wonder what she 
would say if she knew about that." 

The next afternoon Paul walked up onto the veranda. 
Elly was sitting in the swing, her grandmother in a chair 
nearby. She rose and met Paul at the steps. "Why did you 
come here?" she said. "Why did you?" Then she turned 
and seemed to watch herself walking before him toward the 
thin old woman sitting bolt upright, sitting bolt and impla- 
cably chaste in that secret place, peopled with ghosts, very 
likely to Elly at any given moment uncountable and un- 
namable, who might well have owned one single mouth. 
She leaned down, screaming: "This is Mr. de Montigny, 
Grandmother! " 

"What?" 



Elly 2 1 1 

"Mr. de Montigny! From Louisiana!" she screamed, and 
saw the grandmother, without moving below the hips, start 
violently backward as a snake does to strike. That was in 
the afternoon. That night Elly quitted the veranda for the 
first time. She and Paul were in a close clump of shrubbery 
on the lawn; in the wild close dark for that instant Elly 
was lost, her blood aloud with desperation and exultation 
and vindication too, talking inside her at the very brink of 
surrender loud as a voice: "I wish she were here to see! I 
wish she were here to see!" when something there had 
been no sound shouted at her and she made a mad awkward 
movement of recovery. The grandmother stood just behind 
and above them. When she had arrived, how long she had 
been there, they did not know. But there she stood, saying 
nothing, in the long anti-climax while Paul departed without 
haste and Elly stood, thinking stupidly, 'I am caught in sin 
without even having time to sin.' Then she was in her room, 
leaning against the door, trying to still her breathing, listen- 
ing for the grandmother to mount the stairs and go to her 
father's room. But the old woman's footsteps ceased at her 
own door. Elly went to her bed and lay upon it without 
undressing, still panting, the blood still aloud. 'So/ she 
thought, 'it will be tomorrow. She will tell him in the morn- 
ing.' Then she began to writhe, to toss lightly from side to 
side. 'I didn't even have a chance to sin,' she thought, with 
panting and amazed regret. 'She thinks I did and she will tell 
that I did, yet I am still virgin. She drove me to it, then pre- 
vented me at the last moment.' Then she was lying with the 
sun in her eyes still fully dressed. 'So it will be this morning, 
today/ she thought dully. 'My God. How could I. How 
could I. I don't want any man, anything.' 

She was waiting in the dining-room when her father came 
down to breakfast. He said nothing, apparently knew noth- 
ing. 'Maybe it's mother she told/ Elly thought. But after a 



zi2 The Village 

while her mother, too, appeared and departed for town also, 
saying nothing. 'So it has not been yet,' she thought, mount- 
ing the stairs. Her grandmother's door was closed. "When 
she opened it, the old woman was sitting up in bed, reading 
a newspaper; she looked up, cold, still, implacable, while 
Elly screamed at her in the empty house: "What else can I 
do, in this little dead, hopeless town? I'll work. I don't want 
to be idle. Just find me a job anything, anywhere, so that 
it's so far away that I'll never have to hear the word Jeffer- 
son again." She was named for the grandmother Ailanthia, 
though the old woman had not heard her own name or her 
granddaughter's or anyone else's in almost fifteen years save 
when it was screamed at her as Elly now screamed: "It 
hadn't even happened last night! Won't you believe me? 
That's it. It hadn't even happened! At least, I would have 
had something, something . . ." with the other watching her 
with that cold, fixed, immobile, inescapable gaze of the very 
deaf. "All right!" Elly cried. "I'll get married then! Will you 
be satisfied then?" 

That afternoon she met Paul downtown. "Was everything 
all right last night?" he said. "Why, what is it? Did they " 

"No. Paul, marry me." They were in the rear of the 
drugstore, partially concealed by the prescription counter, 
though anyone might appear behind it at any moment. She 
leaned against him, her face wan, tense, her painted mouth 
like a savage scar upon it. "Marry me. Or it will be too late, 
Paul." 

"I don't marry them," Paul said. "Here. Pull yourself 
together." 

She leaned against him, rife with promise. Her voice was 
wan and urgent. "We almost did last night. If you'll marry 
me, I will" 

"You will, eh? Before or after?" 

"Yes. Now. Any time." 



Elly 2 1 3 

"I'm sorry," he said. 

"Not even if I will now?" 

"Come on, now. Pull yourself together." 

"Oh, I can hear you. But I don't believe you. And I am 
afraid to try and find out." She began to cry. He spoke in 
thin and mounting annoyance: 

"Stop it, I tell you!" 

"Yes. All right. I've stopped. You won't, then? I tell you, 
it will be too late." 

"Hell, no. I don't marry them, I tell you." 

"All right. Then it's good-bye. Forever." 

"That's O.K. by me, too. If that's how you feel. If I ever 
see you again, you know what it will mean. But no marry- 
ing. And I'll see next time that we don't have any audience," 

"There won't be any next time," Elly said. 

The next day he was gone. A week later, her engagement 
was in the Memphis papers. It was to a young man whom 
she had known from childhood. He was assistant cashier in 
the bank, who they said would be president of it some day. 
He was a grave, sober young man of impeccable character 
and habits, who had been calling on her for about a year 
with a kind of placid formality. He took supper with the 
family each Sunday night, and when infrequent road shows 
came to town he always bought tickets for himself and Elly 
and her mother. When he called on her, even after the 
engagement was announced, they did not sit in the dark 
swing. Perhaps he did not know that anyone had ever sat 
in it in the darkness. No one sat in it at all now, and Elly 
passed the monotonous round of her days in a kind of dull 
peace. Sometimes at night she cried a little, though not often; 
now and then she examined her mouth in the glass and cried 
quietly, with quiet despair and resignation. 'Anyway I can 
live quietly now,' she thought. 'At least I can live out the 
rest of my dead life as quietly as if I were already dead.' 

Then one dav. without warning, as though she, too, had 



214 The Village 

accepted the armistice and the capitulation, the grandmother 
departed to visit her son in Mills City. Her going seemed to 
leave the house bigger and emptier than it had ever been, 
as if the grandmother had been the only other actually living 
person in it. There were sewing women in the house daily 
now, making the trousseau, yet Elly seemed to herself to 
move quietly and aimlessly, in a hiatus without thought or 
sense, from empty room to empty room giving upon an 
identical prospect too familiar and too peaceful to be even 
saddening any longer. For long hours now she would stand 
at her mother's bedroom window, watching the slow and 
infinitesimal clematis tendrils as they crept and overflowed 
up the screen and onto the veranda roof with the augment- 
ing summer. Two months passed so; she would be married 
in three weeks. Then one day her mother said, "Your grand- 
mother wants to come home Sunday. Why don't you and 
Philip drive down to Mills City and spend Saturday night 
with your uncle, and bring her back Sunday?" Five minutes 
later, at the mirror, Elly looked at her reflection as you look 
at someone who has just escaped a fearful danger. 'God,' 
she thought, 'what was I about to do? What 'was I about 
to do? 

Within the hour she had got Paul on the telephone, leav- 
ing home to do it, taking what precautions for secrecy her 
haste would afford her. 

"Saturday morning?" he said. 

"Yes. I'll tell mother Phi ... he wants to leave early, at 
daylight. They won't recognize you or the car. I'll be ready 
and we can get away quick." 

"Yes." She could hear the wire, distance; she had a feeling 
of exultation, escape. "But you know what it means. If I 
come back. What I told you." 

"I'm not afraid. I still don't believe you, but I am not 
afraid to try it now." 



Elly 215 

Again she could hear the wire. "I'm not going to marry 
you, Elly." 

"All right, darling. I tell you I'm not afraid to try it any 
more. Exactly at daylight. I'll be waiting." 

She went to the bank. After a time Philip was free and 
came to her where she waited, her face tense and wan 
beneath the paint, her eyes bright and hard. "There is some- 
thing you must do for me. It's hard to ask, and I guess it will 
be hard to do." 

"Of course I'll do it. What is it?" 

"Grandmother is coming home Sunday. Mother wants 
you and me to drive down Saturday and bring her back." 

"All right. I can get away Saturday." 

"Yes. You see, I told you it would be hard. I don't want 
you to go." 

"Don't want me to . . ." He looked at her bright, almost 
haggard face. "You want to go alone?" She didn't answer, 
watching him. Suddenly she came and leaned against him 
with a movement practiced, automatic. She took one of his 
arms and drew it around her. "Oh," he said. "I see. You 
want to go with someone else." 

"Yes. I can't explain now. But I will later. But mother will 
never understand. She won't let me go unless she thinks it 
is you." 

"I see." His arm was without life; she held it about her. 
"It's another man you want to go with." 

She laughed, not loud, not long. "Don't be foolish. Yes. 
There's another man in the party. People you don't know 
and that I don't expect to see again before I am married. 
But mother won't understand. That's why I must ask you. 
Will you do it?" 

"Yes. It's all right. If we can't trust one another, we 
haven't got any business marrying." 

"Yes. We must trust one another." She released his arm. 



216 The Village 

She looked at him intently, speculatively, with a cold and 
curious contempt. "And you'll let mother believe . . ." 

"You can trust me. You know that." 

"Yes. I'm sure I can." Suddenly she held out her hand. 
"Good-bye." 

"Good-bye?" 

She leaned against him again. She kissed him. "Careful," 
he said. "Somebody might . . ." 

"Yes. Until later, then. Until I explain." She moved back, 
looked at him absently, speculatively. "This is the last 
trouble I'll ever give you, I expect. Maybe this will be 
worth that to you. Good-bye." 

That was Thursday afternoon. On Saturday morning, at 
dawn, when Paul stopped his car before the dark house, she 
seemed to materialize at once, already running across the 
lawn. She sprang into the car before he could descend and 
open the door, swirling down into the seat, leaning forward 
and taut with urgency and flight like an animal. "Hurry!" 
she said. "Hurry! Hurry! Hurry!" 

But he held the car a moment longer. "Remember. I told 
you what it meant if I came back. O.K.?" 

"I heard you. I tell you I'm not afraid to risk it now. 
Hurry! Hurry!" 

And then, ten hours later, with the Mills City signs in- 
creasing with irrevocable diminishment, she said, "So you 
won't marry me? You won't?" 

"I told you that all the time." 

"Yes. But I didn't believe you. I didn't believe you. I 
thought that when I after And now there is nothing else 
I can do, is there?" 

"No," he said. 

"No," she repeated. Then she began to laugh, her voice 
beginning to rise. 

"Elly!" he said. "Stop it, now!" 



Elly 2 1 7 

"All right," she said. "I just happened to think about my 
grandmother. I had forgotten her." 

Pausing at the turn of the stair, Elly could hear Paul and 
her uncle and aunt talking in the living-room below. She 
stood quite still, in an attitude almost pensive, nun-like, 
virginal, as though posing, as though she had escaped for the 
moment into a place where she had forgotten where she came 
from and where she intended to go. Then a clock in the hall 
struck eleven, and she moved. She went on up the stairs 
quietly and went to the door of her cousin's room, which 
she was to occupy for the night, and entered. The grand- 
mother sat in a low chair beside the dressing table littered 
with the frivolous impedimenta of a young girl . . . bottles, 
powder puffs, photographs, a row of dance programs stuck 
into the mirror frame. Elly paused. They looked at one 
another for a full moment before the old woman spoke: 
"Not contented with deceiving your parents and your 
friends, you must bring a Negro into my son's house as a 
guest." 

"Grandmother!" Elly said. 

"Having me sit down to table with a negro man." 

"Grandmother!" Elly cried in that thin whisper, her face 
haggard and grimaced. She listened. Feet, voices were com- 
ing up the stairs, her aunt's voice and Paul's. "Hush!" Elly 
cried. "Hush!" 

"What? What did you say?" 

Elly ran to the chair and stooped and laid her fingers on 
the old woman's thin and bloodless lips and, one furiously 
importunate and the other furiously implacable, they glared 
eye to eye across the hand while the feet and the voices 
passed the door and ceased. Elly removed her hand. From 
the row of them in the mirror frame she jerked one of the 
cards with its silken cord and tiny futile pencil. She wrote 



218 The Village 

on the back of the card. He is not a negro he 'went to Va. 
and Harvard and everywhere. 

The grandmother read the card. She looked up. "I can 
understand Harvard, but not Virginia. Look at his hair, his 
fingernails, if you need proof. I don't. I know the name 
which his people have borne for four generations." She re- 
turned the card. "That man must not sleep under this roof." 

Elly took another card and scrawled swiftly. He shall. He 
is my guest. I asked him here. You are my grandmother you 
'would not have me treat any guest that way not even a dog. 

The grandmother read it. She sat with the card in her 
hand. "He shall not drive me to Jefferson. I will not put a foot 
in that car, and you shall not. We will go home on the train. 
No blood of mine shall ride with him again." 

Elly snatched another card, scrawled furiously. I will. 
You cannot stop me. Try and stop me. 

The grandmother read it. She looked at Elly. They glared 
at one another. "Then I will have to tell your father." 

Already Elly was writing again. She thrust the card at her 
grandmother almost before the pencil had ceased; then in the 
same motion she tried to snatch it back. But the grandmother 
had already grasped the corner of it and now they glared 
at one another, the card joining them like a queer umbilical 
cord. "Let go!" Elly cried. "Let it go!" 

"Turn loose," the grandmother said. 

"Wait," Elly cried thinly, whispering, tugging at the card, 
twisting it. "I made a mistake. I " With an astonishing 
movement, the grandmother bent the card up as Elly tried to 
snatch it free. 

"Ah," she said, then she read aloud: Tell him. What do 
you know. "So. You didn't finish it, I see. What do I know?" 

"Yes," Elly said. Then she began to speak in a fierce whis- 
per: "Tell him! Tell him we went into a clump of trees 
this morning and stayed there two hours. Tell him!" The 



Elly 219 

grandmother folded the card carefully and quietly. She rose. 
"Grandmother!" Elly cried. 

"My stick," the grandmother said. "There; against the 
wall." 

When she was gone Elly went to the door and turned the 
latch and recrossed the room. She moved quietly, getting a 
robe of her cousin's from the closet, and undressed, slowly, 
pausing to yawn terrifically. "God, Pm tired," she said aloud, 
yawning. She sat down at the dressing table and began to 
manicure her nails with the cousin's equipment. There was 
a small ivory clock on the dressing table. She glanced at it 
now and then. 

Then the clock below stairs struck midnight. She sat for 
a moment longer with her head above her glittering nails, 
listening to the final stroke. Then she looked at the ivory 
one beside her. I'd hate to catch a train by you,' she thought. 
As she looked at it her face began again to fill with the weary 
despair of the afternoon. She went to the door and passed 
into the dark hall. She stood in the darkness, on her naked 
feet, her head bent, whimpering quietly to herself with 
bemused and childish self-pity. 'Everything's against me,' 
she thought. 'Everything.' When she moved, her feet made 
no sound. She walked with her arms extended into the dark- 
ness. She seemed to feel her eyeballs turning completely and 
blankly back into her skull with the effort to see. She entered 
the bathroom and locked the door. Then haste and urgency 
took her again. She ran to the angle of the wall beyond 
which the guest room was and stooped, cupping her voice 
into the angle with her hands. "Paul!" she whispered, "Paul!" 
holding her breath while the dying and urgent whisper 
failed against the cold plaster. She stooped, awkward in the 
borrowed robe, her blind eyes unceasing in the darkness with 
darting despair. She ran to the lavatory , found the tap in the 
darkness and tempered the drip of water to a minor but 



220 The Village 

penetrating monotony. Then she opened the door and stood 
just within it. She heard the clock below stairs strike the 
half hour. She had not stirred, shaking slowly as with cold, 
when it struck one. 

She heard Paul as soon as he left the guest room. She heard 
him come down the hall; she heard his hand seek the switch. 
When it clicked on, she found that her eyes were closed. 

"What's this?" Paul said. He wore a suit of her uncle's 
pajamas. "What the devil " 

"Lock the door," she whispered. 

"Like hell. You fool. You damned fool." 

"Paul!" She held him as though she expected him to flee. 
She shut the door behind him and fumbled for the latch 
when he caught her wrist. 

"Let me out of here!" he whispered. 

She leaned against him, shaking slowly, holding him. Her 
eyes showed no iris at all. "She's going to tell daddy. She's 
going to tell daddy to-morrow, Paul!" Between the whispers 
the water dripped its unhurried minor note. 

"Tell what? What does she know?" 

"Put your arms around me, Paul." 

"Hell, no. Let go. Let's get out of here." 

"Yes. You can help it. You can keep her from telling 
daddy." 

"How help it? Damn it, let me go!" 

"She will tell, but it won't matter then. Promise. Paul. 
Say you will." 

"Marry you? Is that what you are talking about? I told 
you yesterday I wouldn't. Let me go, I tell you." 

"All right. All right." She spoke in an eager whisper. "I 
believe you now. I didn't at first, but I do now. You needn't 
marry me, then. You can help it without marrying me." She 
clung to him, her hair, her body, rich with voluptuous and 
fainting promise. "You won't have to marry me. Will you 
do it?" 



Elly 221 

"Do what?" 

"Listen. You remember that curve with the little white 
fence, where it is so far down to the bottom? Where if a car 
went through that little fence. . . ." 

"Yes. What about it?" 

"Listen. You and she will be in the car. She won't know, 
won't have time to suspect. And that little old fence wouldn't 
stop anything and they will all say it was an accident. She 
is old; it wouldn't take much; maybe even the shock and 
you are young and maybe it won't even . . . Paul! Paul!" 
With each word her voice seemed to faint and die, speaking 
with a dying cadence out of urgency and despair while he 
looked down at her blanched face, at her eyes filled with 
desperate and voluptuous promise. "Paul!" 

"And where will you be all this time?" She didn't stir, 
her face like a sleepwalker's. "Oh. I see. You'll go home on 
the train. Is that it?" 

"Paul!" she said in that prolonged and dying whisper. 
"Paul!" 

In the instant of striking her his hand, as though refusing 
of its own volition the office, opened and touched her face 
in a long, shuddering motion almost a caress. Again, gripping 
her by the back of the neck, he assayed to strike her; again 
his hand, something, refused. When he flung her away she 
stumbled backward into the wall. Then his feet ceased and 
then the water began to fill the silence with its steady and 
unhurried sound. After a while the clock below struck two, 
and she moved wearily and heavily and closed the tap. 

But that did not seem to stop the sound of the water. It 
seemed to drip on into the silence where she lay rigid on 
her back in bed, not sleeping, not even thinking. It dripped 
on while behind the frozen grimace of her aching face she 
got through the ritual of breakfast and of departure, the 
grandmother between Paul and herself in the single seat. Even 
the sound of the car could not drown it out, until suddenly 



222 The Village 

she realized what it was. 'It's the signboards/ she thought, 
watching them as they diminished in retrograde. *I even 
remember that one; now it's only about two miles. I'll wait 
until the next one; then I will . . . now. Now.' "Paul," she 
said. He didn't look at her. "Will you marry me?" 

"No." Neither was she looking at his face. She was watch- 
ing his hands as they jockeyed the wheel slightly and con- 
stantly. Between them the grandmother sat, erect, rigid 
beneath the archaic black bonnet, staring straight ahead like 
a profile cut from parchment. 

"I'm going to ask you just once more. Then it will be too 
late. I tell you it will be too late then, Paul . . . Paul?" 

"No, I tell you. You don't love me. I don't love you. 
We've never said we did." 

"All right. Not love, then. Will you marry me without it? 
Remember, it \vill be too late." 

"No. I will not." 

"But why? Why, Paul?" He didn't answer. The car fled 
on. Now it was the first sign which she had noticed; she 
thought quietly, 'We must be almost there now. It is the 
next curve.' She said aloud, speaking across the deafness of 
the old woman between them: "Why not, Paul? If it's that 
story about nigger blood, I don't believe it. I don't care." 
Tes,' she thought, 'this is the curve.' The road entered the 
curve, descending. She sat back, and then she found her 
grandmother looking full at her. But she did not try now 
to veil her face, her eyes, any more than she would have tried 
to conceal her voice: "Suppose I have a child?" 

"Suppose you do? I can't help it now. You should have 
thought of that. Remember, you sent for me; I didn't ask 
to come back." 

"No. You didn't ask. I sent for you. I made you. And this 
is the last time. Will you? Quick!" 

"No." 



Elly 223 

"All right," she said. She sat back; at that instant the road 
seemed to poise and pause before plunging steeply down- 
ward beside the precipice; the white fence began to flicker 
past. As Elly flung the robe aside she saw her grandmother 
still watching her; as she lunged forward across the old 
woman's knees they glared eye to eye the haggard and 
desperate girl and the old woman whose hearing had long 
since escaped everything and whose sight nothing escaped 
for a profound instant of despairing ultimatum and im- 
placable refusal. "Then die!" she cried into the old woman's 
face; "die!" grasping at the wheel as Paul tried to fling her 
back. But she managed to get her elbow into the wheel 
spokes with all her weight on it, sprawling across her grand- 
mother's body, holding the wheel hard over as Paul struck 
her on the mouth with his fist. "Oh," she screamed, "you hit 
me. You hit me!" When the car struck the railing it flung 
her free, so that for an instant she lay lightly as an alighting 
bird upon Paul's chest, her mouth open, her eyes round with 
shocked surprise. "You hit me!" she wailed. Then she was 
falling free, alone in a complete and peaceful silence like a 
vacuum. Paul's face, her grandmother, the car, had disap- 
peared, vanished as though by magic; parallel with her eyes 
the shattered ends of white railing, the crumbling edge of the 
precipice where dust whispered and a faint gout of it hung 
like a toy balloon, rushed mutely skyward. 

Overhead somewhere a sound passed, dying away the 
snore of an engine, the long hissing of tires in gravel, then 
the wind sighed in the trees again, shivering the crests against 
the sky. Against the bole of one of them the car lay in an 
inextricable and indistinguishable mass, and Elly sat in a 
litter of broken glass, staring dully at it. "Something hap- 
pened," she whimpered. "He hit me. And now they are 
dead; it's me that's hurt, and nobody will come." She moaned 
a little, whimpering. Then with an air of dazed astonish- 



224 The Village 

ment she raised her hand. The palm was red and wet. She 
sat whimpering quietly, digging stupidly at her palm. 
"There's glass all in it and I can't even see it," she said, whim- 
pered, gazing at her palm while the warm blood stained 
slowly down upon her skirt. Again the sound rushed steadily 
past high overhead, and died away. She looked up, following 
it. "There goes another one," she whimpered. "They won't 
even stop to see if I am hurt." 



Uncle Willy 



I KNOW what they said. They said I didn't run away from 
home but that I was tolled away by a crazy man who, if I 
hadn't killed him first, would have killed me inside another 
week. But if they had said that the women, the good women 
in Jefferson had driven Uncle Willy out of town and I fol- 
lowed him and did what I did because I knew that Uncle 
Willy was on his last go-round and this time when they got 
him again it would be for good and forever, they would have 
been right. Because I wasn't tolled away and Uncle Willy 
wasn't crazy, not even after all they had done to him. I 
didn't have to go; I didn't have to go any more than Uncle 
Willy had to invite me instead of just taking it for granted 
that I wanted to come. I went because Uncle Willy was the 
finest man I ever knew, because even women couldn't beat 
him, because in spite of them he wound up his life getting 
fun out of being alive and he died doing the thing that was 
the most fun of all because I was there to help him. And 
that's something that most men and even most women too 
don't get to do, not even the women that call meddling with 
other folks' lives fun. 

He wasn't anybody's uncle, but all of us, and grown people 
too, called him (or thought of him) as Uncle Willy. He 
didn't have any kin at all except a sister in Texas married 
to an oil millionaire. He lived by himself in a little old neat 

"5 



226 * The Village 

white house where he had been born on the edge of town, 
he and an old nigger named Job Wylie that was older than 
he was even, that cooked and kept the house and was the 
porter at the drugstore which Uncle Willy's father had 
established and which Uncle Willy ran without any other 
help than old Job; and during the twelve or fourteen years 
(the life of us as children and then boys), while he just used 
dope, we saw a lot of him. We liked to go to his store because 
it was always cool and dim and quiet inside because he never 
washed the windows; he said the reason was that he never 
had to bother to dress them because nobody could see in 
anyway, and so the heat couldn't get in either. And he never 
had any customers except country people buying patent 
medicines that were already in bottles, and niggers buying 
cards and dice, because nobody had let him fill a prescription 
in forty years I reckon, and he never had any soda fountain 
trade because it was old Job who washed the glasses and 
mixed the syrups and made the ice cream ever since Uncle 
Willy's father started the business in eighteen-fifty-some- 
thing and so old Job couldn't see very well now, though 
papa said he didn't think that old Job took dope too, it was 
from breathing day and night the air which Uncle Willy 
had just exhaled. 

But the ice cream tasted all right to us, especially when we 
came in hot from the ball games. We had a league of three 
teams in town and Uncle Willy would give the prize, a ball 
or a bat or a mask, for each game though he would never 
come to see us play, so after the game both teams and maybe 
all three would go to the store to watch the winner get the 
prize. And we would eat the ice cream and then we would 
all go behind the prescription case and watch Uncle Willy 
light the little alcohol stove and fill the needle and roll his 
sleeve up over the little blue myriad punctures starting at 
his elbow and going right on up into his shirt. And the next 



Uncle Willy 227 

day would be Sunday and we would wait in our yards and 
fall in with him as he passed from house to house and go on 
to Sunday school, Uncle Willy with us, in the same class 
with us, sitting there while we recited. Mr. Barbour from the 
Sunday school never called on him. Then we would finish 
the lesson and we would talk about baseball until the bell 
rang and Uncle Willy still not saying anything, just sitting 
there all neat and clean, with his clean collar and no tie and 
weighing about a hundred and ten pounds and his eyes 
behind his glasses kind of all run together like broken eggs. 
Then we would all go to the store and eat the ice cream 
that was left over from Saturday and then go behind the 
prescription case and watch him again: the little stove and 
his Sunday shirt rolled up and the needle going slow into 
his blue arm and somebody would say, "Don't it hurt?" and 
he would say, "No. I like it." 

II 

THEN THEY made him quit dope. He had been using it for 
forty years, he told us once, and now he was sixty and he 
had about ten years more at the outside, only he didn't tell 
us that because he didn't need to tell even fourteen-year-old 
boys that. But they made him quit. It didn't take them long. 
It began one Sunday morning and it was finished by the 
next Friday; we had just sat down in our class and Mr. Bar- 
bour had just begun, when all of a sudden Reverend Schultz, 
the minister, was there, leaning over Uncle Willy and already 
hauling him out of his seat when we looked around, hauling 
him up and saying in that tone in which preachers speak to 
fourteen-year-old boys that I don't believe even pansy boys 
like: "Now, Brother Christian, I know you will hate to 
leave Brother Barbour's class, but let's you and I go in and 
join Brother Miller and the men and hear what he can tell 



228 The Village 

us on this beautiful and heartwarming text," and Uncle 
Willy still trying to hold back and looking around at us 
with his run-together eyes blinking and saying plainer than 
if he had spoke it: "What's this? What's this, fellows? What 
are they fixing to do to me?" 

We didn't know any more than he did. We just finished 
the lesson; we didn't talk any baseball that day; and we 
passed the alcove where Mr. Miller's men's Bible class met, 
with Reverend Schultz sitting in the middle of them like he 
did every Sunday, like he was just a plain man like the rest 
of them yet kind of bulging out from among the others like 
he didn't have to move or speak to keep them reminded that 
he wasn't a plain man; and I would always think about April 
Fool's one year when Miss Callaghan called the roll and then 
stepped down from her desk and said, "Now I'm going to 
be a pupil today," and took a vacant seat and called out a 
name and made them go to her desk and hold the lesson and 
it would have been fun if you could have just quit remem- 
bering that tomorrow wouldn't be April Fool's and the day 
after that wouldn't be either. And Uncle Willy was sitting 
by Reverend Schultz looking littler than ever, and I thought 
about one day last summer when they took a country man 
named Bundren to the asylum at Jackson but he wasn't too 
crazy not to know where he was going, sitting there in the 
coach window handcuffed to a fat deputy sheriff that was 
smoking a cigar. 

Then Sunday school was over and we went out to wait 
for him, to go to the store and eat the ice cream. And he 
didn't come out. He didn't come out until church was over 
too, the first time that he had ever stayed for church that 
any of us knew of that anybody knew of, papa told me 
later coming out with Mrs. Merridew on one side of him 
and Reverend Schultz on the other still holding him by the 
arm and he looking around at us again with his eyes saying 



Uncle Willy 229 

again only desperate now: "Fellows, what's this? What's 
this, fellows?" and Reverend Schultz shoving him into Mrs. 
Merridew's car and Airs. Merridew saying, loud, like she was 
in the pulpit: "Now, Mr. Christian, I'm going to take you 
right out to my house and I'm going to fix you a nice glass 
of cool lemonade and then we will have a nice chicken dinner 
and then you are going to take a nice nap in my hammock 
and then Brother and Sister Schultz are coming out and we 
will have some nice ice cream," and Uncle Willy saying, 
"No. Wait, ma'am, wait! Wait! I got to go to the store and 
fill a prescription I promised this morning " 

So they shoved him into the car and him looking back at 
us where we stood there; he went out of sight like that, 
sitting beside Mrs. Merridew in the car like Darl Bundren 
and the deputy on the train, and I reckon she was holding 
his wrist and I reckon she never needed any handcuffs and 
Uncle Willy giving us that single look of amazed and des- 
perate despair. 

Because now he was already an hour past the time for his 
needle and that afternoon when he finally slipped away from 
Mrs. Merridew he was five hours past it and so he couldn't 
even get the key into the lock, and so Mrs. Merridew and 
Reverend Schultz caught him and this time he wasn't talking 
or looking either: he was trying to get away like a half-wild 
cat tries to get away. They took him to his home and Mrs. 
Merridew telegraphed his sister in Texas and Uncle Willy 
didn't come to town for three days because Mrs. Merridew 
and Mrs. Hovis took turn about staying in the house with 
him day and night until his sister could get there. That was 
vacation then and we played the game on Monday and that 
afternoon the store was still locked and Tuesday it was still 
locked, and so it was not until Wednesday afternoon and 
Uncle Willy was running fast. 

He didn't have any shirt on and he hadn't shaved and he 



230 The Village 

could not get the key into the lock at all, panting and whim- 
pering and saying, "She went to sleep at last; she went to 
sleep at last," until one of us took the key and unlocked the 
door. We had to light the little stove too and fill the needle 
and this time it didn't go into his arm slow, it looked like 
he was trying to jab it clean through the bone. He didn't go 
back home. He said he wouldn't need anything to sleep on 
and he gave us the money and let us out the back door and 
we bought the sandwiches and the bottle of coffee from the 
cafe and we left him there. 

Then the next day, it was Mrs. Merridew and Reverend 
Schultz and three more ladies; they had the marshal break in 
the door and Mrs. Merridew holding Uncle Willy by the 
back of the neck and shaking him and kind of whispering, 
"You little wretch! You little wretch! Slip off from me, will 
you?" and Reverend Schultz saying, "Now, Sister; now, 
Sister; control yourself," and the other ladies hollering Mr. 
Christian and Uncle Willy and Willy, according to how old 
they were or how long they had lived in Jefferson. It didn't 
take them long. 

The sister got there from Texas that night and we would 
walk past the house and see the ladies on the front porch or 
going in and out, and now and then Reverend Schultz kind 
of bulging out from among them like he would out of Mr. 
Miller's Bible class, and we could crawl up behind the hedge 
and hear them through the window, hear Uncle Willy cry- 
ing and cussing and fighting to get out of the bed and the 
ladies saying, "Now, Mr. Christian; now, Uncle Willy," 
and "Now, Bubber," too, since his sister was there; and 
Uncle Willy crying and praying and cussing. And then it 
was Friday, and he gave up. We could hear them holding 
him in the bed; I reckon this was his last go-round, because 
none of them had time to talk now; and then we heard him, 
his voice weak but clear and his breath going in and out. 



Uncle Willy 231 

"Wait," he said. "Wait! I will ask it one more time. Won't 
you please quit? Won't you please go away? Won't you 
please go to hell and just let me come on at my own gait?" 

"No, Mr. Christian," Mrs. Merridew said. "We are doing 
this to save you." 

For a minute we didn't hear anything. Then we heard 
Uncle Willy lay back in the bed, kind of flop back. 

"All right," he said. "All right." 

It was like one of those sheep they would sacrifice back 
in the Bible. It was like it had climbed up onto the altar 
itself and flopped onto its back with its throat held up and 
said: "All right. Come on and get it over with. Cut my 
damn throat and go away and let me lay quiet in the fire." 

Ill 

HE WAS SICK for a long time. They took him to Memphis 
and they said that he was going to die. The store stayed 
locked all the time now, and after a few weeks we didn't 
even keep up the league. It wasn't just the balls and the bats. 
It wasn't that. We would pass the store and look at the big 
old lock on it and at the windows you couldn't even see 
through, couldn't even see inside where we used to eat the 
ice cream and tell him who beat and who made the good 
plays and him sitting there on his stool with the little stove 
burning and the dope boiling and bubbling and the needle 
waiting in his hand, looking at us with his eyes blinking 
and all run together behind his glasses so you couldn't even 
tell where the pupil was like you can in most eyes. And the 
niggers and the country folks that used to trade with him 
coming up and looking at the lock too, and asking us how 
he was and when he would come home and open up again. 
Because even after the store opened again, they would not 
trade with the clerk that Mrs. Merridew and Reverend 



232 The Village 

Schultz put in the store. Uncle Willy's sister said not to 
bother about the store, to let it stay shut because she would 
take care of Uncle Willy if he got well. But Mrs. Merridew 
said no, she not only aimed to cure Uncle Willy, she was 
going to give him a complete rebirth, not only into real 
Christianity but into the practical world too, with a place 
in it waiting for him so he could hold up his head not only 
with honor but pride too among his fellow men; she said 
that at first her only hope had been to fix it so he would not 
have to face his Maker slave body and soul to morphine, 
but now since his constitution was stronger than anybody 
could have believed, she was going to see that he assumed 
that position in the world which his family's name entitled 
him to before he degraded it. 

She and Reverend Schultz found the clerk. He had 
been in Jefferson about six months. He had letters 
to the church, but nobody except Reverend Schultz and 
Mrs. Merridew knew anything about him. That is, they 
made him the clerk in Uncle Willy's store; nobody else 
knew anything about him at all. But Uncle Willy's old 
customers wouldn't trade with him. And we didn't either. 
Not that we had much trade to give him and we certainly 
didn't expect him to give us any ice cream and I don't 
reckon we would have taken it if he had offered it to us. 
Because it was not Uncle Willy, and pretty soon it wasn't 
even the same ice cream because the first thing the clerk 
did after he washed the windows was to fire old Job, only 
old Job refused to quit. He stayed around the store any- 
how, mumbling to himself and the clerk would run him 
out the front door and old Job would go around to the 
back and come in and the clerk would find him again and 
cuss him, whispering, cussing old Job good even if he did 
have letters to the church; he went and swore out a war- 
rant and the marshal told old Job he would have to stay out 



Uncle Willy 233 

of the store. Then old Job moved across the street. He 
would sit on the curb all day where he could watch the 
door and every time the clerk came in sight old Job would 
holler, "I ghy tell um! I ghy do hit!" So we even quit pass- 
ing the store. We would cut across the corner not to pass 
it, with the windows clean now and the new town trade the 
clerk had built up he had a lot of trade now going in 
and out, just stopping long enough to ask old Job about 
Uncle Willy, even though we had already got what news 
came from Memphis about him every day and we knew 
that old Job would riot know, would not be able to get it 
straight even if someone told him, since he never did believe 
that Uncle Willy was sick, he just believed that Mrs. Merri- 
dew had taken him away somewhere by main force and 
was holding him in another bed somewhere so he couldn't 
get up and come back home; and old Job sitting on the 
curb and blinking up at us with his little watery red eyes 
like Uncle Willy would and saying, U I ghy tell um! Holting 
him up dar whilst whipper-snappin' trash makin' free wid 
Marse Hoke Christian's sto. I ghy tell um!" 

IV 

UNCLE WILLY didn't die. One day he came home with his 
skin the color of tallow and weighing about ninety pounds 
now and with his eyes like broken eggs still but dead eggs, 
eggs that had been broken so long now that they didn't 
even smell dead any more until you looked at them and 
saw that they were anything in the world except dead. That 
was after he got to know us again. I don't mean that he had 
forgotten about us exactly. It was like he still liked us as 
boys, only he had never seen us before and so he would have 
to learn our names and which faces the names belonged to. 
His sister had gone back to Texas now, because Mrs. Merri- 



234 The Village 

dew was going to look after him until he was completely 
recovered, completely cured. Yes. Cured. 

I remember that first afternoon when he came to town 
and we walked into the store and Uncle Willy looked at the 
clean windows that you could see through now and at the 
town customers that never had traded with him, and at 
the clerk and said, "You're my clerk, hey?" and the clerk 
begun to talk about Mrs. Merridew and Reverend Schultz 
and Uncle Willy said, "All right, all right," and now he ate 
some ice cream too, standing at the counter with us like he 
was a customer too and still looking around the store while 
he ate the ice cream, with those eyes that were not dead at 
all and he said, "Looks like you been getting more work out 
of my damned old nigger than I could/' and the clerk began 
to say something else about Mrs. Merridew and Uncle Willy 
said, "All right, all right. Just get a holt of Job right away 
and tell him I am going to expect him to be here every day 
and that I want him to keep this store looking like this from 
now on." Then we went on behind the prescription case, 
with Uncle Willy looking around here too, at how the clerk 
had it neated up, with a big new lock on the cabinet where 
the drugs and such were kept, with those eyes that wouldn't 
anybody call dead, I don't care who he was, and said, "Step 
up there and tell that fellow I want my keys." But it wasn't 
the stove and the needle. Mrs. Merridew had busted both 
of them that day. But it wasn't that anyway, because the 
clerk came back and begun to talk about Mrs. Merridew 
and Reverend Schultz, and Uncle Willy listening and say- 
ing, "All right, all right," and we never had seen him laugh 
before and his face didn't change now but we knew that he 
was laughing behind it. Then we went out. He turned sharp 
off the square, down Nigger Row to Sonny Barger's store 
and I took the money and bought the Jamaica ginger from 
Sonny and caught up with them and we went home with 



Uncle Willy 235 

Uncle Willy and we sat in the pasture while he drank the 
Jamaica ginger and practiced our names some more. 

And that night we met him where he said. He had the 
wheelbarrow and the crowbar and we broke open the back 
door and then the cabinet with the new lock on it and got 
the can of alcohol and carried it to Uncle Willy's and buried 
it in the barn. It had almost three gallons in it and he didn't 
come to town at all for four weeks and he was sick again, 
and Mrs. Merridew storming into the house, jerking out 
drawers and flinging things out of closets and Uncle Willy 
lying in the bed and watching her with those eyes that were 
a long way from being dead. But she couldn't find anything 
because it was all gone now, and besides she didn't know 
what it was she was looking for because she was looking for 
a needle. And the night Uncle Willy was up again we took 
the crowbar and went back to the store and when we went 
to the cabinet we found that it was already open and Uncle 
Willy's stool sitting in the door and a quart bottle of alcohol 
on the stool in plain sight, and that was all. And then I knew 
that the clerk knew who got the alcohol before but I didn't 
know why he hadn't told Mrs. Merridew until two years 
later. 

I didn't know that for two years, and Uncle Willy a year 
now going to Memphis every Saturday in the car his sister 
had given him. I wrote the letter with Uncle Willy looking 
over my shoulder and dictating, about how his health was 
improving but not as fast as the doctor seemed to want and 
that the doctor said he ought not to walk back and forth to 
the store and so a car, not an expensive car, just a small car 
that he could drive himself or maybe find a negro boy to 
drive for him if his sister thought he ought not to: and she 
sent the money and he got a burr-headed nigger boy about 
my size named Secretary to drive it for him. That is, Secre- 
tary said he could drive a car; certainly he and Uncle Willy 



236 The Village 

both learned on the night trips they would make back into 
the hill country to buy corn whisky and Secretary learned to 
drive in Memphis pretty quick, too, because they went every 
Saturday, returning Monday morning with Uncle Willy 
insensible on the back seat, with his clothes smelling of that 
smell whose source I was not to discover at first hand for 
some years yet, and two or three half-empty bottles and a 
little notebook full of telephone numbers and names like 
Lorine and Billie and Jack. I didn't know it for two years, 
not until that Monday morning when the sheriff came and 
padlocked and sealed what was left of Uncle Willy's stock 
and when they tried to find the clerk they couldn't even 
find out what train he had left town on; a hot morning in 
July and Uncle Willy sprawled out on the back seat, and on 
the front seat with Secretary a woman twice as big as Uncle 
Willy, in a red hat and a pink dress and a dirty white fur 
coat over the back of the seat and two straw suitcases on the 
fenders, with hair the color of a brand new brass hydrant 
bib and her cheeks streaked with mascara and caked powder 
where she had sweated. 

It was worse than if he had started dope again. You would 
have thought he had brought smallpox to town. I remember 
how when Mrs. Merridew telephoned Mamma that after- 
noon you could hear her from away out at her house, over 
the wire, clean out to the back door and the kitchen: "Mar- 
ried! Married! Whore! Whore! Whore!" like the clerk used 
to cuss old Job, and so maybe the church can go just so 
far and maybe the folks that are in it are the ones that know 
the best or are entitled to say when to disconnect religion 
for a minute or two. And Papa was cussing too, not cussing 
anybody; I knew he was not cussing Uncle Willy or even 
Uncle Willy's new wife, just like I knew that I wished Mrs. 
Merridew could have been there to hear him. Only I reckon 
if she had been there she couldn't have heard anything be- 



Uncle Willy 237 

cause they said she still had on a house dress when she went 
and snatched Reverend Schultz into her car and went out 
to Uncle Willy's, where he was still in bed like always on 
Monday and Tuesday, and his new wife run Mrs. Merridew 
and Reverend Schultz out of the house with the wedding 
license like it was a gun or a knife. And I remember how all 
that afternoon Uncle Willy lived on a little quiet side 
street where the other houses were all little new ones that 
country people who had moved to town within the last fif- 
teen years, like mail carriers and little storekeepers, lived 
how all that afternoon mad-looking ladies with sun-bonnets 
on crooked came busting out of that little quiet street 
dragging the little children and the grown girls with them, 
heading for the mayor's office and Reverend Schultz's house, 
and how the young men and the boys that didn't work and 
some of the men that did would drive back and forth past 
Uncle Willy's house to look at her sitting on the porch smok- 
ing cigarettes and drinking something out of a glass; and how 
she came down town the next day to shop, in a black hat 
now and a red-and-white striped dress so that she looked 
like a great big stick of candy and three times as big as 
Uncle Willy now, walking along the street with men popping 
out of the stores when she passed like she was stepping on 
a line of spring triggers and both sides of her behind kind 
of pumping up and down inside the dress until somebody 
hollered, threw back his head and squalled: "YIPPEEE!" 
like that and she kind of twitched her behind without even 
stopping and then they hollered sure enough. 

And the next day the wire came from his sister, and Papa 
for the lawyer and Mrs. Merridew for the witness went out 
there and Uncle Willy's wife showed them the license and 
told them to laugh that off, that Manuel Street or not she 
was married as good and tight as any high-nosed bitch in 
Jefferson or anywhere else and Papa saying, "Now, Mrs. 



238 The Village 

Merridew; now, Mrs. Christian," and he told Uncle Willy's 
wife how Uncle Willy was bankrupt now and might even 
lose the house too, and his wife said how about that sister 
in Texas, was Papa going to tell her that the oil business was 
bankrupt too and not to make her laugh. So they telegraphed 
the sister again and the thousand dollars came and they had 
to give Uncle Willy's wife the car too. She went back to 
Memphis that same afternoon, driving across the square with 
the straw suitcases, in a black lace dress now and already 
beginning to sweat again under her new makeup because it 
was still hot, and stopping where the men were waiting at 
the post office for the afternoon mail and she said, "Come 
on up to Manuel Street and see me sometime and I will show 
you hicks what you and this town can do to yourselves and 
one another." 

And that afternoon Mrs. Merridew moved back into 
Uncle Willy's house and Papa said the letter she wrote 
Uncle Willy's sister had eleven pages to it because Papa said 
she would never forgive Uncle Willy for getting bankrupted. 
We could hear her from behind the hedge: "You're crazy, 
Mr. Christian; crazy. I have tried to save you and make 
something out of you besides a beast but now my patience 
is exhausted. I am going to give you one more chance. I am 
going to take you to Keeley and if that fails, I am going to 
.take you myself to your sister and force her to commit you 
to an asylum." And the sister sent papers from Texas declar- 
ing that Uncle Willy was incompetent and making Mrs. 
Merridew his guardian and trustee, and Mrs. Merridew took 
him to the Keeley in Memphis. And that was all. 

V 

THAT is, I reckon they thought that that was all, that this 
lime Uncle Willy would surely die. Because even Papa 



Uncle Willy 239 

thought that he was crazy now because even Papa said that 
if it hadn't been for Uncle Willy I would not have run 
away, and therefore I didn't run away, I was tolled away 
by a lunatic; it wasn't Papa, it was Uncle Robert that said 
that he wasn't crazy because any man who could sell Jeffer- 
son real estate for cash while shut up in r, Keeley institute 
wasn't crazy or even drunk. Because they didn't even know 
that he was out of Keeley, even Mrs. Merridew didn't know 
it until he was gone two days and they couldn't find him. 
They never did find him or find out how he got out and 
I didn't either until I got the letter from him to take the 
Memphis bus on a certain day and he would meet me at a 
stop on the edge of Memphis. I didn't even realize that I had 
not seen Secretary or old Job either in two weeks. But he 
didn't toll me away. I went because I wanted to, because he 
was the finest man I ever knew, because he had had fun all 
his life in spite of what they had tried to do to him or with 
him, and I hoped that maybe if I could stay with him a 
while I could learn how to, so I could still have fun too when 
I had to get old. Or maybe I knew more than that, without 
knowing it, like I knew that I would do anything he asked 
me to do, no matter what it was, just like I helped him break 
into the store for the alcohol when he took it for granted 
that I would without asking me to at all and then helped 
him hide it from Mrs. Merridew. Maybe I even knew what 
old Job was going to do. Not what he did do, but that he 
would do it if the occasion arose, and that this would have 
to be Uncle Willy's last go-round and if I wasn't there it 
would be just him against all the old terrified and timid cling- 
ing to dull and rule-ridden breathing which Jefferson was to 
him and which, even though he had escaped Jefferson, old 
Job still represented. 

So I cut some grass that week and I had almost two dollars. 
I took the bus on the day he said and he was waiting for me 



240 The Village 

at the edge of town, in a Ford now without any top on it and 
you could still read the chalk letters, $85 cash on the wind- 
shield, and a brand new tent folded up in the back of it and 
Uncle Willy and old Job in the front seat, and Uncle Willy 
looked fine with a checked cap new except for a big oil 
stain, with the bill turned round behind and a pair of goggles 
cocked up on the front of it and his celluloid collar freshly 
washed and no tie in it and his nose peeling with sunburn 
and his eyes bright behind his glasses. I would have gone 
with him anywhere; I would do it over again right now, 
knowing what was going to happen. He would not have to 
ask me now any more than he did then. So I got on top of the 
tent and we didn't go toward town, we went the other way. 
I asked where we were going but he just said wait, rushing 
the little car along like he couldn't get there quick enough 
himself, and I could tell from his voice that this was fine, this 
was the best yet, better than anybody else could have thought 
about doing, and old Job hunched down in the front seat, 
holding on with both hands and yelling at Uncle Willy about 
going so fast. Yes. Maybe i knew from old Job even then 
that Uncle Willy may have escaped Jefferson but he had 
just dodged it; he hadn't gotten away. 

Then we came to the sign, the arrow that said Airport, and 
we turned and I said: "What? What is it?" but Uncle Willy 
just said: "Wait; just wait," like he couldn't hardly wait 
himself, hunched over the wheel with his white hair blow- 
ing under his cap and his collar riding up behind so you 
could see his neck between the collar and the shirt; and old 
Job saying (Oh yes, I could tell even then): "He got hit, all 
right. He done done hit. But I done tole him. Nemmine. 
I done warned him." Then we came to the airport and Uncle 
Willy stopped quick and pointed up without even getting 
out and said, "Look." 

It was an airplane flying around and Uncle Willy running 



Uncle Willy 241 

up and down the edge of the field waving his handkerchief 
until it saw him and came down and landed and rolled up to 
us, a little airplane with a two-cylinder engine. It was Secre- 
tary, in another new checked cap and goggles like Uncle 
Willy's and they told me how Uncle Willy had bought one 
for old Job too but old Job wouldn't wear it. And that night 
we stayed in a little tourist camp about two miles away and 
he had a cap and goggles all ready for me too; and then I 
knew why they hadn't been able to find him Uncle Willy 
told me how he had bought the airplane with some of the 
money he had sold his house for after his sister saved it 
because she had been born in it too, but that Captain Bean 
at the airport wouldn't teach him to run it himself because 
he would need a permit from a doctor ("By God," Uncle 
Willy said, "damn if these Republicans and Democrats and 
XYZ's ain't going to have it soon where a man can't even 
flush the toilet in his own bathroom.") and he couldn't go 
to the doctor because the doctor might want to send him 
back to the Keeley or tell Mrs. Merridew where he was. So 
he just let Secretary learn to run it first and now Secretary 
had been running it for two weeks, which was almost four- 
teen days longer than he had practiced on the car before 
they started out with it. So Uncle Willy bought the car and 
tent and camping outfit yesterday and tomorrow we were 
going to start. We would go first to a place named Renfro 
where nobody knew us and where there was a big pasture 
that Uncle Willy had found out about and we would stay 
there a week while Secretary taught Uncle Willy to run the 
airplane. Then we would head west. When we ran out of 
the house money we would stop at a town and take up pas- 
sengers and make enough to buy gasoline and food to get 
to the next town, Uncle Willy and Secretary in the airplane 
and me and old Job in the car; and old Job sitting in a chair 
against the wall, blinking at Uncle Willy with his little weak 



242 The Village 

red sullen eyes, and Uncle Willy reared up on the cot with 
his cap and goggles still on and his collar without any tie (it 
wasn't fastened to his shirt at all: just buttoned around his 
neck) sometimes sideways and sometimes even backward 
like an Episcopal minister's, and his eyes bright behind his 
glasses and his voice bright and fine. "And by Christmas we 
will be in California!" he said. "Think of that. Calif ornia!" 



VI 

So HOW could they say that I had to be tolled away? How 
could they? I suppose I knew then that it wouldn't work, 
couldn't work, that it was too fine to be true. I reckon I even 
knew how it was going to end just from the glum way Secre- 
tary acted whenever Uncle Willy talked about learning to 
run the airplane himself, just as I knew from the way old Job 
looked at Uncle Willy, not what he did of course, but what 
he would do if the occasion arose. Because I was the other 
white one. I was white, even if old Job and Secretary were 
both older than me, so it would be all right; I could do it all 
right. It was like I knew even then that, no matter what 
might happen to him, he wouldn't ever die and I thought 
that if I could just learn to live like he lived, no matter what 
might happen to me I wouldn't ever die either. 

So we left the next morning, just after daylight because 
there was another fool rule that Secretary would have to 
stay in sight of the field until they gave him a license to go 
away. We filled the airplane with gas and Secretary went 
up in it just like he was going up to practice. Then Uncle 
Willy got us into the car quick because he said the airplane 
could make sixty miles an hour and so Secretary would be 
at Renfro a long while before we got there. But when we 
got to Renfro Secretary wasn't there and we put the tent up 
and ate dinner and he still didn't come and Uncle Willy 



Uncle Willy 243 

beginning to cuss and we ate supper and dark came but Sec- 
retary didn't and Uncle Willy was cussing good now. He 
didn't come until the next day. We heard him and ran out 
and watched him fly right over us, coming from the opposite 
direction of Memphis, going fast and us all hollering and 
waving. But he went on, with Uncle Willy jumping up and 
down and cussing, and we were loading the tent into the car 
to try to catch him when he came back. We didn't hear him 
at all now and we could see the propeller because it wasn't 
running and it looked like Secretary wasn't even going to 
light in the pasture but he was going to light in some trees 
on the edge of it. But he skinned by them and kind of 
bumped down and we ran up and found him still sitting in 
the airplane with his eyes closed and his face the color of 
wood ashes and he said, "Captin, will you please tell me 

where to find Ren " before he even opened his eyes to 

see who we were. He said he had landed seven times yester- 
day and it wouldn't be Renfro and they would tell him how 
to get to Renfro and he would go there and that wouldn't 
be Renfro either and he had slept in the airplane last night 
and he hadn't eaten since we left Memphis because he had 
spent the three dollars Uncle Willy gave him for gasoline and 
if he hadn't run out of gas when he did he wouldn't never 
have found us. 

Uncle Willy wanted me to go to town and get some more 
gas so he could start learning to run it right away but Secre- 
tary wouldn't. He just refused. He said the airplane belonged 
to Uncle Willy and he reckoned he belonged to Uncle Willy 
too, leastways until he got back home, but that he had flown 
all he could stand for a while. So Uncle Willy started the 
next morning. 

I thought for a while that I would have to throw old Job 
down and hold him and him hollering, "Don't you git in dat 
thing!" and still hollering, "I ghy tell um! I ghy tell urn!" 



244 The Village 

while we watched the airplane with Secretary and Uncle 
Willy in it kind of jump into the air and then duck down 
like Uncle Willy was trying to take the short cut to China 
and then duck up again and get to going pretty straight at 
last and fly around the pasture and then turn down to land, 
and every day old Job hollering at Uncle Willy and field 
hands coming up out of the fields and folks in wagons and 
walking stopping in the road to watch them and the airplane 
coming down, passing us with Uncle Willy and Secretary 
side by side and looking exactly alike, I don't mean in the 
face but exactly alike like two tines of a garden fork look 
exactly like just before they chop into the ground; we could 
see Secretary's eyes and his mouth run out so you could 
almost hear him saying, "Hooooooooo!" and Uncle Willy's 
glasses shining and his hair blowing from under his cap and 
his celluloid collar that he washed every night before he 
went to bed and no tie in it and they would go by, fast, and 
old Job hollering, "You git outer dar! You git outer dat 
thing!" and we could hear Secretary too: "Turn hit loose, 
Unker Willy! Turn hit loosel " and the airplane would go on, 
ducking up one second and down the next and with one wing 
higher than the other one second and lower die next and 
then it would be traveling sideways and maybe it would hit 
the ground sideways the first time, with a kind of crashing 
sound and the dust spurting up and then bounce off again 
and Secretary hollering, "Unker Willy! Turn loose!" and at 
night in the tent Uncle Willy's eyes would still be shining 
and he would be too excited to stop talking and go to sleep 
and I don't believe he even remembered that he had not 
taken a drink since he first thought about buying the air- 
plane. 

Oh yes, I know what they said about me after it was all 
over, what Papa said when he and Mrs. Merridew got there 
that morning, about me being the white one, almost a man, 



Uncle Willy 245 

and Secretary and old Job just irresponsible niggers, yet it 
was old Job and Secretary who tried to prevent him. Because 
that was it; that was what they couldn't understand. 

I remember the last night and Secretary and old Job both 
working on him, when old Job finally made Secretary tell 
Uncle Willy that he would never learn to fly, and Uncle 
Willy stopped talking and stood up and looked at Secretary. 
"Didn't you learn to run it in two weeks?" he said. Secretary 
said yes. "You, a damn, trifling, worthless, ignorant, burr- 
headed nigger?" and Secretary said yes. "And me that grad- 
uated from a university and ran a fifteen-thousand-dollar 
business for forty years, yet you tell me I can't learn to run 
a damn little fifteen-hundred-dollar airplane?" Then he 
looked at me. "Don't you believe I can run it?" he said. And 
I looked at him and I said, "Yes. I believe you can do any- 
thing." 

VII 

AND NOW I can't tell them. I can't say it. Papa told me once 
that somebody said that if you know it you can say it. Or 
maybe the man that said that didn't count fourteen-year-old 
boys. Because I must have known it was going to happen. 
And Uncle Willy must have known it too, known that the 
moment would come. It was like we both had known it and 
we didn't even have to compare notes, tell one another that 
we did: he not needing to say that day in Memphis, "Come 
with me so you will be there when I will need you," and me 
not needing to say, "Let me come so I can be there when 
you will." 

Because old Job telephoned Mrs. Merridew. He waited 
until we were asleep and slipped out and walked all the way 
to town and telephoned her; he didn't have any money and 
he probably never telephoned in his life before, yet he tele- 



246 The Village 

phoned her and the next morning he came up running in the 
dew (the town, the telephone, was five miles away) just as 
Secretary was getting the engine started and I knew what he 
had done even before he got close enough to holler, running 
and stumbling along slow across the pasture, hollering, "Holt 
um! Holt um! Dey'll be here any minute! Jest holt um ten 
minutes en dey'll be here," and I knew and I ran and met him 
and now I did hold him and him fighting and hitting at me 
and still hollering at Uncle Willy in the airplane. "You tele- 
phoned?" I said. "Her? Her? Told her where he is?" 

"Yes," Uncle Job hollered. "En she say she gonter git yo 
pappy and start right away and be here by six o'clock," and 
me holding him; he felt like a handful of scrawny dried sticks 
and I could hear his lungs wheezing and I could feel his heart, 
and Secretary came up running too and old Job begun to 
holler at Secretary, "Git him outer dar! Dey comin! Dey be 
here any minute if you can jest holt um!" and Secretary 
saying, "Which? Which?" and old Job hollered at him to 
run and hold the airplane and Secretary turned and I tried to 
grab his leg but I couldn't and I could see Uncle Willy look- 
ing toward us and Secretary running toward the airplane 
and I got onto my knees and waved and I was hollering too. 
I don't reckon Uncle Willy could hear me for the engine. 
But I tell you he didn't need to, because we knew, we both 
knew; and so I knelt there and held old Job on the ground 
and we saw the airplane start, with Secretary still running 
after it, and jump into the air and duck down and then jump 
up again and then it looked like it had stopped high in the 
air above the trees where we thought Secretary was fixing to 
land that first day before it ducked down beyond them and 
went out of sight and Secretary was already running and so 
it was only me and Uncle Job that had to get up and start. 

Oh, yes, I know what they said about me; I knew it all that 
afternoon while we were going home with the hearse in front 



Uncle Willy 247 

and Secretary and old Job in the Ford next and Papa and me 
in our car coming last and Jefferson getting nearer and 
nearer; and then all of a sudden I began to cry. Because the 
dying wasn't anything, it just touched the outside of you 
that you wore around with you for comfort and convenience 
like you do your clothes: it was because the old garments, 
the clothes that were not worth anything had betrayed one 
of the two of us and the one betrayed was me, and Papa with 
his other arm around my shoulders now, saying, "Now, 
now; I didn't mean that. You didn't do it. Nobody blames 
you." 

You see? That was it. I did help Uncle Willy. He knows 
I did. He knows he couldn't have done it without me. He 
knows I did; we didn't even have to look at one another 
when he went. That's it. 

And now they will never understand, not even Papa, and 
there is only me to try to tell them and how can I ever tell 
them, and make them understand? How can I? 



Mule in the Yard 



IT WAS a gray day in late January, though not cold because 
of the fog. Old Het, just walked in from the poorhouse, ran 
down the hall toward the kitchen, shouting in a strong, 
bright, happy voice. She was about seventy probably, though 
by her own counting, calculated from the ages of various 
housewives in the town from brides to grandmothers whom 
she claimed to have nursed in infancy, she would have to be 
around a hundred and at least triplets. Tall, lean, fog-beaded, 
in tennis shoes and a long rat-colored cloak trimmed with 
what forty or fifty years ago had been fur, a modish though 
not new purple toque set upon her headrag and carrying 
(time was when she made her weekly rounds from kitchen 
to kitchen carrying a brocaded carpetbag though since the 
advent of the ten-cent stores the carpetbag became an endless 
succession of the convenient paper receptacles with which 
they supply their customers for a few cents) the shopping- 
bag, she ran into the kitchen and shouted with strong and 
childlike pleasure: "Miss Mannie! Mule in de yard!" 

Mrs. Hait, stooping to the stove, in the act of drawing 
from it a scuttle of live ashes, jerked upright; clutching the 
scuttle, she glared at old Het, then she too spoke at once, 
strong too, immediate. "Them sons of bitches," she said. She 
left the kitchen, not running exactly, yet with a kind of out- 
raged celerity, carrying the scuttle a compact woman of 

249 



250 The Village 

forty-odd, with an air of indomitable yet relieved bereave- 
ment, as though that which had relicted her had been a 
woman and a not particularly valuable one at that. She wore 
a calico wrapper and a sweater coat, and a man's felt hat 
which they in the town knew had belonged to her ten years' 
dead husband. But the man's shoes had not belonged to him. 
They were high shoes which buttoned, with toes like small 
tulip bulbs, and in the town they knew that she had bought 
them new for herself. She and old Het ran down the kitchen 
steps and into the fog. That's why it was not cold: as though 
there lay supine and prisoned between earth and mist the long 
winter night's suspiration of the sleeping town in dark, close 
rooms the slumber and the rousing; the stale waking ther- 
mostatic, by re-heating heat-engendered: it lay like a scum of 
cold grease upon the steps and the wooden entrance to the 
basement and upon the narrow plank walk which led to a 
shed building in the corner of the yard: upon these planks, 
running and still carrying the scuttle of live ashes, Mrs. Hait 
skated viciously. 

"Watch out! " old Het, footed securely by her rubber soles, 
cried happily. "Dey in de front!" Mrs. Hait did not fall. She 
did not even pause. She took in the immediate scene with 
one cold glare and was running again when there appeared at 
the corner of the house and apparently having been born 
before their eyes of the fog itself, a mule. It looked taller 
than a giraffe. Longheaded, with a flying halter about its 
scissorlike ears, it rushed down upon them with violent and 
apparitionlike suddenness. 

"Dar hit!" old Het cried, waving the shopping-bag. 
"Hoo!" Mrs. Hait whirled. Again she skidded savagely on 
the greasy planks as she and the mule rushed parallel with 
one another toward the shed building, from whose open 
doorway there now projected the static and astonished face 
of a cow. To the cow the fog-born mule doubtless looked 



Mule in the Yard 251 

taller and more incredibly sudden than a giraffe even, and 
apparently bent upon charging right through the shed as 
though it were made of straw or were purely and simply 
mirage. The cow's head likewise had a quality transient and 
abrupt and unmundane. It vanished, sucked into invisibility 
like a match flame, though the mind knew and the reason 
insisted that she had withdrawn into the shed, from which, 
as proof's burden, there came an indescribable sound of 
shock and alarm by shed and beast engendered, analogous to 
a single note from a profoundly struck lyre or harp. Toward 
this sound Mrs. Hait sprang, immediately, as if by pure reflex, 
as though in invulnerable compact of female with female 
against a world of mule and man. She and the mule con- 
verged upon the shed at top speed, the heavy scuttle poised 
lightly in her hand to hurl. Of course it did not take this 
long, and likewise it was the mule which refused the gambit. 
Old Het was still shouting "Dar hit! Dar hit!" when it 
swerved and rushed at her where she stood tall as a stove 
pipe, holding the shopping-bag which she swung at the beast 
as it rushed past her and vanished beyond the other corner 
of the house as though sucked back into the fog which had 
produced it, profound and instantaneous and without any 
sound. 

With that unhasteful celerity Mrs. Hait turned and set 
the scuttle down on the brick coping of the cellar entrance 
and she and old Het turned the corner of the house in time to 
see the now wraithlike mule at the moment when its course 
converged with that of a choleric-looking rooster and eight 
Rhode Island Red hens emerging from beneath the house. 
Then for an instant its progress assumed the appearance and 
trappings of an apotheosis: hell-born and hell-returning, in 
the act of dissolving completely into the fog, it seemed to rise 
vanishing into a sunless and dimensionless medium borne 
upon and enclosed by small winged goblins. 



252 The Village 

"Dey's mo in de front!" old Het cried. 

"Them sons of bitches," Mrs. Hait said, again in that grim, 
prescient voice without rancor or heat. It was not the mules 
to which she referred; it was not even the owner of them. It 
was her whole town-dwelling history as dated from that 
April dawn ten years ago when what was left of Hait had 
been gathered from the mangled remains of five mules and 
several feet of new Manila rope on a blind curve of the rail- 
road just out of town; the geographical hap of her very 
home; the very components of her bereavement the mules, 
the defunct husband, and the owner of them. His name was 
Snopes; in the town they knew about him too how he 
bought his stock at the Memphis market and brought it to 
Jefferson and sold it to farmers and widows and orphans 
black and white, for whatever he could contrive down to a 
certain figure; and about how (usually in the dead season of 
winter) teams and even small droves of his stock would es- 
cape from the fenced pasture where he kept them and, tied 
one to another with sometimes quite new hemp rope (and 
which item Snopes included in the subsequent claim), would 
be annihilated by freight trains on the same blind curve 
which was to be the scene of Halt's exit from this world; 
once a town wag sent him through the mail a printed train 
schedule for the division. A squat, pasty man perennially tie- 
less and with a strained, harried expression, at stated intervals 
he passed athwart the peaceful and somnolent life of the 
town in dust and uproar, his advent heralded by shouts and 
cries, his passing marked by a yellow cloud filled with toss- 
ing jug-shaped heads and clattering hooves and the same for- 
lorn and earnest cries of the drovers; and last of all and well 
back out of the dust, Snopes himself moving at a harried and 
panting trot, since it was said in the town that he was deathly 
afraid of the very beasts in which he cleverly dealt. 

The path which he must follow from the railroad station 



Mule in the Yard 253 

to his pasture crossed the edge of town near Halt's home; 
Hait and Mrs. Hait had not been in the house a week before 
they waked one morning to find it surrounded by galloping 
mules and the air filled with the shouts and cries of the dro- 
vers. But it was not until that April dawn some years later, 
when those who reached the scene first found what might be 
termed foreign matter among the mangled mules and the 
savage fragments of new rope, that the town suspected that 
Hait stood in any closer relationship to Snopes and the mules 
than that- of helping at periodical intervals to drive them out 
of his front yard. After that they believed that they knew; in 
a three days' recess of interest, surprise, and curiosity they 
watched to see if Snopes would try to collect on Hait also. 

But they learned only that the adjuster appeared and called 
upon Mrs. Hait and that a few days later she cashed a check 
for eight thousand five hundred dollars, since this was back 
in the old halcyon days when even the companies considered 
their southern branches and divisions the legitimate prey of 
all who dwelt beside them. She took the cash: she stood in 
her sweater coat and the hat which Hait had been wearing 
on the fatal morning a week ago and listened in cold, grim 
silence while the teller counted the money and the president 
and the cashier tried to explain to her the virtues of a bond, 
then of a savings account, then of a checking account, and 
departed with the money in a salt sack under her apron; after 
a time she painted her house: that serviceable and time-defy- 
ing color which the railroad station was painted, as though 
out of sentiment or (as some said) gratitude. 

The adjuster also summoned Snopes into conference, from 
which he emerged not only more harried-looking than ever, 
but with his face stamped with a bewildered dismay which it 
was to wear from then on, and that was the last time his pas- 
ture fence was ever to give inexplicably away at dead of 
night upon mules coupled in threes and fours by adeauate 



254 The Village 

rope even though not always new. And then it seemed as 
though the mules themselves knew this, as if, even while hal- 
tered at the Memphis block at his bid, they sensed it somehow 
as they sensed that he was afraid of them. Now, three or four 
times a year and as though by fiendish concord and as soon 
as they were freed of the box car, the entire uproar the dust 
cloud filled with shouts earnest, harried, and dismayed, with 
plunging demoniac shapes would become translated in a 
single burst of perverse and uncontrollable violence, without 
any intervening contact with time, space, or earth, across 
the peaceful and astonished town and into Mrs. Hait's yard, 
where, in a certain hapless despair which abrogated for the 
moment even physical fear, Snopes ducked and dodged 
among the thundering shapes about the house (for whose 
very impervious paint the town believed that he felt he had 
paid and whose inmate lived within it a life of idle and queen- 
like ease on money which he considered at least partly his 
own) while gradually that section and neighborhood gath- 
ered to look on from behind adjacent window curtains and 
porches screened and not, and from the sidewalks and even 
from halted wagons and cars in the street housewives in the 
wrappers and boudoir caps of morning, children on the way 
to school, casual Negroes and casual whites in static and en- 
tertained repose. 

They were all there when, followed by old Het and carry- 
ing the stub of a worn-out broom, Mrs. Hait ran around the 
next corner and onto the handkerchief-sized plot of earth 
which she called her front yard. It was small; any creature 
with a running stride of three feet could have spanned it in 
two paces, yet at the moment, due perhaps to the myopic 
and distortive quality of the fog, it seemed to be as incredibly 
full of mad life as a drop of water beneath the microscope. 
Yet again she did not falter. With the broom clutched in her 
hand and apparently with a kind of sublime faith in her own 



Mule in the Yard 255 

invulnerability, she rushed on after the haltered mule which 
was still in that arrested and wraithlike process of vanishing 
furiously into the fog, its wake indicated by the tossing and 
dispersing shapes of the nine chickens like so many jagged 
scraps of paper in the dying air blast of an automobile, and 
the madly dodging figure of a man. The man was Snopes; 
beaded too with moisture, his wild face gaped with hoarse 
shouting and the two heavy lines of shaven beard descending 
from the corners of it as though in alluvial retrospect of years 
of tobacco, he screamed at her: "Fore God, Miz Haiti I done 
everything I could!" She didn't even look at him. 

"Ketch that big un with the bridle on," she said in her cold, 
panting voice. "Git that big un outen here." 

"Sho!" Snopes shrieked. "Jest let urn take their time. Jest 
don't git um excited now." 

"Watch out!" old Het shouted. "He headin fer de back 
again!'' 

"Git the rope," Mrs. Halt said, running again. Snopes 
glared back at old Het. 

"Fore God, where is ere rope?" he shouted. 

"In de cellar fo God!" old Het shouted, also without paus- 
ing. "Go roun de udder way en head um." Again she and 
Mrs. Halt turned the corner in time to see again the still-van- 
ishing mule with the halter once more in the act of floating 
lightly onward in its cloud of chickens with which, they 
being able to pass under the house and so on the chord of a 
circle while it had to go around on the arc, it had once more 
coincided. When they turned the next corner they were in 
the back yard again. 

"Fo God!" old Het cried. "He fixin to misuse de cow!" 
For they had gained on the mule now, since it had stopped. 
In fact, they came around the corner on a tableau. The cow 
now stood in the centre of the yard. She and the mule faced 
one another a few feet apart. Motionless, with lowered heads 



256 The Village 

and braced forelegs, they looked like two book ends from 
two distinct pairs of a general pattern which some one of 
amateurly bucolic leanings might have purchased, and which 
some child had salvaged, brought into idle juxtaposition and 
then forgotten; and, his head and shoulders projecting above 
the back-flung slant of the cellar entrance where the scuttle 
still sat, Snopes standing as though buried to the armpits for 
a Spanish-Indian-American suttee. Only again it did not take 
this long. It was less than tableau; it was one of those things 
which later even memory cannot quite affirm. Now and in 
turn, man and cow and mule vanished beyond the next cor- 
ner, Snopes now in the lead, carrying the rope, the cow next 
with her tail rigid and raked slightly like the stern staff of a 
boat. Mrs. Hait and old Het ran on, passing the open cellar 
gaping upon its accumulation of human necessities and wid- 
owed womanyears boxes for kindling wood, old papers and 
magazines, the broken and outworn furniture and utensils 
which no woman ever throws away; a pile of coal and an- 
other of pitch pine for priming fires and ran on and turned 
the next corner to see man and cow and mule all vanishing 
now in the wild cloud of ubiquitous chickens which had once 
more crossed beneath the house and emerged. They ran on, 
Mrs. Hait in grim and unflagging silence, old Het with the 
eager and happy amazement of a child. But when they gained 
the front again they saw only Snopes. He lay flat on his 
stomach, his head and shoulders upreared by his outstretched 
arms, his coat tail swept forward by its own arrested momen- 
tum about his head so that from beneath it his slack-jawed 
face mused in wild repose like that of a burlesqued nun. 

"Whar'd dey go?" old Het shouted at him. He didn't 
answer. 

u Dey tightenin' on de curves!" she cried. "Dey already in 
de back again!" That's where they were. The cow made a 
feint at running into her shed, but deciding perhaps that her 



Mule in the Yard 257 

speed was too great, she whirled in a final desperation of 
despair-like valor. But they did not see this, nor see the mule, 
swerving to pass her, crash and blunder for an instant at the 
open cellar door before going on. When they arrived, the 
mule was gone. The scuttle was gone too, but they did not 
notice it; they saw only the cow standing in the centre of the 
yard as before, panting, rigid, with braced forelegs and low- 
ered head facing nothing, as if the child had returned and re- 
moved one of the book ends for some newer purpose or 
game. They ran on. Mrs. Hait ran heavily now, her mouth 
too open, her face putty-colored and one hand pressed to her 
side. So slow was their progress that the mule in its third 
circuit of the house overtook them from behind and soared 
past with undiminished speed, with brief demon thunder and 
a keen ammonia-sweet reek of sweat sudden and sharp as a 
jeering cry, and was gone. Yet they ran doggedly on around 
the next corner in time to see it succeed at last in vanishing 
into the fog; they heard its hoofs, brief, staccato, and derisive, 
on the paved street, dying away. 

"Well!" old Het said, stopping. She panted, happily. 
"Gentlemen, hush! Ain't we had " Then she became stone 
still; slowly her head turned, high-nosed, her nostrils pulsing; 
perhaps for the instant she saw the open cellar door as they 
had last passed it, with no scuttle beside it. "Fo God I smells 
smoke!" she said. "Chile, run, git yo money." 

That was still early, not yet ten o'clock. By noon the 
house had burned to the ground. There was a farmers' sup- 
ply store where Snopes could be usually found; more than 
one had made a point of finding him there by that time. They 
told him about how when the fire engine and the crowd 
reached the scene, Mrs. Hait, followed by old Het carrying 
her shopping-bag in one hand and a framed portrait of Mr. 
Hait in the other, emerged with an umbrella and wearing a 
new, dun-colored, mail-order coat, in one pocket of which 



258 The Villag* 

lay a fruit jar filled with smoothly rolled banknotes and in the 
other a heavy, nickel-plated pistol, and crossed the street to 
the house opposite, where with old Het beside her in another 
rocker, she had been sitting ever since on the veranda, grim, 
inscrutable, the two of them rocking steadily, while hoarse 
and tireless men hurled her dishes and furniture and bedding 
up and down the street. 

"What are you telling me for?" Snopes said. "Hit warn't 
me that set that ere scuttle of live fire where the first thing 
that passed would knock hit into the cellar." 

"It was you that opened the cellar door, though." 

"Sho. And for what? To git that rope, her own rope, 
where she told me to git it." 

"To catch your mule with, that was trespassing on her 
property. You can't get out of it this time, I. O. There ain't 
a jury in the county that won't find for her." 

"Yes. I reckon not. And just because she is a woman. 
That's why. Because she is a durn woman. All right. Let her 
go to her durn jury with hit. I can talk too; I reckon hit's a 
few things I could tell a jury myself about " He ceased. 
They were watching him. 

"What? Tell a jury about what?" 

"Nothing. Because hit ain't going to no jury. A jury be- 
tween her and me? Me and Mannie Hait? You boys don't 
know her if you think she's going to make trouble over a 
pure acci-dent couldn't nobody help. Why, there ain't a 
fairer, finer woman in the county than Miz Mannie Hait. I 
just wisht I had a opportunity to tell her so." The opportu- 
nity came at once. Old Het was behind her, carrying the 
shopping-bag. Mrs. Hait looked once, quietly, about at the 
faces, making no response to the murmur of curious saluta- 
tion, then not again. She didn't look at Snopes long either, 
nor talk to him long. 

"I come to buy that mule," she said. 



Mule in the Yard 259 

"What mule?" They looked at one another. "You'd like 
to own that mule?" She looked at him. "Hit'll cost you a 
hundred and fifty, Miz Mannie." 

"You mean dollars?" 

"I don't mean dimes nor nickels neither, Miz Mannie." 

"Dollars," she said. "That's more than mules was in Halt's 



time." 



"Lots of things is different since Halt's time. Including 
you and me." 

"I reckon so," she said. Then she went away. She turned 
without a word, old Het following. 

"Maybe one of them others you looked at this morning 
would suit you," Snopes said. She didn't answer. Then they 
were gone. 

"I don't know as I would have said that last to her," one 
said. 

"What for?" Snopes said. "If she was aiming to law some- 
thing outen me about that fire, you reckon she would have 
come and offered to pay me money for hit?" That was about 
one o'clock. About four o'clock he was shouldering his way 
through a throng of Negroes before a cheap grocery store 
when one called his name. It was old Het, the now bulging 
shopping-bag on her arm, eating bananas from a paper sack. 

"Fo God I wuz jest dis minute huntin fer you," she said. 
She handed the banana to a woman beside her and delved and 
fumbled in the shopping-bag and extended a greenback. 
"Miz Mannie gimme dis to give you; I wuz jest on de way 
to de sto whar you stay at. Here." He took the bill. 

"What's this? From Miz Hait?" 

"Fer de mule." The bill was for ten dollars. "You don't 
need to gimme no receipt. I kin be de witness I give hit to 
you." 

"Ten dollars? For that mule? I told her a hundred and 
fifty dollars." 



260 The Village 

"You'll have to fix dat up wid her yo'self. She jest gimme 
dis to give ter you when she sot out to fetch de mule." 

"Set out to fetch She went out there herself and taken 
my mule outen my pasture?" 

"Lawd, chile," old Het said, "Miz Mannie ain't skeered of 
no mule. Ain't you done foun dat out?" 

And then it became late, what with the yet short winter 
days; when she came in sight of the two gaunt chimneys 
against the sunset, evening was already finding itself. But she 
could smell the ham cooking before she came in sight of the 
cow shed even, though she could not see it until she came 
around in front where the fire burned beneath an iron skillet 
set on bricks and where nearby Mrs. Hait was milking the 
cow. "Well," old Het said, "you is settled down, ain't you?" 
She looked into the shed, neated and raked and swept even, 
and floored now with fresh hay. A clean new lantern burned 
on a box, beside it a pallet bed was spread neatly on the straw 
and turned neatly back for the night. "Why, you is fixed 
up," she said with pleased astonishment. Within the door was 
a kitchen chair. She drew it out and sat down beside the 
skillet and laid the bulging shopping-bag beside her. 

"I'll tend dis meat whilst you milks. I'd offer to strip dat 
cow fer you ef I wuzn't so wo out wid all dis excitement we 
been had." She looked around her. "I don't believe I sees yo 
new mule, dough." Mrs. Hait grunted, her head against the 
cow's flank. After a moment she said, 

"Did you give him that money?" 

"I give um ter him. He ack surprise at first, lak maybe he 
think you didn't aim to trade dat quick. I tole him to settle de 
details wid you later. He taken de money, dough. So I reckin 
dat's offen his mine en yo'n bofe." Again Mrs. Hait grunted. 
Old Het turned the ham in the skillet. Beside it the coffee pot 
bubbled and steamed. "Cawfee smell good too," she said. "I 
ain't had no appetite in years now. A bird couldn't live on de 
vittles I eats. But jest lemme git a whiff er cawfee en seem lak 



Mule in the Yard 261 

hit always whets me a little. Now, ef you jest had nudder 
little piece o dis ham, now Fo God, you got company 
aready." But Mrs. Hait did not even look up until she had 
finished. Then she turned without rising from the box on 
which she sat. 

"I reckon you and me better have a little talk," Snopes said. 
"I reckon I got something that belongs to you and I hear you 
got something that belongs to me." He looked about, quickly, 
ceaselessly, while old Het watched him. He turned to her. 
"You go away, aunty. I don't reckon you want to set here 
and listen to us." 

u Lawd, honey," old Het said. "Don't you mind me. I done 
already had so much troubles myself dat I kin set en listen 
to udder folks' widout hit worryin me a-tall. You gawn talk 
whut you came ter talk; I jest set here en tend de ham." 
Snopes looked at Mrs. Hait. 

"Ain't you going to make her go away?" he said. 

"What for?" Mrs. Hait said. "I reckon she ain't the first 
critter that ever come on this yard when hit wanted and 
went or stayed when hit liked." Snopes made a gesture, brief, 
fretted, restrained. 

"Well," he said. "All right. So you taken the mule." 

"I paid you for it. She give you the money." 

"Ten dollars. For a hundred-and-fifty-dollar mule. Ten 
dollars." 

"I don't know anything about hundred-and-fifty-dollar 
mules. All I know is what the railroad paid." Now Snopes 
looked at her for a full moment. 

"What do you mean?" 

"Them sixty dollars a head the railroad used to pay you for 
mules back when you and Hait " 

"Hush," Snopes said; he looked about again, quick, cease- 
less. "All right. Even call it sixty dollars. But you just sent 
me ten." 

"Yes. I sent you the difference." He looked at her, per- 



262 The Village 

fectly still. "Between that mule and what you owed Halt." 

"What I owed " 

"For getting them five mules onto the tr " 

"Hush!" he cried. "Hush!" Her voice went on, cold, grim, 
level. 

"For helping you. You paid him fifty dollars each time, 
and the railroad paid you sixty dollars a head for the mules. 
Ain't that right?" He watched her. "The last time you never 
paid him. So I taken that mule instead. And I sent you the ten 
dollars difference." 

"Yes," he said in a tone of quiet, swift, profound bemuse- 
ment; then he cried: "But look! Here's where I got you. Hit 
was our agreement that I wouldn't never owe him nothing 
until after the mules was " 

"I reckon you better hush yourself," Mrs. Halt said. 

" until hit was over. And this time, when over had come, 
I never owed nobody no money because the man hit would 
have been owed to wasn't nobody," he cried triumphantly. 
"You see?" Sitting on the box, motionless, downlooking, Mrs, 
Hait seemed to muse. "So you just take your ten dollars back 
and tell me where my mule is and we'll just go back good 
friends to where we started at. Fore God, I'm as sorry as ere 
a living man about that fire " 

"Fo God!" old Het said, "hit was a blaze, wuzn't it?" 

" but likely with all that ere railroad money you still got, 
you just been wanting a chance to build new, all along. So 
here. Take hit." He put the money into her hand. "Where's 
my mule?" But Mrs. Hait didn't move at once. 

"You want to give it back to me?" she said. 

"Sho. We been friends all the time; now we'll just go back 
to where we left off being. I don't hold no hard feelings and 
don't you hold none. Where you got the mule hid?" 

"Up at the end of that ravine ditch behind Spilmer's," 
she said. 



Mule in the Yard 263 

"Sho. I know. A good, sheltered place, since you ain't got 
nere barn. Only if you'd a just left hit in the pasture, hit 
would a saved us both trouble. But hit ain't no hard feelings 
though. And so I'll bid you goodnight. You're all fixed up, 
I see. I reckon you could save some more money by not 
building no house a-tall." 

"I reckon I could," Mrs. Hait said. But he was gone. 

"Whut did you leave de mule dar fer?" old Het said. 

"I reckon that's far enough," Mrs. Hait said. 

"Fer enough?" But Mrs. Hait came and looked into the 
skillet, and old Het said, "Wuz hit me er you dat mentioned 
something erbout er nudder piece o dis ham?" So they were 
both eating when in the not-quite-yet accomplished twilight 
Snopes returned. He came up quietly and stood, holding his 
hands to the blaze as if he were quite cold. He did not look 
at any one now. 

"I reckon I'll take that ere ten dollars," he said. 

"What ten dollars?" Mrs. Hait said. He seemed to muse 
upon the fire. Mrs. Hait and old Het chewed quietly, old Het 
alone watching him. 

"You ain't going to give hit back to me?" he said. 

"You was the one that said to let's go back to where we 
started," Mrs. Hait said. 

"Fo God you wuz, en dat's de fack," old Het said. Snopes 
mused upon the fire; he spoke in a tone of musing and amazed 
despair: 

"I go to the worry and the risk and the agoment for years 
and years and I get sixty dollars. And you, one time, without 
no trouble and no risk, without even knowing you are going 
to git it, git eighty-five hundred dollars. I never begrudged 
hit to you; can't nere a man say I did, even if hit did seem a 
little strange that you should git it all when he wasn't work- 
ing for you and you never even knowed where he was at and 
what doing; that all you done to git it was to be married to 



264 The Village 

him. And now, after all these ten years of not begrudging 
you hit, you taken the best mule I had and you ain't even 
going to pay me ten dollars for hit. Hit ain't right. Hit ain't 
justice." 

"You got de mule back, en you ain't satisfried yit," old Het 
said. "Whut does you want?" Now Snopes looked at Mrs. 
Hait. 

"For the last time I ask hit," he said. "Will you or won't 
you give hit back?" 

"Give what back?" Mrs. Hait said. Snopes turned. He 
stumbled over something : it was old Het's shopping-bag 
and recovered and went on. They could see him in silhou- 
ette, as though framed by the two blackened chimneys 
against the dying west; they saw him fling up both clenched 
hands in a gesture almost Gallic, of resignation and impotent 
despair. Then he was gone. Old Het was watching Mrs. Hait. 

"Honey," she said. "Whut did you do wid de mule?" Mrs. 
Hait leaned forward to the fire. On her plate lay a stale bis- 
cuit. She lifted the skillet and poured over the biscuit the 
grease in which the ham had cooked. 

"I shot it," she said. 

"You which?" old Het said. Mrs. Hait began to eat the 
biscuit. "Well," old Het said, happily, "de mule burnt de 
house en you shot de mule. Dat's whut I calls justice." It 
was getting dark fast now, and before her was still the three- 
mile walk to the poorhouse. But the dark would last a long 
time in January, and the poorhouse too would not move at 
once. She sighed with weary and happy relaxation. "Gentle- 
men, hush! Ain't we had a day!" 



That Will Be Fine 



WE COULD HEAR the water running into the tub. We looked 
at the presents scattered over the bed where mamma had 
wrapped them in the colored paper, with our names on them 
so Grandpa could tell who they belonged to easy when he 
would take them off the tree. There was a present for every- 
body except Grandpa because mamma said that Grandpa is 
too old to get presents any more. 

"This one is yours," I said. 

"Sho now/' Rosie said. "You come on and get in that 
tub like your mamma tell you." 

"I know what's in it," I said. "I could tell you if I wanted 
to." 

Rosie looked at her present. "I reckon I kin wait twell 
hit be handed to me at the right time," she said. 

"I'll tell you what's in it for a nickel," I said. 

Rosie looked at her present. "I ain't got no nickel," she 
said. "But I will have Christmas morning when Mr. Rodney 
give me that dime." 

"You'll know what's in it anyway then and you won't 
pay me," I said. "Go and ask mamma to lend you a nickel." 

Then Rosie grabbed me by the arm. "You come on and 
get in that tub," she said. "You and money! If you ain't 
rich time you twenty-one, hit will be because the law done 
abolished money or done abolished you." 

265 



266 The Village 

So I went and bathed and came back, with the presents all 
scattered out across mamma's and papa's bed and you could 
almost smell it and tomorrow night they would begin to 
shoot the fireworks and then you could hear it too. It 
would be just tonight and then tomorrow we would get 
on the train, except papa, because he would have to stay at 
the livery stable until after Christmas Eve, and go to 
Grandpa's, and then tomorrow night and then it would 
be Christmas and Grandpa would take the presents off the 
tree and call out our names, and the one from me to Uncle 
Rodney that I bought with my own dime and so after a 
while Uncle Rodney would prize open Grandpa's desk 
and take a dose of Grandpa's tonic and maybe he would 
give me another quarter for helping him, like he did last 
Christmas, instead of just a nickel, like he would do last 
summer while he was visiting mamma and us and we were 
doing business with Mrs. Tucker before Uncle Rodney 
went home and began to work for the Compress Association, 
and it would be fine. Or maybe even a half a dollar and it 
seemed to me like I just couldn't wait. 

"Jesus, I can't hardly wait," I said. 

"You which?" Rosie hollered. "Jesus?" she hollered. 
"Jesus? You let your mamma hear you cussing and I bound 
you'll wait. You talk to me about a nickel! For a nickel 
I'd tell her just what you said." 

"If you'll pay me a nickel I'll tell her myself," I said. 

"Get into that bed!" Rosie hollered. "A seven-year-old 
boy, cussing!" 

"If you will promise not to tell her, I'll tell you what's in 
your present and you can pay me the nickel Christmas morn- 
ing," I said. 

"Get in that bed!" Rosie hollered. "You and your nickel! 
I bound if I thought any of you all was fixing to buy even 
a dime present for your grandpa, I'd put in a nickel of hit 
myself." 



That Will Be Fine 267 

"Grandpa don't want presents," I said. "He's too old." 
"Hah," Rosie said. "Too old, is he? Suppose everybody 
decided you was too young to have nickels: what would you 
think about that? Hah?" 

So Rosie turned out the light and went out. But I 
could still see the presents by the firelight: the ones for Uncle 
Rodney and Grandma and Aunt Louisa and Aunt Louisa's 
husband Uncle Fred, and Cousin Louisa and Cousin Fred 
and the baby and Grandpa's cook and our cook, that was 
Rosie, and maybe somebody ought to give Grandpa a present 
only maybe it ought to be Aunt Louisa because she and 
Uncle Fred lived with Grandpa, or maybe Uncle Rodney 
ought to because he lived with Grandpa too. Uncle Rodney 
always gave mamma and papa a present but maybe it would 
be just a waste of his time and Grandpa's time both for 
Uncle Rodney to give Grandpa a present, because one time 
I asked mamma why Grandpa always looked at the present 
Uncle Rodney gave her and papa and got so mad, and papa 
began to laugh and mamma said papa ought to be ashamed, 
that it wasn't Uncle Rodney's fault if his generosity was 
longer than his pocket book, and papa said Yes, it certainly 
wasn't Uncle Rodney's fault, he never knew a man to try 
harder to get money than Uncle Rodney did, that Uncle 
Rodney had tried every known plan to get it except work, 
and that if mamma would just think back about two years 
she would remember one time when Uncle Rodney could 
have thanked his stars that there was one man in the con- 
nection whose generosity, or whatever mamma wanted to 
call it, was at least five hundred dollars shorter than his 
pocket book, and mamma said she defied papa to say that 
Uncle Rodney stole the money, that it had been malicious 
persecution and papa knew it, and that papa and most other 
men were prejudiced against Uncle Rodney, why she didn't 
know, and that if papa begrudged having lent Uncle Rodney 
the five hundred dollars when the family's good name was 



268 The Village 

at stake to say so and Grandpa would raise it somehow and 
pay papa back, and then she began to cry and papa said 
All right, all right, and mamma cried and said how Uncle 
Rodney was the baby and that must be why papa hated 
him and papa said All right, all right; for God's sake, all 
right. 

Because mamma and papa didn't know that Uncle Rodney 
had been handling his business all the time he was visiting 
us last summer, any more than the people in Mottstown 
knew that he was doing business last Christmas when I 
worked for him the first time and he paid me the quarter. 
Because he said that if he preferred to do business with 
ladies instead of men it wasn't anybody's business except his, 
not even Mr. Tucker's. He said how I never went around 
telling people about papa's business and I said how every- 
body knew papa was in the livery-stable business and so I 
didn't have to tell them, and Uncle Rodney said Well, 
that was what half of the nickel was for and did I want to 
keep on making the nickels or did I want him to hire some- 
body else? So I would go on ahead and watch through Mr. 
Tucker's fence until he came out to go to town and I would 
go along behind the fence to the corner and watch until 
Mr. Tucker was out of sight and then I would put my hat 
on top of the fence post and leave it there until I saw Mr. 
Tucker coming back. Only he never came back while I 
was there because Uncle Rodney would always be through 
before then, and he would come up and we would walk 
back home and he would tell mamma how far we had 
walked that day and mamma would say how good that was 
for Uncle Rodney's health. So he just paid me a nickel at 
home. It wasn't as much as the quarter when he was in 
business with the other lady in Mottstown Christmas, but 
that was just one rime and he visited us all summer and so 
by that time I had a lot more than a quarter. And besides 



That Will Be Fine 269 

the other time was Christmas and he took a dose of Grandpa's 
tonic before he paid me the quarter and so maybe this time 
it might be even a half a dollar. I couldn't hardly wait. 

II 

BUT IT GOT TO BE daylight at last and I put on my Sunday 
suit, and I would go to the front door and watch for the 
hack and then I would go to the kitchen and ask Rosie if it 
wasn't almost time and she would tell me the train wasn't 
even due for two hours yet. Only while she was telling me 
we heard the hack, and so I thought it was time for us to 
go and get on the train and it would be fine, and then we 
would go to Grandpa's and then it would be tonight and 
then tomorrow and maybe it would be a half a dollar this 
cime and Jesus it would be fine. Then mamma came running 
out without even her hat on and she said how it was two 
hours yet and she wasn't even dressed and John Paul said 
Yessum but papa sent him and papa said for John Paul to 
tell mamma that Aunt Louisa was here and for mamma to 
hurry. So we put the basket of presents into the hack and 
I rode on the box with John Paul and mamma hollering 
from inside the hack about Aunt Louisa, and John Paul said 
that Aunt Louisa had come in a hired buggy and papa took 
her to the hotel to eat breakfast because she left Mottstown 
before daylight even. And so maybe Aunt Louisa had come 
to Jefferson to help mamma and papa get a present for 
Grandpa. 

"Because we have one for everybody else," I said, "I 
bought one for Uncle Rodney with my own money." 

Then John Paul began to laugh and I said Why? and he 
said it was at the notion of me giving Uncle Rodney any- 
thing that he would want to use, and I said Why? and 
John Paul said because I was shaped like a man, and I said 



2 yo The Village 

Why? and John Paul said he bet papa would like to give 
Uncle Rodney a present without even waiting for Christmas, 
and I said What? and John Paul said A job of work. And I 
told John Paul how Uncle Rodney had been working all the 
time he was visiting us last summer, and John Paul quit 
laughing and said Sho, he reckoned anything a man kept 
at all the time, night and day both, he would call it work 
no matter how much fun it started out to be, and I said 
Anyway Uncle Rodney works now, he works in the office 
of the Compress Association, and John Paul laughed good 
then and said it would sholy take a whole association to 
compress Uncle Rodney. And then mamma began to holler 
to go straight to the hotel, and John Paul said Nome, papa 
said to come straight to the livery stable and wait for him. 
And so we went to the hotel and Aunt Louisa and papa 
came out and papa helped Aunt Louisa into the hack and 
Aunt Louisa began to cry and mamma hollering Louisa! 
Louisa! What is it? What has happened? and papa saying 
Wait now. Wait. Remember the nigger, and that meant 
John Paul, and so it must have been a present for Grandpa 
and it didn't come. 

And then we didn't go on the train after all. We went to 
the stable and they already had the light road hack hitched 
up and waiting, and mamma was crying now and saying 
how papa never even had his Sunday clothes and papa 
cussing now and saying Damn the clothes; if we didn't get 
to Uncle Rodney before the others caught him, papa would 
just wear the clothes Uncle Rodney had on now. So we got 
into the road hack fast and papa closed the curtains and then 
mamma and Aunt Louisa could cry all right and papa hol- 
lered to John Paul to go home and tell Rosie to pack his 
Sunday suit and take her to the train; anyway that would be 
fine for Rosie. So we didn't go on the train but we went 
fast, with papa driving and saying Didn't anybody know 



That W ill Ee Fine 271 

where he was? and Aunt Louisa quit crying a while and 
said how Uncle Rodney didn't come to supper last night, 
but right after supper he came in and how Aunt Louisa 
had a terrible feeling as soon as she heard his step in the 
hall and how Uncle Rodney wouldn't tell her until they 
were in his room and the door closed and then he said 
he must have two thousand dollars and Aunt Louisa said 
where in the world could she get two thousand dollars? and 
Uncle Rodney said Ask Fred, that was Aunt Louisa's hus- 
band, and George, that was papa; tell them they would 
have to dig it up, and Aunt Louisa said she had that terrible 
feeling and she said Rodney! Rodney! What and Uncle 
Rodney begun to cuss and say Dammit, don't start sniveling 
and crying now, and Aunt Louisa said Rodney, what have 
you done now? and then they both heard the knocking at 
the door and how Aunt Louisa looked at Uncle Rodney and 
she knew the truth before she even laid eyes on Mr. Pruitt 
and the sheriff, and how she said Don't tell pa! Keep it 
from pa! It will kill him. . . . 

"Who?" papa said. "Mister who?" 

"Mr. Pruitt," Aunt Louisa said, crying again. "The 
president of the Compress Association. They moved to 
Mottstown last spring. You don't know him." 

So she went down to the door and it was Mr. Pruitt and 
the sheriff. And how Aunt Louisa begged Mr. Pruitt for 
Grandpa's sake and how she gave Mr. Pruitt her oath that 
Uncle Rodney would stay right there in the house until 
papa could get there, and Mr. Pruitt said how he hated it 
to happen at Christmas too and so for Grandpa's and Aunt 
Louisa's sake he would give them until the day after Christ- 
mas if Aunt Louisa would promise him that Uncle Rodney 
would not try to leave Mottstown. And how Mr. Pruitt 
showed her with her own eyes the check with Grandpa's 
name signed to it and how even Aunt Louisa could see that 



272 The Village 

Grandpa's name had been and then mamma said Louisa! 
Louisa! Remember Georgie! and that was me, and papa 
cussed too, hollering How in damnation do you expect 
to keep it from him? Ey hiding the newspapers? and Aunt 
Louisa cried again and said how everybody was bound to 
know it, that she didn't expect or hope that any of us could 
ever hold our heads up again, that all she hoped for was to 
keep it from Grandpa because it would kill him. She cried 
hard then and papa had to stop at a branch and get down 
and soak his handkerchief for mamma to wipe Aunt Louisa's 
face with it and then papa took the bottle of tonic out of the 
dash pocket and put a few drops on the handkerchief, and 
Aunt Louisa smelled it and then papa took a dose of the 
tonic out of the bottle and mamma said George! and papa 
drank some more of the tonic and then made like he was 
handing the bottle back for mamma and Aunt Louisa to 
take a dose too and said, "I don't blame you. If I was a 
woman in this family I'd take to drink too. Now let me get 
this bond business straight." 

"It was those road bonds of ma's," Aunt Louisa said. 

We were going fast again now because the horses had 
rested while papa was wetting the handkerchief and taking 
the dose of tonic, and papa was saying All right, what about 
the bonds? when all of a sudden he jerked around in the 
seat and said, "Road bonds? Do you mean he took that 
damn screw driver and prized open your mother's desk too?" 

Then mamma said George! how can you? only Aunt 
Louisa was talking now, quick now, not crying now, not 
yet, and papa with his head turned over his shoulder and 
saying Did Aunt Louisa mean that that five hundred papa 
had to pay out two years ago wasn't all of it? And Aunt 
Louisa said it was twenty-five hundred, only they didn't 
v^ant Grandpa to find it out, and so Grandma put up her 
road bonds for security on the note, and how they said now 



That Will Be Fine 273 

that Uncle Rodney had redeemed Grandma's note and the 
road bonds from the bank with some of the Compress 
Association's bonds out of the safe in the Compress Associa- 
tion office, because when Mr. Pruitt found the Compress 
Association's bonds were missing he looked for them and 
found them in the bank and when he looked in the Compress 
Association's safe all he found was the check for two thou- 
sand dollars with Grandpa's name signed to it, and how 
Mr. Pruitt hadn't lived in Mottstown but a year but even he 
knew that Grandpa never signed that check and besides he 
looked in the bank again and Grandpa never had two 
thousand dollars in it, and how Mr. Pruitt said how he would 
wait until the day after Christmas if Aunt Louisa would 
give him her sworn oath that Uncle Rodney would not go 
away, and Aunt Louisa did it and then she went back up- 
stairs to plead with Uncle Rodney to give Mr. Pruitt the 
bonds and she went into Uncle Rodney's room where she 
had left him, and the window was open and Uncle Rodney 
was gone. 

"Damn Rodney!" papa said. "The bonds! You mean, no- 
body knows where the bonds are?" 

Now we were going fast because we were coming down 
the last hill and into the valley where Mottstown was. Soon 
we would begin to smell it again; it would be just today and 
then tonight and then it would be Christmas, and Aunt 
Louisa sitting there with her face white like a whitewashed 
fence that has been rained on and papa said Who in hell 
ever gave him such a job anyway, and Aunt Louisa said Mr. 
Pruitt, and papa said how even if Mr. Pruitt had only lived 
in Mottstown a few months, and then Aunt Louisa began 
to cry without even putting her handkerchief to her face 
this time and mamma looked at Aunt Louisa and she began 
to cry too and papa took out the whip and hit the team a 
belt with it even if they were going fast and he cussed. 



274 The Village 

"Damnation to hell," papa said. "I see. Pruitt's married." 

Then we could see it too. There were holly wreaths in 
the windows like at home in Jefferson, and I said, "They 
shoot fireworks in Mottstown too like they do in Jefferson." 

Aunt Louisa and mamma were crying good now, and now 
it was papa saying Here, here; remember Georgie, and that 
was me, and Aunt Louisa said, "Yes, yes! Painted ,common 
thing, traipsing up and down the streets all afternoon alone 
in a buggy, and the one and only time Mrs. Church called 
on her, and that was because of Mr. Pruitt's position alone, 
Mrs. Church found her without corsets on and Mrs. Church 
told me she smelled liquor on her breath." 

And papa saying Here, here, and Aunt Louisa crying 
good and saying how it was Mrs. Pruitt that did it because 
Uncle Rodney was young and easy led because he never 
had had opportunities to meet a nice girl and marry her, and 
papa was driving fast toward Grandpa's house and he said, 
"Marry? Rodney marry? What in hell pleasure would he 
get out of slipping out of his own house and waiting until 
after dark and slipping around to the back and climbing up 
the gutter and into a room where there wasn't anybody in 
it but his own wife." 

And so mamma and Aunt Louisa were crying good when 
we got to Grandpa's. 

Ill 

AND UNCLE RODNEY wasn't there. We came in, and Grandma 
said how Mandy, that was Grandpa's cook, hadn't come 
to cook breakfast and when Grandma sent Emmeline, that 
was Aunt Louisa's baby's nurse, down to Mandy's cabin 
in the back yard, the door was locked on the inside but 
Mandy wouldn't answer and then Grandma went down 
there herself and Mandy wouldn't answer and so Cousin 



That Will Be Fine 275 

Fred climbed in the window and Mandy was gone and Uncle 
Fred had just got back from town then and he and papa both 
hollered, "Locked? on the inside? and nobody in it?" 

And then Uncle Fred told papa to go in and keep Grandpa 
entertained and he would go and then Aunt Louisa grabbed 
papa and Uncle Fred both and said she would keep Grandpa 
quiet and for both of them to go and find him, find him, 
and papa said if only the fool hasn't tried to sell them to some- 
body, and Uncle Fred said Good God, man, don't you 
know that check was dated ten days ago? And so we went 
in where Grandpa was reared back in his chair and saying 
how he hadn't expected papa until tomorrow but by God 
he was glad to see somebody at last because he waked up 
this morning and his cook had quit and Louisa had chased 
off somewhere before daylight and now he couldn't even 
find Uncle Rodney to go down and bring his mail and a 
cigar or two back, and so thank God Christmas never came 
but once a year and so be damned if he wouldn't be glad 
when it was over, only he was laughing now because when 
he said that about Christmas before Christmas he always 
laughed, it wasn't until after Christmas that he didn't laugh 
when he said that about Christmas. Then Aunt Louisa got 
Grandpa's keys out of his pocket herself and opened the 
desk where Uncle Rodney would prize it open with a screw 
driver, and took out Grandpa's tonic and then mamma said 
for me to go and find Cousin Fred and Cousin Louisa. 

So Uncle Rodney wasn't there. Only at first I thought 
maybe it wouldn't be a quarter even, it wouldn't be nothing 
this time, so at first all I had to think about was that anyway 
it would be Christmas and that would be something anyway. 
Because I went on around the house, and so after a while 
papa and Uncle Fred came out, and I could see them through 
the bushes knocking at Mandy's door and calling, "Rodney, 
Rodney," like that. Then I had to get back in the bushes 



276 The Village 

because Uncle Fred had to pass right by me to go to the 
woodshed to get the axe to open Mandy's door. But they 
couldn't fool Uncle Rodney. If Mr. Tucker couldn't fool 
Uncle Rodney in Mr. Tucker's own house, Uncle Fred and 
papa ought to known they couldn't fool him right in his 
own papa's back yard. So I didn't even need to hear them. 
I just waited until after a while Uncle Fred came back out 
the broken door and came to the woodshed and took the axe 
and pulled the lock and hasp and steeple off the woodhouse 
door and went back and then papa came out of Mandy's 
house and they nailed the woodhouse lock onto Mandy's 
door and locked it and they went around behind Mandy's 
house, and I could hear Uncle Fred nailing the windows up. 
Then they went back to the house. But it didn't matter if 
Mandy was in the house too and couldn't get out, because 
the train came from Jefferson with Rosie and papa's Sunday 
clothes on it and so Rosie was there to cook for Grandpa 
and us and so that was all right too. 

But they couldn't fool Uncle Rodney. I could have told 
them that. I could have told them that sometimes Uncle 
Rodney even wanted to wait until after dark to even begin 
to do business. And so it was all right even if it was late in 
the afternoon before I could get away from Cousin Fred 
and Cousin Louisa. It was late; soon they would begin to 
shoot the fireworks downtown, and then we would be hear- 
ing it too, so I could just see his face a little between the 
slats where papa and Uncle Fred had nailed up the back 
window; I could see his face where he hadn't shaved, and he 
was asking me why in hell it took me so long because he 
had heard the Jefferson train come before dinner, before 
eleven o'clock, and laughing about how papa and Uncle 
Fred had nailed him up in the house to keep him when that 
was exactly what he wanted, and that I would have to slip 
out right after supper somehow and did I reckon I could 



That Will Be Fine 277 

manage it? And I said how last Christmas it had been a 
quarter, but I didn't have to slip out of the house that time, 
and he laughed, saying Quarter? Quarter? did I ever see ten 
quarters all at once? and I never did, and he said for me to 
be there with the screw driver right after supper and I 
would see ten quarters, and to remember that even God 
didn't know where he is and so for me to get the hell away 
and stay away until I came back after dark with the screw 
driver. 

And they couldn't fool me either. Because I had been 
watching the man all afternoon, even when he thought I 
was just playing and maybe because I was from Jefferson 
instead of Mottstown and so I wouldn't know who he was. 
But I did, because once when he was walking past the back 
fence and he stopped and lit his cigar again and I saw the 
badge under his coat when he struck the match and so I 
knew he was like Mr. Watts at Jefferson that catches the 
niggers. So I was playing by the fence and I could hear him 
stopping and looking at me and I played and he said, 
"Howdy, son. Santy Glaus coming to see you tomorrow?" 

"Yes, sir," I said. 

"You're Miss Sarah's boy, from up at Jefferson, ain't you?" 
he said. 

"Yes, sir," I said. 

"Come to- spend Christmas with your grandpa, eh?" he 
said. "I wonder if your Uncle Rodney's at home this after- 
noon." 

"No, sir," I said. 

"Well, well, that's too bad," he said. "I wanted to see him 
a minute. He's downtown, I reckon?" 

"No, sir," I said. 

"Well, well," he said. "You mean he's gone away on a 
visit, maybe?" 

"Yes, sir," I said. 



278 The Village 

"Well, well," he said. "That's too bad. I wanted to see him 
on a little business. But I reckon it can wait." Then he looked 
at me and then he said, "You're sure he's out of town, 
then?" 

"Yes, sir," I said. 

"Well, that was all I wanted to know," he said. "If you 
happen to mention this to your Aunt Louisa or your Uncle 
Fred you can tell them that was all I wanted to know." 

"Yes, sir," I said. So he went away. And he didn't pass 
the house any more. I watched for him, but he didn't come 
back. So he couldn't fool me either. 



IV 

THEN IT BEGAN to get dark and they started to shoot the fire- 
works downtown. I could hear them, and soon we would 
be seeing the Roman candles and skyrockets and I would 
have the ten quarters then and I thought about the basket 
full of presents and I thought how maybe I could go on 
downtown when I got through working for Uncle Rodney 
and buy a present for Grandpa with a dime out of the ten 
quarters and give it to him tomorrow and maybe, because 
nobody else had given him a present, Grandpa might give 
me a quarter too instead of the dime tomorrow, and that 
would be twenty-one quarters, except for the dime, and that 
would be fine sure enough. But I didn't have time to do that. 
We ate supper, and Rosie had to cook that too, and mamma 
and Aunt Louisa with powder on their faces where they 
had been crying, and Grandpa; it was papa helping him 
take a dose of tonic every now and then all afternoon while 
Uncle Fred was downtown, and Uncle Fred came back and 
papa came out in the hall and Uncle Fred said he had 
looked everywhere, in the bank and in the Compress, and 
how Mr. Pruitt had helped him but they couldn't find a sign 
either of them or of the money, because Uncle Fred war 



That Will Be Fine 279 

afraid because one night last week Uncle Rodney hired 
a rig and went somewhere and Uncle Fred found out 
Uncle Rodney drove over to the main line at Kingston and 
caught the fast train to Memphis, and papa said Damnation, 
and Uncle Fred said By God we will go down there after 
supper and sweat it out of him, because at least we have 
got him. I told Pruitt that and he said that if we hold to 
him, he will hold off and give us a chance. 

So Uncle Fred and papa and Grandpa came in to supper 
together, with Grandpa between them saying Christmas 
don't come but once a year, thank God, so hooray for 
it, and papa and Uncle Fred saying Now you are all 
right, pa; straight ahead now, pa, and Grandpa would go 
straight ahead awhile and then begin to holler Where in hell 
is that damn boy? and that meant Uncle Rodney, and that 
Grandpa was a good mind to go downtown himself and 
haul Uncle Rodney out of that damn pool hall and make 
him come home and see his kinfolks. And so we ate supper 
and mamma said she would take the children upstairs and 
Aunt Louisa said No, Emmeline could put us to bed, and 
so we went up the back stairs, and Emmeline said how she 
had done already had to cook breakfast extra today and if 
folks thought she was going to waste all her Christmas doing 
extra work they never had the sense she give them credit for 
and that this looked like to her it was a good house to be 
away from nohow, and so we went into the room and then 
after a while I went back down the back stairs and I re- 
membered where to find the screw driver too. Then I 
could hear the firecrackers plain from downtown, and the 
moon was shining now but I could still see the Roman 
candles and the skyrockets running up the sky. Then 
Uncle Rodney's hand came out of the crack in the shutter 
and took the screw driver. I couldn't see his face now and 
it wasn't laughing exactly, it didn't sound exactly like 
laughing, it was just the way he breathed behind the shutter. 



i8o The Village 

Because they couldn't fool him. "All right," he said. "Now 
that's ten quarters. But wait. Are you sure nobody knows 
where I am?" 

"Yes, sir," I said. "I waited by the fence until he come 
and asked me." 

"Which one?" Uncle Rodney said. 

"The one that wears the badge," I said. 

Then Uncle Rodney cussed. But it wasn't mad cussing. 
It sounded just like it sounded when he was laughing ex- 
cept the words. 

"He said if you were out of town on a visit, and I said 
Yes sir," I said. 

"Good," Uncle Rodney said. "By God, some day you will 
be as good a business man as I am. And I won't make you 
a liar much longer, either. So now you have got ten quarters, 
haven't you?" 

"No," I said. "I haven't got them yet." 

Then he cussed again, and I said, "I will hold my cap up 
and you can drop them in it and they won't spill then." 

Then he cussed hard, only it wasn't loud. "Only I'm 
not going to give you ten quarters," he said, and I begun 
to say You said and Uncle Rodney said, "Because I am 
going to give you twenty." 

And I said Yes, sir, and he told me how to find the right 
house, and what to do when I found it. Only there wasn't 
any paper to carry this time because Uncle Rodney said how 
this was a twenty-quarter job, and so it was too important 
to put on paper and besides I wouldn't need a paper because 
I would not know them anyhow, and his voice coming hiss- 
ing down from behind the shutter where I couldn't see him 
and still sounding like when he cussed while he was saying 
how papa and Uncle Fred had done him a favor by nailing 
up the door and window and they didn't even have sense 
enough to know it. 



That Will Be Fine 281 

"Start at the corner of the house and count three windows. 
Then throw the handful of gravel against the window. 
Then when the window opens never mind who it will be, 
you won't know anyway just say who you are and then 
say 'He will be at the corner with the buggy in ten minutes. 
Bring the jewelry.' Now you say it," Uncle Rodney said. 

"He will be at the corner with the buggy in ten minutes. 
Bring the jewelry," I said. 

"Say 'Bring all the jewelry,' " Uncle Rodney said. 

"Bring all the jewelry," I said. 

"Good," Uncle Rodney said. Then he said, "Well? What 
are you waiting on?" 

"For the twenty quarters," I said. 

Uncle Rodney cussed again. "Do you expect me to pay 
you before you have done the work?" he said. 

"You said about a buggy," I said. "Maybe you will forget 
to pay me before you go and you might not get back until 
after we go back home. And besides, that day last summer 
when we couldn't do any business with Mrs. Tucker be- 
cause she was sick and you wouldn't pay me the nickel be- 
cause you said it wasn't your fault Mrs. Tucker was sick." 

Then Uncle Rodney cussed hard and quiet behind the 
crack and then he said, "Listen. I haven't got the twenty 
quarters now. I haven't even got one quarter now. And the 
only way I can get any is to get out of here and finish this 
business. And I can't finish this business tonight unless you do 
your work. See? I'll be right behind you. I'll be waiting right 
there at the corner in the buggy when you come back. Now, 
go on. Hurry." 



V 

So I WENT ON ACROSS THE YARD, only the moon was bright 
now and I walked behind the fence until I got to the street* 



282 The Village 

And I could hear the firecrackers and I could see the Roman 
candles and skyrockets sliding up the sky, but the fireworks 
were all downtown, and so all I could see along the street was 
the candles and wreaths in the windows. So I came to the 
lane, went up the lane to the stable, and I could hear the 
horse in the stable, but I didn't know whether it was the right 
stable or not; but pretty soon Uncle Rodney kind of jumped 
around the corner of the stable and said Here you are, and 
he showed me where to stand and listen toward the house and 
he went back into the stable. But I couldn't hear anything 
but Uncle Rodney harnessing the horse, and then he whistled 
and I went back and he had the horse already hitched to the 
buggy and I said Whose horse and buggy is this; it's a lot 
skinnier than Grandpa's horse? And Uncle Rodney said It's 
my horse now, only damn this moonlight to hell. Then I 
went back down the lane to the street and there wasn't any- 
body coming so I waved my arm in the moonlight, and the 
buggy came up and I got in and we went fast. The side cur- 
tains were up and so I couldn't see the skyrockets and Roman 
candles from town, but I could hear the firecrackers and I 
thought maybe we were going through town and maybe 
Uncle Rodney would stop and give me some of the twenty 
quarters and I could buy Grandpa a present for tomorrow, 
but we didn't; Uncle Rodney just raised the side curtain 
without stopping and then I could see the house, the two 
magnolia trees, but we didn't stop until we came to the 
corner. 

"Now," Uncle Rodney said, "when the window opens, 
say 'He will be at the corner in ten minutes. Bring all the 
jewelry.' Never mind who it will be. You don't want to 
know who it is. You want to even forget what house it is. 
See?" 

"Yes, sir," I said. "And then you will pay me the " 

"Yes!" he said, cussing. "Yes! Get out of here quick!" 



That Will Be Fine 283 

So I got out and the buggy went on and I went back up 
the street. And the house was dark all right except for one 
light, so it was the right one, besides the two trees. So I went 
across the yard and counted the three windows and I was 
just about to throw the gravel when a lady ran out from be- 
hind a bush and grabbed me. She kept on trying to say some- 
thing, only I couldn't tell what it was, and besides she never 
had time to say very much anyhow because a man ran out 
from behind another bush and grabbed us both. Only he 
grabbed her by the mouth, because I could tell that from the 
kind of slobbering noise she made while she was fighting to 
get loose. 

"Well, boy?" he said. "What is it? Are you the one?" 

"I work for Uncle Rodney," I said. 

"Then you're the one," he said. Now the lady was fighting 
2nd slobbering sure enough, but he held her by the mouth. 
"All right. What is it?" 

Only I didn't know Uncle Rodney ever did business with 
men. But maybe after he began to work in the Compress As- 
sociation he had to. And then he had told me I would not 
know them anyway, so maybe that was what he meant. 

"He says to be at the corner in ten minutes," I said. "And 
to bring all the jewelry. He said for me to say that twice. 
Bring all the jewelry." 

The lady was slobbering and fighting worse than ever 
now, so maybe he had to turn me loose so he could hold her 
with both hands. 

"Bring all the jewelry," he said, holding the lady with both 
hands now. "That's a good idea. That's fine. I don't blame 
him for telling you to say that twice. All right. Now you go 
back to the corner and wait and when he comes, tell him this: 
"She says to come and help carry it.' Say that to him twice, 
too. Understand?" 

"Then I'll get my twenty quarters," I said. 



284 The Village 

"Twenty quarters, hah?" the man said, holding the lady. 
"That's what you are to get, is it? That's not enough. You 
tell him this, too: 'She says to give you a piece of the jew- 
elry.' Understand?" 

"I just want my twenty quarters," I said. 

Then he and the lady went back behind the bushes again 
and I went on, too, back toward the corner, and I could see 
the Roman candles and skyrockets again from toward town 
and I could hear the firecrackers, and then the buggy came 
back and Uncle Rodney was hissing again behind the curtain 
like when he was behind the slats on Mandy's window. 

"Well? "he said. 

"She said for you to come and help carry it," I said. 

"What?" Uncle Rodney said. "She said he's not there?'" 

"No, sir. She said for you to come and help carry it. For 
me to say that twice." Then I said, "Where's my twenty 
quarters?" because he had already jumped out of the buggy 
and jumped across the walk into the shadow of some bushes. 
So I went into the bushes too and said, "You said you would 
give " 

"All right; all right!" Uncle Rodney said. He was kind of 
squatting along the bushes; I could hear him breathing. "I'll 
give them to you tomorrow. I'll give you thirty quarters 
tomorrow. Now you get to hell on home. And if they have 
been down to Mandy's house, you don't know anything. 
Run, now. Hurry." 

"I'd rather have the twenty quarters tonight," I said. 

He was squatting fast along in the shadow of the bushes, 
and I was right behind him, because when he whirled around 
he almost touched me, but I jumped back out of the bushes 
in time and he stood there cussing at me and then he stooped 
down and I saw it was a stick in his hand and I turned and 
ran. Then he went on, squatting along in the shadow, and 
then I went back to the buggy, because the day after Christ- 



That Will Be Fine 285 

mas we would go back to Jefferson, and so if Uncle Rodney 
didn't get back before then I would not see him again until 
next summer and then maybe he would be in business with 
another lady and my twenty quarters would be like my 
nickel that time when Mrs. Tucker was sick. So I waited by 
the buggy and I could watch the skyrockets and the Roman 
candles and I could hear the firecrackers from town, only it 
was late now and so maybe all the stores would be closed and 
so I couldn't buy Grandpa a present, even when Uncle Rod- 
ney came back and gave me my twenty quarters. So I was 
listening to the firecrackers and thinking about how maybe I 
could tell Grandpa that I had wanted to buy him a present 
and so maybe he might give me fifteen cents instead of a dime 
anyway, when all of a sudden they started shooting fire- 
crackers back at the house where Uncle Rodney had gone. 
Only they just shot five of them fast, and when they didn't 
shoot any more I thought that maybe in a minute they would 
shoot the skyrockets and Roman candles too. But they didn't. 
They just shot the five firecrackers right quick and then 
stopped, and I stood by the buggy and then folks began to 
come out of the houses and holler at one another and then I 
began to see men running toward the house where Uncle 
Rodney had gone, and then a man came out of the yard fast 
and went up the street toward Grandpa's and I thought at 
first it was Uncle Rodney and that he had forgotten the 
buggy, until I saw that it wasn't. 

But Uncle Rodney never came back and so I went on 
toward the yard to where the men were, because I could still 
watch the buggy too and see Uncle Rodney if he came back 
out of the bushes, and I came to the yard and I saw six men 
carrying something long and then two other men ran up and 
stopped me and one of them said Hell-fire, it's one of those 
kids, the one from Jefferson. And I could see then that what 
the men were carrying was a window blind with something 



286 The Village 

wrapped in a quilt on it and so I thought at first that they had 
come to help Uncle Rodney carry the jewelry, only I didn't 
see Uncle Rodney anywhere, and then one of the men said, 
"Who? One of the kids? Hell-fire, somebody take him on 
home." 

So the man picked me up, but I said I had to wait on Uncle 
Rodney, and the man said that Uncle Rodney would be all 
right, and I said But I wanted to wait for him here, and then 
one of the men behind us said Damn it, get him on out of 
here, and we went on. I was riding on the man's back and 
then I could look back and see the six men in the moonlight 
carrying the blind with the bundle on it, and I said Did it 
belong to Uncle Rodney? and the man said No, if it be- 
longed to anybody now it belonged to Grandpa. And so 
then I knew what it was. 

"It's a side of beef," I said. "You are going to take it to 
Grandpa." Then the other man made a funny sound and the 
one I was riding on said Yes, you might call it a side of beef, 
and I said, "It's a Christmas present for Grandpa. Who is it 
going to be from? Is it from Uncle Rodney?" 

"No," the man said. "Not from him. Call it from the men 
of Mottstown. From all the husbands in Mottstown." 



VI 

THEN WE CAME in sight of Grandpa's house. And now the 
lights were all on, even on the porch, and I could see folks 
in the hall, I could see ladies with shawls over their heads,, 
and some more of them going up the walk toward the porch, 
and then I could hear somebody in the house that sounded 
like singing and then papa came out of the house and came 
down the walk to the gate and we came up and the man put 
me down and I saw Rosie waiting at the gate too. Only it 
didn't sound like singing now because there wasn't any music 



That Will Be Fine 287 

with it, and so maybe it was Aunt Louisa again and so maybe 
she didn't like Christmas now any better than Grandpa said 
he didn't like it. 

"It's a present for Grandpa," I said. 

"Yes," papa said. "You go on with Rosie and go to bed. 
Mamma will be there soon. But you be a good boy until she 
comes. You mind Rosie. All right, Rosie. Take him on. 
Hurry." 

"You don't need to tell me that," Rosie said. She took my 
hand. "Come on." 

Only we didn't go back into the yard, because Rosie came 
out the gate and we went up the street. And then I thought 
maybe we were going around the back to dodge the people 
and we didn't do that, either. We just went on up the street, 
and I said, "Where are we going?" 

And Rosie said, "We gonter sleep at a lady's house name 
Mrs. Jordon." 

So we went on. I didn't say anything. Because papa had 
forgotten to say anything about my slipping out of the house 
yet and so maybe if I went on to bed and stayed quiet he 
would forget about it until tomorrow too. And besides, the 
main thing was to get a holt of Uncle Rodney and get my 
twenty quarters before we went back home, and so maybe 
that would be all right tomorrow too. So we went on and 
Rosie said Yonder's the house, and we went in the yard and 
then all of a sudden Rosie saw the possum. It was in a persim- 
mon tree in Mrs. Jordon's yard and I could see it against the 
moonlight too, and I hollered, "Run! Run and get Mrs. Jor- 
don's ladder!" 

And Rosie said, "Ladder my foot! You going to bed!" 

But I didn't wait. I began to run toward the house, with 
Rosie running behind me and hollering You, Georgie! You 
come back here! But I didn't stop. We could get the ladder 
and get the possum and give it to Grandpa along with the 



288 The Village 

side of meat and it wouldn't cost even a dime and then maybe 
Grandpa might even give me a quarter too, and then when I 
got the twenty quarters from Uncle Rodney I would have 
twenty-one quarters and that will be fine. 



That Evening Sun 



i 

MONDAY is NO DIFFERENT from any other weekday in Jeffer- 
son now. The streets are paved now, and the telephone and 
electric companies are cutting down more and more of the 
shade trees the water oaks, the maples and locusts and elms 
to make room for iron poles bearing clusters of bloated and 
ghostly and bloodless grapes, and we have a city laundry 
which makes the rounds on Monday morning, gathering the 
bundles of clothes into bright-colored, specially-made motor 
cars: the soiled wearing of a whole week now flees appari- 
tionlike behind alert and irritable electric horns, with a long 
diminishing noise of rubber and asphalt like tearing silk, and 
even the Negro women who still take in white people's 
washing after the old custom, fetch and deliver it in auf.o- 
mobiles. 

But fifteen years ago, on Monday morning the quiet, 
dusty, shady streets would be full of Negro women with, 
balanced on their steady, turbaned heads, bundles of clothes 
tied up in sheets, almost as large as cotton bales, carried so 
without touch of hand between the kitchen door of the white 
house and the jlackened washpot beside a cabin door in 
Negro Hollow. 

Nancy would set her bundle on the top of her head, then 
upon the bundle in turn she would set the black straw sailor 

289 



290 The Village 

hat which she wore winter and summer. She was tall, with a 
high, sad face sunken a little where her teeth were missing. 
Sometimes we would go a part of the way down the lane and 
across the pasture with her, to watch the balanced bundle 
and the hat that never bobbed nor wavered, even when she 
walked down into the ditch and up the other side and stooped 
through the fence. She would go down on her hands and 
knees and crawl through the gap, her head rigid, uptilted, 
the bundle steady as a rock or a balloon, and rise to her feet 
again and go on. 

Sometimes the husbands of the washing women would 
fetch and deliver the clothes, but Jesus never did that for 
Nancy, even before father told him to stay away from our 
house, even when Dilsey was sick and Nancy would come to 
cook for us. 

And then about half the time we'd have to go down the 
lane to Nancy's cabin and tell her to come on and cook 
breakfast. We would stop at the ditch, because father told 
us to not have anything to do with Jesus he was a short 
black man, with a razor scar down his face and we would 
throw rocks at Nancy's house until she came to the door, 
leaning her head around it without any clothes on. 

"What yawl mean, chunking my house?" Nancy said. 
"What you little devils mean?" 

"Father says for you to come on and get breakfast," Caddy 
said. "Father says it's over a half an hour now, and you've 
got to come this minute." 

"I aint studying no breakfast," Nancy said. "I going tc 
get my sleep out." 

"I bet you're drunk," Jason said. "Father says you're 
drunk. Are you drunk, Nancy?" 

"Who says I is?" Nancy said. "I got to get my sleep out 
1 dint studying no breakfast." 



That Evening Sun 291 

So after a while we quit chunking the cabin and went back 
home. When she finally came, it was too late for me to go to 
school. So we thought it was whisky until that day they ar- 
rested her again and they were taking her to jail and they 
passed Mr Stovall. He was the cashier in the bank and a dea- 
con in the Baptist church, and Nancy began to say: 

"When you going to pay me, white man? When you going 
to pay me, white man? It's been three times now since you 
paid me a cent " Mr Stovall knocked her down, but she 
kept on saying, "When you going to pay me, white man? It's 
been three times now since " until Mr Stovall kicked her 
in the mouth with his heel and the marshal caught Mr Stovall 
back, and Nancy lying in the street, laughing. She turned 
her head and spat out some blood and teeth and said, "It's 
oeen three times now since he paid me a cent." 

That was how she lost her teeth, and all that day they told 
about Nancy and Mr Stovall, and all that night the ones that 
passed the jail could hear Nancy singing and yelling. They 
could see her hands holding to the window bars, and a lot of 
them stopped along the fence, listening to her and to the 
jailer trying to make her stop. She didn't shut up until almost 
daylight, when the jailer began to hear a bumping and scrap- 
ing upstairs and he went up there and found Nancy hanging 
from the window bar. He said that it was cocaine and not 
whisky, because no nigger would try to commit suicide un- 
less he was full of cocaine, because a nigger full of cocaine 
wasn't a nigger any longer. 

The jailer cut her down and revived her; then he beat her, 
whipped her. She had hung herself with her dress. She had 
fixed it all right, but when they arrested her she didn't have 
on anything except a dress and so she didn't have anything 
to tie her hands with and she couldn't make her hands let go 
of the window ledge. So the jailer heard the noise and ran up 
there and found Nancy hanging from the window, stark 



292 The Village 

naked, her belly already swelling out a little, like a little 
balloon. 

When Dilsey was sick in her cabin and Nancy was cook- 
ing for us, we could see her apron swelling out; that was 
before father told Jesus to stay away from the house. Jesus 
was in the kitchen, sitting behind the stove, with his razor 
scar on his black face like a piece of dirty string. He said it 
was a watermelon that Nancy had under her dress. 

"It never come off of your vine, though," Nancy said. 

"Off of what vine?" Caddy said. 

"I can cut down the vine it did come off of," Jesus said. 

"What makes you want to talk like that before these chil- 
len?" Nancy said. "Whyn't you go on to work? You done et. 
You want Mr Jason to catch you hanging around his kitchen, 
talking that way before these chillen?" 

"Talking what way?" Caddy said. "What vine?" 

"I cant hang around white man's kitchen," Jesus said. "But 
white man can hang around mine. White man can come in 
my house, but I cant stop him. When white man want to 
come in my house, I aint got no house. I cant stop him, but he 
cant kick me outen it. He cant do that." 

Dilsey was still sick in her cabin. Father told Jesus to stay 
off our place. Dilsey was still sick. It was a long time. We 
were in the library after supper. 

"Isn't Nancy through in the kitchen yet?" mother said. 
"It seems to me that she has had plenty of time to have 
finished the dishes." 

"Let Quentin go and see," father said. "Go and see if 
Nancy is through, Quentin. Tell her she can go on home." 

I went to the kitchen. Nancy was through. The dishes 
were put away and the fire was out. Nancy was sitting in a 
chair, close to the cold stove. She looked at me. 

"Mother wants to know if you are through," I said. 

"Yes," Nancy said. She looked at me, "I done finished." 
She looked at me. 



Thai Evening Sun 293 

"What is it?" I said. "What is it?" 

"I aint nothing but a nigger," Nancy said. "It aint none of 
my fault." 

She looked at me, sitting in the chair before the cold stove, 
the sailor hat on her head. I went back to the library. It was 
the cold stove and all, when you think of a kitchen being 
warm and busy and cheerful. And with a cold stove and the 
dishes all put away, and nobody wanting to eat at that hour. 

"Is she through?" mother said. 

"Yessum," I said. 

"What is she doing?" mother said. 

"She's not doing anything. She's through." 

"I'll go and see," father said. 

"Maybe she's waiting for Jesus to come and take her 
home," Caddy said. 

"Jesus is gone," I said. Nrncy told us how one morning 
she woke up and Jesus was gone. 

"He quit me," Nancy said. "Done gone to Memphis, I 
reckon. Dodging them city p<?-lice for a while, I reckon." 

"And a good riddance," father said. "I hope he stays 
there." 

"Nancy's scaired of the dark," Jason said. 

"So are you," Caddy said. 

"I'm not," Jason said. 

"Scairy cat," Caddy said. 

"I'm not," Jason said. 

"You, Candace!" mother said. Father came back. 

"I am going to walk down the lane with Nancy," he said. 
"She says that Jesus is back." 

"Has she seen him?" mother said. 

"No. Some Negro sent her word that he was back in town. 
I wont be long." 

"You'll leave me alone, to take Nancy home?" mother said. 
"Is her safety more precious to you than mine?" 

"I wont be long," father said. 



294 The Village 

"You'll leave these children unprotected, with that Negro 
about?" 

"I'm going too," Caddy said. "Let me go, Father." 

"What would he do with them, if he were unfortunate 
enough to have them?" father said. 

"I want to go, too," Jason said. 

"Jason!" mother said. She was speaking to father. You 
could tell that by the way she said the name. Like she be- 
lieved that all day father had been trying to think of doing 
the thing she wouldn't like the most, and that she knew all 
the time that after a while he would think of it. I stayed quiet, 
because father and I both knew that mother would want 
him to make me stay with her if she just thought of it in 
time. So father didn't look at me. I was the oldest. I was nine 
and Caddy was seven and Jason was five. 

"Nonsense," father said. "We wont be long." 

Nancy had her hat on. We came to the lane. "Jesus always 
been good to me," Nancy said. "Whenever he had two dol- 
lars, one of them was mine." We walked in the lane. "If I 
can just get through the lane," Nancy said, "I be all right 
then." 

The lane was always dark. "This is where Jason got scared 
on Hallowe'en," Caddy said. 

"I didn't," Jason said. 

"Cant Aunt Rachel do anything with him?" father said. 
Aunt Rachel was old. She lived in a cabin beyond Nancy's, 
by herself. She had white hair and she smoked a pipe in the 
door, all day long; she didn't work any more. They said she 
was Jesus' mother. Sometimes she said she was and some- 
times she said she wasn't any kin to Jesus. 

"Yes, you did," Caddy said. "You were scairder than 
Frony. You were scairder than T.P even. Scairder than 
niggers." 

"Cant nobody do nothing with him," Nancy said. "He say 



That Evening Sun 295 

I done woke up the devil in him and aint but one thing going 
to lay it down again." 

"Well, he's gone now," father said. "There's nothing for 
you to be afraid of now. And if you'd just let white men 
alone." 

"Let what white men alone?" Caddy said. "How let them 
alone?" 

"He aint gone nowhere," Nancy said. "I can feel him. I 
can feel him now, in this lane. He hearing us talk, every 
word, hid somewhere, waiting. I aint seen him, and I aint 
going to see him again but once more, with that razor in his 
mouth. That razor on that string down his back, inside his 
shirt. And then I aint going to be even surprised." 

"I wasn't scaired," Jason said. 

"If you'd behave yourself, you'd have kept out of this," 
father said. "But it's all right now. He's probably in St. Louis 
now. Probably got another wife by now and forgot all about 
you." 

"If he has, I better not find out about it," Nancy said. "I'd 
stand there right over them, and every time he wropped her, 
I'd cut that arm off. I'd cut his head off and I'd slit her belly 
and I'd shove" 

"Hush," father said. 

"Slit whose belly, Nancy?" Caddy said. 

"I wasn't scaired," Jason said. "I'd walk right down this 
lane by myself." 

"Yah," Caddy said. "You wouldn't dare to put your foot 
down in it if we were not here too." 



II 

DILSEY WAS STILL SICK, so we took Nancy home every night 
until mother said, "How much longer is this going on? I to 



296 The Village 

be left alone in this big house while you take home a fright- 
ened Negro?" 

We fixed a pallet in the kitchen for Nancy. One night we 
waked up, hearing the sound. It was not singing and it waj> 
not crying, coming up the dark stairs. There was a light in 
mother's room and we heard father going down the hall, 
down the back stairs, and Caddy and I went into the hall. 
The floor was cold. Our toes curled away from it while we 
listened to the sound. It was like singing and it wasn't like 
singing, like the sounds that Negroes make. 

Then it stopped and we heard father going down the back 
stairs, and we went to the head of the stairs. Then the sound 
began again, in the stairway, not loud, and we could see 
Nancy's eyes halfway up the stairs, against the wall They 
looked like cat's eyes do, like a big cat against the wall, 
watching us. When we came down the steps to where she 
was, she quit making the sound again, and we stood there 
until father came back up from the kitchen, with his pistol in 
his hand. He went back down with Nancy and they came 
back with Nancy's pallet. 

We spread the pallet in our room. After the light in 
mother's room went off, we could see Nancy's eyes again. 
"Nancy," Caddy whispered, "are you asleep, Nancy?" 

Nancy whispered something. It was oh or no, I dont know 
which. Like nobody had made it, like it came from nowhere 
and went nowhere, until it was like Nancy was not there at 
all; that I had looked so hard at her eyes on the stairs that 
they had got printed on my eyeballs, like the sun does when 
you have closed your eyes and there is no sun. "Jesus," 
Nancy whispered. "Jesus." 

"Was it Jesus?" Caddy said. "Did he try to come into the 
kitchen?" 

"Jesus," Nancy said. Like this: Jeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesus, until 
the sound went out, like a match or a candle does. 



That Evening Sun 297 

"It's the other Jesus she means," I said. 

"Can you see us, Nancy?" Caddy whispered. "Can you 
see our eyes too?" 

"I aint nothing but a nigger," Nancy said. "God knows. 
God knows." 

"What did you see down there in the kitchen?" Caddy 
whispered. "What tried to get in?" 

"God knows," Nancy said. We could see her eyes. "God 
knows." 

Dilsey got well. She cooked dinner. "You'd better stay in 
bed a day or two longer," father said. 

"What for?" Dilsey said. "If I had been a day later, this 
place would be to rack and ruin. Get on out of here now. 
and let me get my kitchen straight again." 

Dilsey cooked supper too. And that night, just before 
dark, Nancy came into the kitchen. 

"How do you know he's back?" Dilsey said. "You aint 
seen him." 

"Jesus is a nigger," Jason said. 

"I can feel him," Nancy said. "I can feel him laying yonder 
in the ditch." 

"Tonight?" Dilsey said. "Is he there tonight?" 

"Dilsey's a nigger too," Jason said. 

"You try to eat something," Dilsey said. 

"I dont want nothing," Nancy said. 

"I aint a nigger," Jason said. 

"Drink some coffee," Dilsey said. She poured a cup of 
coffee for Nancy. "Do you know he's out there tonight? 
How come you know it's tonight?" 

"I know," Nancy said. "He's there, waiting. I know. I 
done lived with him too long. I know what he is fixing to do 
fore he know it himself." 

"Drink some coffee," Dilsey said. Nancy held the cup to 
her mouth and blew into the cup. Her mouth pursed out 



298 The Village 

like a spreading adder's, like a rubber mouth, like she had 

blown all the color out of her lips with blowing the coffee. 

"I aint a nigger," Jason said. "Are you a nigger, Nancy?" 

"I hellborn, child," Nancy said. "I wont be nothing soon. 

I going back where I come from soon." 

Ill 

SHE BEGAN TO DRINK the coffee. While she was drinking, hold- 
ing the cup in both hands, she began to make the sound again. 
She made the sound into the cup and the coffee sploshed out 
onto her hands and her dress. Her eyes looked at us and she 
sat there, her elbows on her knees, holding the cup in both 
hands, looking at us across the wet cup, making the sound. 
"Look at Nancy," Jason said. "Nancy cant cook for us now. 
Dilsey's got well now." 

"You hush up," Dilsey said. Nancy held the cup in both 
hands, looking at us, making the sound, like there were two 
of them: one looking at us and the other making the sound. 
"Whyn't you let Mr Jason telefoam the marshal?" Dilsey 
said. Nancy stopped then, holding the cup in her long brown 
hands. She tried to drink some coffee again, but it sploshed 
out of the cup, onto her hands and her dress, and she put the 
cup down. Jason watched her. 

"I cant swallow it," Nancy said. "I swallows but it wont 
go down me." 

"You go down to the cabin," Dilsey said. "Frony will fix 
you a pallet and I'll be there soon." 

"Wont no nigger stop him," Nancy said. 

"I aint a nigger," Jason said. "Am I, Dilsey?" 

"I reckon not," Dilsey said. She looked at Nancy. "I dont 
reckon so. What you going to do, then?" 

Nancy looked at us. Her eyes went fast, like she was afraid 



That Evening Sun 299 

there wasn't time to look, without hardly moving at all. She 
looked at us, at all three of us at one time. "You member that 
night I stayed in yawls' room?" she said. She told about how 
we waked up early the next morning, and played. We had 
to play quiet, on her pallet, until father woke up and it was 
time to get breakfast. "Go and ask your maw to let me stay 
here tonight," Nancy said. "I wont need no pallet. We can 
play some more." 

Caddy asked mother. Jason went too. "I cant have 
Negroes sleeping in the bedrooms," mother said. Jason cried. 
He cried until mother said he couldn't have any dessert for 
three days if he didn't stop. Then Jason said he would stop 
if Dilsey would make a chocolate cake. Father was there. 

"Why dont you do something about it?" mother said. 
"What do we have officers for?" 

"Why is Nancy afraid of Jesus?" Caddy said. "Are you 
afraid of father, mother?" 

"What could the officers do?" father said. "If Nancy 
hasn't seen him, how could the officers find him?" 

"Then why is she afraid?" mother said. 

"She says he is there. She says she knows he is there 
tonight." 

"Yet we pay taxes," mother said. "I must wait here alone 
in this big house while you take a Negro woman home." 

"You know that I am not lying outside with a razor," 
father said. 

"I'll stop if Dilsey will make a chocolate cake," Jason 
said. Mother told us to go out and father said he didn't 
know if Jason would get a chocolate cake or not, but he 
knew what Jason was going to get in about a minute. We 
went back to the kitchen and told Nancy. 

"Father said for you to go home and lock the door, and 
you'll be all right," Caddy said. "All right from what, 
Nancy? Is Jesus mad at you?" Nancy was holding the coffee 



300 The Village 

cup in her hands again, her elbows on her knees and her 
hands holding the cup between her knees. She was looking 
into the cup. "What have you done that made Jesus mad?" 
Caddy said. Nancy let the cup go. It didn't break on the 
floor, but the coffee spilled out, and Nancy sat there with 
her hands still making the shape of the cup. She began to 
make the sound again, not loud. Not singing and not unsing- 
ing. We watched her. 

"Here," Dilsey said. "You quit that, now. You get aholt 
of yourself. You wait here. I going to get Versh to vvalk 
home with you." Dilsey went out. 

We looked at Nancy. Her shoulders kept shaking, but 
she quit making the sound. We watched her. "What's 
Jesus going to do to you?" Caddy said. "He went away," 

Nancy looked at us. "We had fun that night I stayed 
in yawls' room, didn't we?" 

"I didn't," Jason said. "I didn't have any fun." 

"You were asleep in mother's room," Caddy said. "You 
were not there." 

"Let's go down to my house and have some more fun," 
Nancy said. 

"Mother wont let us," I said. "It's too late now." 

"Dont bother her," Nancy said. "We can tell her in the 
morning. She wont mind." 

"She wouldn't let us," I said. 

"Dont ask her now," Nancy said. "Dont bother her now." 

"She didn't say we couldn't go," Caddy said. 

"We didn't ask," I said. 

"If you go, I'll tell," Jason said. 

"We'll have fun," Nancy said. "They won't mind, just to 
my house. I been working for yawl a long time. They won't 
mind." 

"I'm not afraid to go," Caddy said. "Jason is the one that's 
afraid. He'll tell." 



That Evening Sun 301 

"I'm not," Jason said. 

"Yes, you are," Caddy said. "You'll tell." 

"I won't tell," Jason said. "I'm not afraid." 

"Jason ain't afraid to go with me," Nancy said. "Is you, 
Jason?" 

"Jason is going to tell," Caddy said. The lane was dark. 
We passed the pasture gate. "I bet if something was to jump 
out from behind that gate, Jason would holler." 

"I wouldn't," Jason said. We walked down the lane. 
Nancy was talking loud. 

"What are you talking so loud for, Nancy?" Caddy said. 

"Who; me?" Nancy said. "Listen at Quentin and Caddy 
and Jason saying I'm talking loud." 

"You talk like there was five of us here," Caddy said. "You 
talk like father was here too." 

"Who; me talking loud, Mr Jason?" Nancy said. 

"Nancy called Jason 'Mister,' " Caddy said. 

"Listen how Caddy and Quentin and Jason talk," Nancy 
said. 

"We're not talking loud," Caddy said. "You're the one 
that's talking like father " 

"Hush," Nancy said; "hush, Mr Jason." 

"Nancy called Jason 'Mister' aguh " 

"Hush," Nancy said. She was talking loud when WQ 
crossed the ditch and stooped through the fence where she 
used to stoop through with the clothes on her head. Then we 
came to her house. We were going fast then. She opened the 
door. The smell of the house was like the lamp and the smell 
of Nancy was like the wick, like they were waiting for one 
another to begin to smell. She lit the lamp and closed the 
door and put the bar up. Then she quit talking loud, looking 
at us. 

"What're we going to do? " Caddy said. 



302 The Village 

"What do yawl want to do?" Nancy said. 

"You said we would have some fun," Caddy said. 

There was something about Nancy's house; something you 
could smell besides Nancy and the house. Jason smelled it, 
even. "I don't want to stay here," he said. "I want to go 
home." 

"Go home, then," Caddy said. 

"I don't want to go by myself," Jason said. 

"We're going to have some fun," Nancy said. 

"How?" Caddy said. 

Nancy stood by the door. She was looking at us, only it 
was like she had emptied her eyes, like she had quit using 
them. "What do you want to do?" she said. 

"Tell us a story," Caddy said. "Can you tell a story?" 

"Yes," Nancy said. 

"Tell it," Caddy said. We looked at Nancy. "You don't 
know any stories." 

"Yes," Nancy said. "Yes, I do." 

She came and sat in a chair before the hearth. There was a 
little fire there. Nancy built it up, when it was already hot 
inside. She built a good blaze. She told a story. She talked 
like her eyes looked, like her eyes watching us and her voice 
talking to us did not belong to her. Like she was living some- 
where else, waiting somewhere else. She was outside the 
cabin. Her voice was inside and the shape of her, the Nancy 
that could stoop under a barbed wire fence with a bundle of 
clothes balanced on her head as though without weight, like 
a balloon, was there. But that was all. "And so this here 
queen come walking up to the ditch, where that bad man was 
hiding. She was walking up to the ditch, and she say, 'If I can 
just get past this here ditch,' was what she say . . ." 

"What ditch?" Caddy said. "A ditch like that one out 
there? Why did a queen want to go into a ditch?" 

"To get to her house," Nancy said. She looked at us. "She 



That Evening Sun 303 

had to cross the ditch to get into her house quick and bar 
the door." 

"Why did she want to go home and bar the door?" Caddy 
said. 



IV 

NANCY LOOKED at us. She quit talking. She looked at us. 
Jason's legs stuck straight out of his pants where he sat on 
Nancy's lap. "I don't think that's a good story," he said. "I 
want to go home." 

"Maybe we had better," Caddy said. She got up from the 
floor. "I bet they are looking for us right now." She went 
toward the door. 

"No," Nancy said. "Don't open it." She got up quick and 
passed Caddy. She didn't touch the door, the wooden bar. 

"Why not?" Caddy said. 

"Come back to the lamp," Nancy said. "We'll have fun. 
You don't have to go." 

"We ought to go," Caddy said. "Unless we have a lot of 
fun." She and Nancy came back to the fire, the lamp. 

"I want to go home," Jason said. "I'm going to tell." 

"I know another story," Nancy said. She stood close to 
the lamp. She looked at Caddy, like when your eyes look up 
at a stick balanced on your nose. She had to look down to 
see Caddy, but her eyes looked like that, like when you are 
balancing a stick. 

"I won't listen to it," Jason said. "I'll bang on the floor." 

"It's a good one," Nancy said. "It's better than the other 
one." 

"What's it about?" Caddy said. Nancy was standing by 
the lamp. Her hand was on the lamp, against the light, long 
and brown. 

"Your hand is on that hot crlobe." Caddv said. "Don't it 
feel hot to your hand?" 



304 The Village 

Nancy looked at her hand on the lamp chimney. She took 
her hand away, slow. She stood there, looking at Caddy, 
wringing her long hand as though it were tied to her wrist 
with a string. 

"Let's do something else," Caddy said. 

"I want to go home," Jason said. 

"I got some popcorn," Nancy said. She looked at Caddy 
and then at Jason and then at me and then at Caddy again. 
"I got some popcorn." 

"I don't like popcorn," Jason said. "I'd rather have candy." 

Nancy looked at Jason. "You can hold the popper." She 
was still wringing her hand; it was long and limp and brown. 

"All right," Jason said. "I'll stay a while if I can do that. 
Caddy can't hold it. I'll want to go home again if Caddy 
holds the popper." 

Nancy built up the fire. "Look at Nancy putting her 
hands in the fire," Caddy said. "What's the matter with you, 
Nancy?" 

"I got popcorn," Nancy said. "I got some." She took the 
popper from under the bed. It was broken. Jason began to 
cry. 

"Now we can't have any popcorn," he said. 

"We ought to go home, anyway," Caddy said. "Come on, 
Quentin." 

"Wait," Nancy said; "wait. I can fix it. Don't you want 
to help me fix it?" 

"I don't think I want any," Caddy said. "It's too late now." 

"You help me, Jason," Nancy said. "Don't you want to 
help me?" 

"No," Jason said. "I want to go home." 

"Hush," Nancy said; "hush. Watch. Watch me. I can fix 
it so Jason can hold it and pop the corn." She got a piece of 
wire and fixed the popper. 



That Evening Sun 305 

"It won't hold good," Caddy said. 

"Yes, it will," Nancy said. "Yawl watch. Yawl help me 
shell some corn." 

The popcorn was under the bed too. We shelled it into the 
popper and Nancy helped Jason hold the popper over the 
fire. 

"It's not popping," Jason said. "I want to go home." 

"You wait," Nancy said. "It'll begin to pop. We'll have 
fun then." She was sitting close to the fire. The lamp was 
turned up so high it was beginning to smoke. 

"Why don't you turn it down some?" I said. 

"It's all right," Nancy said. "I'll clean it. Yawl wait. The 
popcorn will start in a minute." 

"I don't believe it's going to start," Caddy said. "We ought 
to start home, anyway. They'll be worried." 

"No," Nancy said. "It's going to pop. Dilsey will tell um 
yawl with me. I been working for yawl long time. They 
won't mind if yawl at my house. You wait, now. It'll start 
popping any minute now." 

Then Jason got some smoke in his eyes and he began to 
cry. He dropped the popper into the fire. Nancy got a wet 
rag ard wiped Jason's face, but he didn't stop crying. 

"Hush," she said. "Hush." But he didn't hush. Caddy took 
the popper out of the fire. 

"It's burned up," she said. "You'll have to get some more 
popcorn, Nancy." 

"Did you put all of it in?" Nancy said. 

"Yes," Caddy said. Nancy looked at Caddy. Then she 
took the popper and opened it and poured the cinders into 
her apron and began to sort the grains, her hands long and 
brown, and we watching her. 

"Haven't you got any more?" Caddy said. 

"Yes," Nancy said; "yes. Look. This here ain't burnt. All 
we need to do is " 



306 The Village 

"I want to go home," Jason said. "I'm going to tell" 

"Hush," Caddy said. We all listened. Nancy's head was 
already turned toward the barred door, her eyes filled with 
red lamplight. "Somebody is coming," Caddy said. 

Then Nancy began to make that sound again, not loud, 
sitting there above the fire, her long hands dangling between 
her knees; all of a sudden water began to come out on her 
face in big drops, running down her face, carrying in each 
one a little turning ball of firelight like a spark until it 
dropped off her chin. "She's not crying," I said. 

"I ain't crying," Nancy said. Her eyes were closed. "I ain't 
crying. Who is it?" 

"I don't know," Caddy said. She went to the door and 
looked out. "We've got to go now," she said. "Here comes 
father." 

"I'm going to tell," Jason said. "Yawl made me come." 

The water still ran down Nancy's face. She turned in her 
chair. "Listen. Tell him. Tell him we going to have fun. Tell 
him I take good care of yawl until in the morning. Tell him 
to let me come home with yawl and sleep on the floor. Tell 
him I won't need no pallet. We'll have fun. You member 
last time how we had so much fun?" 

"I didn't have fun," Jason said. "You hurt me. You put 
smoke in my eyes. I'm going to tell." 

V 

FATHER CAME IN. He looked at us. Nancy did not get up. 
"Tell him," she said. 
"Caddy made us come down here," Jason said. "I didn't 



want to." 



Father came to the fire. Nancy looked up at him. "Can't 
you go to Aunt Rachel's and stay?" he said. Nancy looked 
up at father, her hands between her knees. "He's not here," 



That Evening Sun 307 

father said. "I would have seen him. There's not a soul in 
sight." 

"He in the ditch," Nancy said. "He waiting in the ditch 
yonder." 

"Nonsense," father said. He looked at Nancy. "Do you 
know he's there?" 

"I got the sign," Nancy said. 

"What sign?" 

"I got it. It was on the table when I come in. It was a hog- 
bone, with blood meat still on it, laying by the lamp. He's 
out there. When yawl walk out that door, I gone." 

"Gone where, Nancy?" Caddy said. 

"I'm not a tattletale," Jason said. 

"Nonsense," father said. 

"He out there," Nancy said. "He looking through that 
window this minute, waiting for yawl to go. Then I gone." 

"Nonsense," father said. "Lock up your house and we'll 
take you on to Aunt Rachel's." 

" 'Twont do no good," Nancy said. She didn't look at 
father now, but he looked down at her, at her long, limp, 
moving hands. "Putting it off wont do no good." 

"Then what do you want to do?" father said. 

"I don't know," Nancy said. "I can't do nothing. Just put 
it off. And that don't do no good. I reckon it belong to me. 
I reckon what I going to get ain't no more than mine." 

"Get what?" Caddy said. "What's yours?" 

"Nothing," father said. "You all must get to bed." 

"Caddy made me come," Jason said. 

"Go on to Aunt Rachel's," father said. 

"It won't do no good," Nancy said. She sat before the 
fire, her elbows on her knees, her long hands between her 
knees. "When even your own kitchen wouldn't do no good. 
When even if I was sleeping on the floor in the room with 
your chillen, and the next morning there I am, and blood " 



The Village 

"Hush," father said. "Lock the door and put out the lamp 
and go to bed." 

"I scared of the dark," Nancy said. "I scared for it to hap- 
pen in the dark." 

"You mean you're going to sit right here with the lamp 
lighted?" father said. Then Nancy began to make the sound 
again, sitting before the fire, her long hands between her 
knees. "Ah, damnation," father said. "Come along, chillen. 
It's past bedtime." 

"When yawl go home, I gone," Nancy said. She talked 
quieter now, and her face looked quiet, like her hands. "Any- 
way, I got my coffin money saved up with Mr. Lovelady." 
Mr. Lovelady was a short, dirty man who collected the 
Negro insurance, coming around to the cabins or the 
kitchens every Saturday morning, to collect fifteen cents. He 
and his wife lived at the hotel. One morning his wife com- 
mitted suicide. They had a child, a little girl. He and the 
child went away. After a week or two he came back alone. 
We would see him going along the lanes and the back streets 
on Saturday mornings. 

"Nonsense," father said. "You'll be the first thing I'll see 
in the kitchen tomorrow morning." 

"You'll see what you'll see, I reckon," Nancy said. "But 
it will take the Lord to say what that will be." 



VI 

WE LEFT HER sitting before the fire. 

"Come and put the bar up," father said. But she didn't 
move. She didn't look at us again, sitting quietly there be- 
tween the lamp and the fire. From some distance down the 
lane we could look back and see her through the open door. 
"What, Father?" Caddy said. "What's going to happen?" 
"Nothing," father said. Jason was on father's back, so 



That Evening Sun 309 

Jason was the tallest of all of us. We went down into the 
ditch. I looked at it, quiet. I couldn't see much where the 
moonlight and the shadows tangled. 

"If Jesus is hid here, he can see us, cant he?" Caddy said. 

"He's not there," father said. "He went away a long time 
ago." 

"You made me come," Jason said, high; against the sky it 
looked like father had two heads, a little one and a big one. 
"I didn't want to." 

We went up out of the ditch. We could still see Nancy's 
house and the open door, but we couldn't see Nancy now, 
sitting before the fire with the door open, because she was 
tired. "I just done got tired," she said. "I just a nigger. It 
ain't no fault of mine." 

But we could hear her, because she began just after we 
came up out of the ditch, the sound that was not singing and 
not unsinging. "Who will do our washing now, Father?" 
I said. 

"I'm not a nigger," Jason said, high and close above 
father's head. 

"You're worse," Caddy said, "you are a tattletale. If some- 
thing was to jump out, you'd be scairder than a nigger." 

"I wouldn't," Jason said. 

"You'd cry," Caddy said. 

"Caddy," father said. 

"I wouldn't!" Jason said. 

"Scairy cat," Caddy said. 

"Candace!" father said. 



Ill THE WILDERNESS 



Red Leaves 

A Justice 

A Courtship 

Lol 



Red Leaves 



i 

THE TWO INDIANS crossed the plantation toward the slave 
quarters. Neat with whitewash, of baked soft brick, the two 
rows of houses in which lived the slaves belonging to the 
clan, faced one another across the mild shade of the lane 
marked and scored with naked feet and with a few home- 
made toys mute in the dust. There was no sign of life. 

"I know what we will find," the first Indian said. 

"What we will not find," the second said. Although it 
was noon, the lane was vacant, the doors of the cabins empty 
and quiet; no cooking smoke rose from any of the chinked 
and plastered chimneys. 

"Yes. It happened like this when the father of him who is 
now the Man, died." 

"You mean, of him who was the Man." 

"Yao." 

The first Indian's name was Three Basket. He was per- 
haps sixty. They were both squat men, a little solid, burgher- 
like; paunchy, with big heads, big, broad, dust-colored faces 
of a certain blurred serenity like carved heads on a ruined 
wall in Siam or Sumatra, looming out of a mist. The sun had 
done it, the violent sun, the violent shade. Their hair looked 
like sedge grass on burnt-over land. Clamped through one 
ear Three Basket wore an enameled snuffbox. 

3'3 



314 The Wilderness 

"I have said all the time that this is not the good way. In 
the old days there were no quarters, no Negroes. A man's 
time was his own then. He had time. Now he must spend 
most of it finding work for them who prefer sweating to do/' 

"They are like horses and dogs." 

"They are like nothing in this sensible world. Nothing 
contents them save sweat. They are worse than the white 
people." 

"It is not as though the Man himself had to find work for 
them to do." 

"You said it. I do not like slavery. It is not the good way. 
In the old days, there was the good way. But not now." 

"You do not remember the old way either." 

"I have listened to them who do. And I have tried this 
way. Man was not made to sweat." 

"That's so. See what it has done to their flesh." 

"Yes. Black. It has a bitter taste, too." 

"You have eaten of it?" 

"Once. I was young then, and more hardy in the appetite 
than now. Now it is different with me." 

"Yes. They are too valuable to eat now." 

"There is a bitter taste to the flesh which I do not like." 

"They are too valuable to eat, anyway, when the white 
men will give horses for them." 

They entered the lane. The mute, meager toys the 
fetish-shaped objects made of wood and rags and feathers 
lay in the dust about the patinaed doorsteps, among bones 
and broken gourd dishes. But there was no sound from any 
cabin, no face in any door; had not been since yesterday, 
when Issetibbeha died. But they already knew what they 
would find. 

It was in the central cabin, a house a little larger than the 
others, where at certain phases of the moon the Negroes 
would gather to begin their ceremonies before removing 



Red Leaves 3 1 5 

after nightfall to the creek bottom, where they kept the 
drums. In this room they kept the minor accessories, the 
cryptic ornaments, the ceremonial records which consisted 
of sticks daubed with red clay in symbols. It had a hearth in 
the center of the floor, beneath a hole in the roof, with a few 
cold wood ashes and a suspended iron pot. The window 
shutters were closed; when the two Indians entered, after 
the abashless sunlight they could distinguish nothing with the 
eyes save a movement, shadow, out of which eyeballs rolled, 
so that the place appeared to be full of Negroes. The two 
Indians stood in the doorway. 

"Yao," Basket said. "I said this is not the good way." 

"I don't think I want to be here," the second said. 

"That is black man's fear which you smell. It does not 
smell as ours does." 

"I don't think I want to be here." 

"Your fear has an odor too." 

"Maybe it is Issetibbeha which we smell." 

"Yao. He knows. He knows what we will find here. He 
knew when he died what we should find here today." Out 
of the rank twilight of the room the eyes, the smell, of 
Negroes rolled about them. "I am Three Basket, whom you 
know," Basket said into the room. "We are come from the 
Man. He whom we seek is gone?" The Negroes said nothing. 
The smell of them, of their bodies, seemed to ebb and flux in 
the still hot air. They seemed to be musing as one upon 
something remote, inscrutable. They were like a single 
octopus. They were like the roots of a huge tree uncovered, 
the earth broken momentarily upon the writhen, thick, fetid 
tangle of its lightless and outraged life. "Come," Basket said. 
"You know our errand. Is he whom we seek gone?" 

"They are thinking something," the second said. "I do 
not want to be here." 

"They are knowing something," Basket said. 



316 The Wilderness 

"They are hiding him, you think? " 

"No. He is gone. He has been gone since last night. It hap- 
pened like this before, when the grandfather of him who is 
now the Man died. It took us three days to catch him. For 
three days Doom lay above the ground, saying 1 see my 
horse and my dog. But I do not see my slave. What have 
you done with him that you will not permit me to lie 
quiet?'" 

"They do not like to die." 

"Yao. They cling. It makes trouble for us, always. A 
people without honor and without decorum. Always a 
trouble." 

"I do not like it here." 

"Nor do I. But then, they are savages; they cannot be 
expected to regard usage. That is why I say that this way 
is a bad way." 

"Yao. They cling. They would even rather work in the 
sun than to enter the earth with a chief. But he is gone." 

The Negroes had said nothing, made no sound. The 
white eyeballs rolled, wild, subdued; the smell was rank, 
violent. "Yes, they fear," the second said. "What shall we 
do now?" 

"Let us go and talk with the Man." 

"Will Moketubbe listen?" 

"What can he do? He will not like to. But he is the Man 



now." 



"Yao. He is the Man. He can wear the shoes with the red 
heels all the time now." They turned and went out. There 
was no door in the door frame. There were no doors in 
any of the cabins. 

"He did that anyway," Basket said. 

"Behind Issetibbeha's back. But now they are his shoes, 
since he is the Man." 

"Yao. Issetibbeha did not like it. I have heard. I know that 



Red Leaves 317 

he said to Moketubbe: 'When you are the Man, the shoes 
will be yours. But until then, they are my shoes.' But now 
Moketubbe is the Man; he can wear them." 

"Yao," the second said. "He is the Man now. He used to 
wear the shoes behind Issetibbeha's back, and it was not 
known if Issetibbeha knew this or not. And then Issetibbeha 
became dead, who was not old, and the shoes are Moketub- 
be's, since he is the Man now. What do you think of that?" 

"I don't think about it," Basket said. "Do you?" 

"No," the second said. 

"Good," Basket said. "You are wise." 



II 

THE HOUSE sat on a knoll, surrounded by oak trees. The 
front of it was one story in height, composed of the deck 
house of a steamboat which had gone ashore and which 
Doom, Issetibbeha's father, had dismantled with his slaves 
and hauled on cypress rollers twelve miles home overland. It 
took them five months. His house consisted at the time of one 
brick wall. He set the steamboat broadside on to the wall, 
where now the chipped and flaked gilding of the rococo 
cornices arched in faint splendor above the gilt lettering of 
the stateroom names above the jalousied doors. 

Doom had been born merely a subchief, a Mingo, one of 
three children on the mother's side of the family. He made 
a journey he was a young man then and New Orleans was 
a European city from north Mississippi to New Orleans 
by keel boat, where he met the Chevalier Sceur Blonde de 
Vitry, a man whose social position, on its face, was as 
equivocal as Doom's own. In New Orleans, among the 
gamblers and cutthroats of the river front, Doom, under the 
tutelage of his patron, passed as the chief, the Man, the he- 
reditary owner of that land which belonged to the male side 



318 The Wilderness 

of the family; it was the Chevalier de Vitry who called him 
du homme, and hence Doom. 

They were seen everywhere together the Indian, the 
squat man with a bold, inscrutable, underbred face, and the 
Parisian, the expatriate, the friend, it was said, of Carondelet 
and the intimate of General Wilkinson. Then they disap- 
peared, the two of them, vanishing from their old equivocal 
haunts and leaving behind them the legend of the sums 
which Doom was believed to have won, and some tale about 
a young woman, daughter of a fairly well-to-do West Indian 
family, the son and brother of whom sought Doom with a 
pistol about his old haunts for some time after his disappear- 
ance. 

Six months later the young woman herself disappeared, 
boarding the St. Louis packet, which put in one night at 
a wood landing on the north Mississippi side, where the 
woman, accompanied by a Negro maid, got off. Four Indians 
met her with a horse and wagon, and they traveled for three 
days, slowly, since she was already big with child, to the 
plantation, where she found that Doom was now chief. He 
never told her how he accomplished it, save that his uncle 
and his cousin had died suddenly. At that time the house 
consisted of a brick wall built by shiftless slaves, against 
which was propped a thatched lean-to divided into rooms 
and littered with bones and refuse, set in the center of ten 
thousand acres of matchless parklike forest where deer 
grazed like domestic cattle. Doom and the woman \vere 
married there a short time before Issetibbeha was born, by 
a combination itinerant minister and slave trader who arrived 
on a mule, to the saddle of which was lashed a cotton um- 
brella and a three-gallon demijohn of whisky. After that, 
Doom began to acquire more slaves and to cultivate some of 
his land, as the white people did. But he never had enough 
for them to do. In utter idleness the majority of them led 
lives transplanted whole out of African jungles, save on the 



Red Leaves 319 

occasions when, entertaining guests, Doom coursed them 
with dogs. 

When Doom died, Issetibbeha, his son, was nineteen. He 
became proprietor of the land and of the quintupled herd 
of blacks for which he had no use at all. Though the title 
of Man rested with him, there was a hierarchy of cousins 
and uncles who ruled the clan and who finally gathered in 
squatting conclave over the Negro question, squatting pro- 
foundly beneath the golden names above the doors of the 
steamboat. 

"We cannot eat them," one said. 

"Why not?" 

"There are too many of them." 

"That's true," a third said. "Once we started, we should 
have to eat them all. And that much flesh diet is not good 
for man." 

"Perhaps they will be like deer flesh. That cannot hurt 
you." 

"We might kill a few of them and not eat them," Issetib- 
beha said. 

They looked at him for a while. "What for?" one said. 

"That is true," a second said. "We cannot do that. They 
are too valuable; remember all the bother they have caused 
us, finding things for them to do. We must do as the white 
men do." 

"How is that?" Issetibbeha said. 

"Raise more Negroes by clearing more land to make corn 
to feed them, then sell them. We will clear the land and 
plant it with food and raise Negroes and sell them to the 
white men for money." 

"But what will we do with this money?" a third said. 

They thought for a while. 

"We will see," the first said. They squatted, profound, 
grave. 

"It means work," the third said. 



320 The Wilderness 

"Let the Negroes do it," the first said. 

"Yao. Let them. To sweat is bad. It is damp. It opens the 
pores." 

"And then the night air enters." 

"Yao. Let the Negroes do it. They appear to like sweat- 
ing." 

So they cleared the land with the Negroes and planted 
it in grain. Up to that time the slaves had lived in a huge 
pen with a lean-to roof over one corner, like a pen for pigs. 
But now they began to build quarters, cabins, putting the 
young Negroes in the cabins in pairs to mate; five years 
later Issetibbeha sold forty head to a Memphis trader, and 
he took the money and went abroad upon it, his maternal 
uncle from New Orleans conducting the trip. At that time 
the Chevalier Soeur Blonde de Vitry was an old man in 
Paris, in a toupee and a corset, with a careful toothless old 
face fixed in a grimace quizzical and profoundly tragic. He 
borrowed three hundred dollars from Issetibbeha and in 
return he introduced him into certain circles; a year later 
Issetibbeha returned home with a gilt bed, a pair of girandoles 
by whose light it was said that Pompadour arranged her 
hair while Louis smirked at his mirrored face across her 
powdered shoulder, and a pair of slippers with red heels. 
They were too small for him, since he had not worn shoes 
at all until he reached New Orleans on his way abroad. 

He brought the slippers home in tissue paper and kept them 
in the remaining pocket of a pair of saddlebags filled with 
cedar shavings, save when he took them out on occasion for 
his son, Moketubbe, to play with. At three years of age 
Moketubbe had a broad, flat, Mongolian face that appeared 
to exist in a complete and unfathomable lethargy, until con- 
fronted by the slippers. 

Moketubbe's mother was a comely girl whom Issetibbeha 
had seen one day working in her shift in a melon patch. He 



Red Leaves 321 

stopped and watched her for a while the broad, solid thighs, 
the sound back, the serene face. He was on his way to the 
creek to fish that day, but he didn't go any farther; perhaps 
while he stood there watching the unaware girl he may have 
remembered his own mother, the city woman, the fugitive 
with her fans and laces and her Negro blood, and all the 
tawdry shabbiness of that sorry affair. Within the year 
Moketubbe was born; even at three he could not get his feet 
into the slippers. Watching him in the still, hot afternoons 
as he struggled with the slippers with a certain monstrous 
repudiation of fact, Issetibbeha laughed quietly to himself. 
He laughed at Moketubbe and the shoes for several years, 
because Moketubbe did not give up trying to put them on 
until he was sixteen. Then he quit. Or Issetibbeha thought 
he had. But he had merely quit trying in Issetibbeha's pres- 
ence. Issetibbeha's newest wife told him that Moketubbe had 
stolen and hidden the shoes. Issetibbeha quit laughing then, 
and he sent the woman away, so that he was alone. "Yao," 
he said. "I too like being alive, it seems." He sent for Moke- 
tubbe. "I give them to you," he said. 

Moketubbe was twenty-five then, unmarried. Issetibbeha 
was not tall, but he was taller by six inches than his son and 
almost a hundred pounds lighter. Moketubbe was already 
diseased with flesh, with a pale, broad, inert face and drop- 
sical hands and feet. "They are yours now," Issetibbeha said, 
watching him. Moketubbe had looked at him once when he 
entered, a glance brief, discreet, veiled. 

"Thanks," he said. 

Issetibbeha looked at him. He could never tell if Moke- 
tubbe saw anything, looked at anything. "Why will it not be 
the same if I give the slippers to you?" 

"Thanks," Moketubbe said. Issetibbeha was using snuff at 
the time; a white man had shown him how to put the powder 



322 The Wilderness: 

into his lip and scour it against his teeth with a twig of gum 
or of alphea. 

"Well," he said, "a man cannot live forever." He looked 
at his son, then his gaze went blank in turn, unseeing, and 
he mused for an instant. You could not tell what he was 
thinking, save that he said half aloud: "Yao. But Doom's 
uncle had no shoes with red heels." He looked at his son 
again, fat, inert. "Beneath all that, a man might think of 
doing anything and it not be known until too late." He sat 
in a splint chair hammocked with deer thongs. a He cannot 
even get them on; he and I are both frustrated by the same 
gross meat which he wears. He cannot even get them on. 
But is that my fault? " 

He lived for five years longer, then he died. He was sick 
one night, and though the doctor came in a skunk-skin vest 
and burned sticks, he died before noon. 

That was yesterday; the grave was dug, and for twelve 
hours now the People had been coming in wagons and car- 
riages and on horseback and afoot, to eat the baked dog and 
the succotash and the yams cooked in ashes and to attend 
the funeral. 

Ill 

"Ix WILL BE THREE DAYS," Basket said, as he and the other 
Indian returned to the house. "It will be three days and the 
food will not be enough; I have seen it before." 

The second Indian's name was Louis Berry. "He will 
smell too, in this weather." 

"Yao. They are nothing but a trouble and a care." 

"Maybe it will not take three days." 

"They run far. Yao. We will smell this Man before he 
enters the earth. You watch and see if I am not right." 

They approached the house. 



Red Leaves 323 

"He can wear the shoes now," Berry said. "He can wear 
them now in man's sight." 

"He cannot wear them for a while yet," Basket said. Berry 
looked at him. "He will lead the hunt." 

"Moketubbe?" Berry said. "Do you think he will? A man 
to whom even talking is travail?" 

"What else can he do? It is his own father who will soon 
begin to smell." 

"That is true," Berry said. "There is even yet a price he 
must pay for the shoes. Yao. He has truly bought them. 
What do you think?" 

"What do you think?" 

"What do you think?" 

"I think nothing." 

"Nor do I. Issetibbeha will not need the shoes now. Let 
Moketubbe have them; Issetibbeha will not care." 

"Yao. Man must die." 

"Yao. Let him; there is still the Man." 

The bark roof of the porch was supported by peeled 
cypress poles, high above the texas of the steamboat, shad- 
ing an unfloored banquette where on the trodden earth 
mules and horses were tethered in bad weather. On the 
forward end of the steamboat's deck sat an old man and 
two women. One of the women was dressing a fowl, the 
other was shelling corn. The old man was talking. He was 
barefoot, in a long linen frock coat and a beaver hat. 

"This world is going to the dogs," he said. "It is being 
ruined by white men. We got along fine for years and 
years, before the white men foisted their Negroes upon 
us. In the old days the old men sat in the shade and ate 
stewed deer's flesh and corn and smoked tobacco and talked 
of honor and grave affairs; now what do we do? Even the 
old wear themselves into the grave taking care of them that 
like sweating." When Basket and Berry crossed the deck 



324 The Wilderness 

he ceased and looked up at them. His eyes were querulous, 
bleared; his face was myriad with tiny wrinkles. "He is fled 
also," he said. 

"Yes," Berry said, "he is gone." 

"I knew it. I told them so. It will take three weeks, like 
when Doom died. You watch and see." 

"It was three days, not three weeks," Berry said. 

"Were you there?" 

"No," Berry said. "But I have heard." 

"Well, I was there," the old man said. "For three whole 
weeks, through the swamps and the briers " They went 
on and left him talking. 

What had been the saloon of the steamboat was now a 
shell, rotting slowly; the polished mahogany, the carving 
glinting momentarily and fading through the mold in figures 
cabalistic and profound; the gutted windows were like 
cataracted eyes. It contained a few sacks of seed or grain, 
and the fore part of the running gear of a barouche, to the 
axle of which two C-springs rusted in graceful curves, sup- 
porting nothing. In one corner a fox cub ran steadily and 
soundlessly up and down a willow cage; three scrawny 
gamecocks moved in the dust, and the place was pocked 
and marked with their dried droppings. 

They passed through the brick wall and entered a big 
room of chinked logs. It contained the hinder part of the 
barouche, and the dismantled body lying on its side, the 
window slatted over with willow withes, through which 
protruded the heads, the still, beady, outraged eyes and frayed 
combs of still more game chickens. It was floored with 
packed clay; in one corner leaned a crude plow and two 
hand-hewn boat paddles. From the ceiling, suspended by 
four deer thongs, hung the gilt bed which Issetibbeha had 
fetched from Paris. It had neither mattress nor springs, the 
frame crisscrossed now by a neat hammocking of thongs. 



Red Leaves 325 

Issetibbeha had tried to have his newest wife, the young 
one, sleep in the bed. He was congenitally short of breath 
himself, and he passed the nights half reclining in his splint 
chair. He would see her to bed and, later, wakeful, sleeping 
as he did but three or four hours a night, he would sit in the 
darkness and simulate slumber and listen to her sneak 
infinitesimally from the gilt and ribboned bed, to lie on a 
quilt pallet on the floor until just before daylight. Then she 
would enter the bed quietly again and in turn simulate 
slumber, while in the darkness beside her Issetibbeha quietly 
laughed and laughed. 

The girandoles were lashed by thongs to two sticks 
propped in a corner where a ten-gallon whisky keg lay also. 
There was a clay hearth; facing it, in the splint chair, Moke- 
tubbe sat. He was maybe an inch better than five feet tall, 
and he weighed two hundred and fifty pounds. He wore a 
broadcloth coat and no shirt, his round, smooth copper 
balloon of belly swelling above the bottom piece of a suit 
of linen underwear. On his feet were the slippers with the red 
heels. Behind his chair stood a stripling with a punkah-like 
fan made of fringed paper. Moketubbe sat motionless, with 
his broad, yellow face with its closed eyes and flat nostrils, 
his flipperlike arms extended. On his face was an expression 
profound, tragic, and inert. He did not open his eyes when 
Basket and Berry came in. 

"He has worn them since daylight?" Basket said. 

"Since daylight," the stripling said. The fan did not cease. 
"You can see." 

"Yao," Basket said. "We can see." Moketubbe did not 
move. He looked like an effigy, like a Malay god in frock 
coat, drawers, naked chest, the trivial scarkt-heeled shoes. 

"I wouldn't disturb him, if I were you," the stripling said. 

"Not if I were you," Basket said. He and Berry squatted. 
The stripling moved the fan steadily. "O Man," Basket said, 



326 The Wilderness 

"listen." Moketubbe did not move. "He is gone," Basket 
said. 

"I told you so," the stripling said. "I knew he would flee. 
I told you." 

"Yao," Basket said. "You are not the first to tell us after- 
ward what we should have known before. Why is it that 
some of you wise men took no steps yesterday to prevent 
this?" 

"He does not wish to die," Berry said. 

"Why should he not wish it?" Basket said. 

"Because he must die some day is no reason," the stripling 
said. "That would not convince me either, old man." 

"Hold your tongue," Berry said. 

"For twenty years," Basket said, "while others of his race 
sweat in the fields, he served the Man in the shade. Why 
should he not wish to die, since he did not wish to sweat?" 

"And it will be quick," Berry said. "It will not take long. s 

"Catch him and tell him that," the stripling said. 

"Hush," Berry said. They squatted, watching Moketubbe's 
face. He might have been dead himself. It was as though 
he were cased so in flesh that even breathing took place too 
deep within him to show. 

"Listen, O Man," Basket said. "Issetibbeha is dead. He 
waits. His dog and his horse we have. But his slave has fled. 
The one who held the pot for him, who ate of his food, 
from his dish, is fled. Issetibbeha waits." 

"Yao," Berry said. 

"This is not the first time," Basket said. "This happened 
when Doom, thy grandfather, lay waiting at the door of the 
earth. He lay waiting three days, saying, 'Where is my 
Negro?' And Issetibbeha, thy father, answered, 'I will find 
him. Rest; I will bring him to you so that you may begin 
the journey/ " 

"Yao," Berry said. 



Red Leaves 327 

Moketubbe had not moved, had not opened his eyes. 

"For three days Issetibbeha hunted in the bottom," Basket 
said. "He did not even return home for food, until the 
Negro was with him; then he said to Doom, his father, 
'Here is thy dog, thy horse, thy Negro; rest.' Issetibbeha, 
who is dead since yesterday, said it. And now Issetibbeha's 
Negro is fled. His horse and his dog wait with him, but his 
Negro is fled." 

"Yao," Berry said. 

Moketubbe had not moved. His eyes were closed; upon 
his supine monstrous shape there was a colossal inertia, 
something profoundly immobile, beyond and impervious to 
flesh. They watched his face, squatting. 

"When thy father was newly the Man, this happened," 
Basket said. "And it was Issetibbeha who brought back the 
slave to where his father waited to enter the earth." Moke- 
tubbe's face had not moved, his eyes had not moved. After 
a while Basket said, "Remove the shoes." 

The stripling removed the shoes. Moketubbe began to 
pant, his bare chest moving deep, as though he were rising 
from beyond his unfathomed flesh back into life, like up 
from the water, the sea. But his eyes had not opened yet. 

Berry said, "He will lead the hunt." 

"Yao," Basket said. "He is the Man. He will lead the hunt." 



IV 

ALL THAT DAY the Negro, Issetibbeha's body servant, hidden 
in the barn, watched Issetibbeha's dying. He was forty, a 
Guinea man. He had a flat nose, a close, small head; the 
inside corners of his eyes showed red a little, and his prom- 
inent gums were a pale bluish red above his square, broad 
teeth. He had been taken at fourteen by a trader off Kam- 



328 The Wilderness 

erun, before his teeth had been filed. He had been Issetib- 
beha's body servant for twenty-three years. 

On the day before, the day on which Issetibbeha lay sick, 
he returned to the quarters at dusk. In that unhurried hour 
the smoke of the cooking fires blew slowly across the street 
from door to door, carrying into the opposite one the smell 
of the identical meat and bread. The women tended them; 
the men were gathered at the head of the lane, watching him 
as he came down the slope from the house, putting his naked 
feet down carefully in a strange dusk. To the waiting men 
his eyeballs were a little luminous. 

"Issetibbeha is not dead yet," the headman said. 

"Not dead," the body servant said. "Who not dead?" 

In the dusk they had faces like his, the different ages, the 
thoughts sealed inscrutable behind faces like the death masks 
of apes. The smell of the fires, the cooking, blew sharp and 
slow across the strange dusk, as from another world, above 
the lane and the pickaninnies naked in the dust. 

"If he lives past sundown, he will live until daybreak," 
one said. 

"Who says?" 

"Talk says." 

"Yao. Talk says. We know but one thing." They looked 
at the body servant as he stood among them, his eyeballs 
a little luminous. He was breathing slow and deep. His chest 
was bare; he was sweating a little. "He knows. He knows it." 

"Let us let the drums talk." 

"Yao. Let the drums tell it." 

The drums began after dark. They kept them hidden in 
the creek bottom. They were made of hollowed cypress 
knees, and the Negroes kept them hidden; why, none knew. 
They were buried in the mud on the bank of a slough; a 
lad of fourteen guarded them. He was undersized, and a 
mute; he squatted in the mud there all day, clouded over 



Red Leaves 329 

with mosquitoes, naked save for the mud with which he 
coated himself against the mosquitoes, and about his neck a 
fiber bag containing a pig's rib to which black shreds of 
flesh still adhered, and two scaly barks on a wire. He slob- 
bered onto his clutched knees, drooling; now and then 
Indians came noiselessly out of the bushes behind him and 
stood there and contemplated him for a while and went 
away, and he never knew it. 

From the loft of the stable where he lay hidden until 
dark and after, the Negro could hear the drums. They were 
three miles away, but he could hear them as though they 
were in the barn itself below him, thudding and thudding. 
It was as though he could see the fire too, and the black 
limbs turning into and out of the flames in copper gleams. 
Only there would be no fire. There would be no more light 
there than where he lay in the dusty loft, with the whisper- 
ing arpeggios of rat feet along the warm and immemorial 
ax-squared rafters. The only fire there would be the smudge 
against mosquitoes where the women with nursing children 
crouched, their heavy sluggish breasts nippled full and 
smooth into the mouths of men children; contemplative, 
oblivious of the drumming, since a fire would signify life. 

There was a fire in the steamboat, where Issetibbeha lay 
dying among his wives, beneath the lashed girandoles and the 
suspended bed. He could see the smoke, and just before sun- 
set he saw the doctor come out, in a waistcoat made of 
skunk skins, and set fire to two clay-daubed sticks at the 
bows of the boat deck. "So he is not dead yet," the Negro 
said into the whispering gloom of the loft, answering him- 
self; he could hear the two voices, himself and himself: 

"Who not dead?" 

"You are dead." 

"Yao, I am dead," he said quietly. He wished to be where 
the drums were. He imagined himself springing out of the 



330 The Wilderness 

bushes, leaping among the drums on his bare, lean, greasy, 
invisible limbs. But he could not do that, because man leaped 
past life, into where death was; he dashed into death and did 
not die, because when death took a man, it took him just this 
side of the end of living. It was when death overran him 
from behind, still in life. The thin whisper of rat feet died 
in fainting gusts along the rafters. Once he had eaten rat. 
He was a boy then, but just come to America. They had 
lived ninety days in a three-foot-high 'tween-deck in tropic 
latitudes, hearing from topside the drunken New England 
captain intoning aloud from a book which he did not recog- 
nize for ten years afterward to be the Bible. Squatting in the 
stable so, he had watched the rat, civilized, by association 
with man reft of its inherent cunning of limb and eye; he 
had caught it without difficulty, with scarce a movement 
of his hand, and he ate it slowly, wondering how any of the 
rats had escaped so long. At that time he was still wearing 
the single white garment which the trader, a deacon in the 
Unitarian church, had given him, and he spoke then only his 
native tongue. 

He was naked now, save for a pair of dungaree pants 
bought by Indians from white men, and an amulet slung on 
a thong about his hips. The amulet consisted of one half of 
a mother-of-pearl lorgnon which Issetibbeha had brought 
back from Paris, and the skull of a cottonmouth moccasin. 
He had killed the snake himself and eaten it, save the poison 
head. He lay in the loft, watching the house, the steamboat, 
listening to the drums, thinking of himself among the drums. 

He lay there all night. The next morning he saw the doctor 
come out, in his skunk vest, and get on his mule and ride 
away, and he became quite still and watched the final dust 
from beneath the mule's delicate feet die away, and then he 
found that he was still breathing and it seemed strange to 
him that he still breathed air, still needed air. Then he lay 



Red Leaves 331 

and watched quietly, waiting to move, his eyeballs a little 
luminous, but with a quiet light, and his breathing light and 
regular, and saw Louis Berry come out and look at the sky. 
It was good light then, and already five Indians squatted in 
their Sunday clothes along the steamboat deck; by noon 
there were twenty-five there. That afternoon they dug the 
trench in which the meat would be baked, and the yams; 
by that time there were almost a hundred guests decorous, 
quiet, patient in their stiff European finery and he watched 
Berry lead Issetibbeha's mare from the stable and tie her to 
a tree, and then he watched Berry emerge from the house 
with the old hound which lay beside Issetibbeha's chair. He 
tied the hound to the tree too, and it sat there, looking 
gravely about at the faces. Then it began to howl. It was still 
howling at sundown, when the Negro climbed down the 
back wall of the barn and entered the spring branch, where 
it was already dusk. He began to run then. He could hear 
the hound howling behind him, and near the spring, already 
running, he passed another Negro. The two men, the one 
motionless and the other running, looked for an instant at 
each other as though across an actual boundary between twc 
different worlds. He ran on into full darkness, mouth closed, 
fists doubled, his broad nostrils bellowing steadily. 

He ran on in the darkness. He knew the country well, 
because he had hunted it often with Issetibbeha, following on 
his mule the course of the fox or the cat beside Issetibbeha's 
mare; he knew it as well as did the men who would pursue 
him. He saw them for the first time shortly before sunset of 
the second day. He had run thirty miles then, up the creek 
bottom, before doubling back; lying in a pawpaw thicket 
he saw the pursuit for the first time. There were two of 
them, in shirts and straw hats, carrying their neatly rolled 
trousers under their arms, and they had no weapons. They 
were middle-aged, paunchy, and they could not have moved 



332 The Wilderness 

very fast anyway; it would be twelve hours before they 
could return to where he lay watching them. "So I will have 
until midnight to rest," he said. He was near enough to the 
plantation to smell the cooking fires, and he thought how 
he ought to be hungry, since he had not eaten in thirty 
hours. "But it is more important to rest," he told himself. 
He continued to tell himself that, lying in the pawpaw 
thicket, because the effort of resting, the need and the haste 
to rest, made his heart thud the same as the running had 
done. It was as though he had forgot how to rest, as though 
the six hours were not long enough to do it in, to remember 
again how to do it. 

As soon as dark came he moved again. lie had thought 
to keep going steadily and quietly through the night, since 
there was nowhere for him to go, but as soon as he moved 
he began to run at top speed, breasting his panting chest, his 
broad-flaring nostrils through the choked and whipping dark- 
ness. He ran for an hour, lost by then, without direction, 
when suddenly he stopped, and after a time his thudding 
heart unraveled from the sound of the drums. By the sound 
they were not two miles away; he followed the sound until 
he could smell the smudge fire and taste the acrid smoke. 
When he stood among them the drums did not cease; only 
the headman came to him where he stood in the drifting 
smudge, panting, his nostrils flaring and pulsing, the hushed 
glare of his ceaseless eyeballs in his mud-daubed face as 
though they were worked from lungs. 

"We have expected thee," the headman said. "Go, now." 

"Go?" 

"Eat, and go. The dead may not consort with the living; 
thou knowest that." 

"Yao. I know that." They did not look at one another. 
The drums had not ceased. 

"Wilt thou eat?" the headman said. 



Red Leaves 333 

"I am not hungry. I caught a rabbit this afternoon, and 
ate while I lay hidden/' 

"Take some cooked meat with thee, then." 

He accepted the cooked meat, wrapped in leaves, and 
entered the creek bottom again; after a while the sound of 
the drums ceased. He walked steadily until daybreak. "I 
have twelve hours," he said. "Maybe more, since the trail 
was followed by night." He squatted and ate the meat and 
wiped his hands on his thighs. Then he rose and removed 
the dungaree pants and squatted again beside a slough and 
coated himself with mud face, arms, body and legs and 
squatted again, clasping his knees, his head bowed. When it 
was light enough to see, he moved back into the swamp and 
squatted again and went to sleep so. He did not dream at all. 
It was well that he moved, for, waking suddenly in broad 
daylight and the high sun, he saw the two Indians. They 
still carried their neatly rolled trousers; they stood opposite 
the place where he lay hidden, paunchy, thick, soft-looking, 
a little ludicrous in their straw hats and shirt tails. 

"This is wearying work," one said. 

"I'd rather be at home in the shade myself," the other said. 
"But there is the Man waiting at the door to the earth." 

"Yao." They looked quietly about; stooping, one of them 
removed from his shirt tail a clot of cockleburs. "Damn that 
Negro," he said. 

"Yao. When have they ever been anything but a trial and 
a care to us?" 

In the early afternoon, from the top of a tree, the Negro 
looked down into the plantation. He could see Issetibbeha's 
body in a hammock between the two trees where the horse 
and the dog were tethered, and the concourse about the 
steamboat was filled with wagons and horses and mules, 
with carts and saddle-horses, while in bright clumps the 
women and the smaller children and the old men squatted 



334 The Wilderness 

about the long trench where the smoke from the barbecuing 
meat blew slow and thick. The men and the big boys would 
all be down there in the creek bottom behind him, on the 
trail, their Sunday clothes rolled carefully up and wedged 
into tree crotches. There was a clump of men near the door 
to the house, to the saloon of the steamboat, though, and he 
watched them, and after a while he saw them bring Moke- 
tubbe out in a litter made of buckskin and persimmon poles; 
high hidden in his leafed nook the Negro, the quarry, looked 
quietly down upon his irrevocable doom with an expression 
as profound as Moketubbe's own. "Yao," he said quietly. 
"He will go then. That man whose body has been dead for 
fifteen years, he will go also." 

In the middle of the afternoon he came face to face with 
an Indian. They were both on a footlog across a slough 
the Negro gaunt, lean, hard, tireless and desperate; the 
Indian thick, soft-looking, the apparent embodiment of the 
ultimate and the supreme reluctance and inertia. The Indian 
made no move, no sound; he stood on the log and watched 
the Negro plunge into the slough and swim ashore and crash 
away into the undergrowth. 

Just before sunset he lay behind a down log. Up the log 
in slow procession moved a line of ants. He caught them and 
ate them slowly, with a kind of detachment, like that of a 
dinner guest eating salted nuts from a dish. They too had a 
salt taste, engendering a salivary reaction out of all propor- 
tion. He ate them slowly, watching the unbroken line move 
up the log and into oblivious doom with a steady and terrific 
undeviation. He had eaten nothing else all day; in his caked 
mud mask his eyes rolled in reddened rims. At sunset, creep- 
ing along the creek bank toward where he had spotted a 
frog, a cottonmouth moccasin slashed him suddenly across 
the forearm with a thick, sluggish blow. It struck clumsily, 
leaving two long slashes across his arm like two razor slashes, 



Red Leaves 335 

and half sprawled with its own momentum and rage, it ap- 
peared for the moment utterly helpless with its own awk- 
wardness and choleric anger. "Ole, grandfather," the Negro 
said. He touched its head and watched it slash him again 
across his arm, and again, with thick, raking, awkward 
blows. "It's that I do not wish to die," he said. Then he said 
it again "It's that I do not wish to die" in a quiet tone, 
of slow and low amaze, as though it were something that, 
until the words had said themselves, he found that he had not 
known, or had not known the depth and extent of his desire. 



V 

MOKETUBBE TOOK the slippers with him. He could not wear 
them very long while in motion, not even in the litter where 
he was slung reclining, so they rested upon a square of 
fawnskin upon his lap the cracked, frail slippers a little 
shapeless now, with their scaled patent-leather surfaces and 
buckleless tongues and scarlet heels, lying upon the supine 
obese shape just barely alive, carried through swamp and 
brier by swinging relays of men who bore steadily all day 
long the crime and its object, on the business of the slain. 
To Moketubbe it must have been as though, himself immor- 
tal, he were being carried rapidly through hell by doomed 
spirits which, alive, had contemplated his disaster, and, dead, 
were oblivious partners to his damnation. 

After resting for a while, the litter propped in the center 
of the squatting circle and Moketubbe motionless in it, with 
closed eyes and his face at once peaceful for the instant and 
filled with inescapable foreknowledge, he could wear the 
slippers for a while. The stripling put them on him, forcing 
his big, tender, dropsical feet into them; whereupon into his 
face came again that expression tragic, passive and pro- 
foundly attentive, which dyspeptics wear. Then they went 



336 The Wilderness 

on. He made no move, no sound, inert in the rhythmic litter 
out of some reserve of inertia, or maybe of some kingly 
virtue such as courage or fortitude. After a time they set the 
litter down and looked at him, at the yellow face like that 
of an idol, beaded over with sweat. Then Three Basket or 
Had-Two-Fathers would say: "Take them off. Honor has 
been served/' They would remove the shoes. Moketubbe's 
face would not alter, but only then would his breathing be- 
come perceptible, going in and out of his pale lips with a 
faint ah-ah-ah sound, and they would squat again while the 
couriers and the runners came up. 

"Not yet?" 

"Not yet. He is going east. By sunset he will reach Mouth 
of Tippah. Then he will turn back. We may take him 



tomorrow." 



"Let us hope so. It will not be too soon." 
"Yao. It has been three days now." 
"When Doom died, it took only three days." 
"But that was an old man. This one is young." 
"Yao. A good race. If he is taken tomorrow, I will win a 
horse." 

"May you win it." 
"Yao. This work is not pleasant." 

That was the day on which the food gave out at the plan- 
tation. The guests returned home and came back the next 
day with more food, enough for a week longer. On that day 
Issetibbeha began to smell; they could smell him for a long 
way up and down the bottom when it got hot toward noon 
and the wind blew. But they didn't capture the Negro on 
that day, nor on the next. It was about dusk on the sixth 
day when the couriers came up to the litter; they had found 
blood. "He has injured himself." 

"Not bad, I hope," Basket said. "We cannot send with 
Issetibbeha one who will be of no service to him." 



Red Leaves 337 

"Nor whom Issetibbeha himself will have to nurse and 
care for/' Berry said. 

"We do not know," the courier said. "He has hidden him- 
self. He has crept back into the swamp. We have left 
pickets." 

They trotted with the litter now. The place where the 
Negro had crept into the swamp was an hour away. In the 
hurry and excitement they had forgotten that Moketubbe 
still wore the slippeis; when they reached the place Moke- 
tubbe had fainted. They removed the slippers and brought 
him to. 

With dark, they formed a circle about the swamp. They 
squatted, clouded over with gnats and mosquitoes; the eve- 
ning star burned low and close down the west, and the 
constellations began to wheel overhead. "We will give him 
time," they said. "Tomorrow is just another name for today." 

"Yao. Let him have time." Then they ceased, and gazed 
as one into the darkness where the swamp lay. After a while 
the noise ceased, and soon the courier came out of the 
darkness. 

"He tried to break out." 

"But you turned him back?" 

"He turned back. We feared for a moment, the three of 
us. We could smell him creeping in the darkness, and we 
could smell something else, which we did not know. That 
was why we feared, until he told us. He said to slay him 
there, since it would be dark and he would not have to see 
the face when it came. But it was not that which we smelled; 
he told us what it was. A snake had struck him. That was 
two days ago. The arm swelled, and it smelled bad. But it 
was not that which we smelled then, because the swelling 
had gone down and his arm was no larger than that of a 
child. He showed us. We felt the arm, all of us did; it was 
no larger than that of a child. He said to give him a hatchet 



338 The Wilderness 

so he could chop the arm off. But tomorrow is today also." 

"Yao. Tomorrow is today." 

"We feared for a while. Then he went back into the 
swamp." 

"That is good." 

"Yao. We feared. Shall I tell the Man?" 

"I will see," Basket said. He went away. The courier 
squatted, telling again about the Negro. Basket returned. 
"The Man says that it is good. Return to your post." 

The courier crept away. They squatted about the litter; 
now and then they slept. Sometime after midnight the 
Negro waked them. He began to shout and talk to himself, 
his voice coming sharp and sudden out of the darkness, 
then he fell silent. Dawn came; a white crane flapped slowly 
across the jonquil sky. Basket was awake. "Let us go now," 
he said. "It is today." 

Two Indians entered the swamp, their movements noisy. 
Before they reached the Negro they stopped, because he 
began to sing. They could see him, naked and mud-caked, 
sitting on a log, singing. They squatted silently a short dis- 
tance away, until he finished. He was chanting something 
in his own language, his face lifted to the rising sun. His 
voice was clear, full, with a quality wild and sad. "Let him 
have time," the Indians said, squatting, patient, waiting. He 
ceased and they approached. He looked back and up at 
them through the cracked mud mask. His eyes were blood- 
shot, his lips cracked upon his square short teeth. The mask 
of mud appeared to be loose on his face, as if he might have 
lost flesh since he put it there; he held his left arm close 
to his breast. From the elbow down it was caked and shape- 
less with black mud. They could smell him, a rank smell. 
He watched them quietly until one touched him on the 
arm. "Come," the Indian said. "You ran well. Do not be 
ashamed." 



Red Leaves 339 

VI 

As THEY NEARED the plantation in the tainted bright morn- 
ing, the Negro's eyes began to roll a little, like those of a 
horse. The smoke from the cooking pit blew low along the 
earth and upon the squatting and waiting guests about the 
yard and upon the steamboat deck, in their bright, stiff, 
harsh finery; the women, the children, the old men. They 
had sent couriers along the bottom, and another on ahead, 
and Issetibbeha's body had already been removed to where 
the grave waited, along with the horse and the dog, though 
they could still smell him in death about the house where he 
had lived in life. The guests were beginning to move toward 
the grave when the bearers of Moketubbe's litter mounted 
the slope. 

The Negro was the tallest there, his high, close, mud- 
caked head looming above them all. He was breathing hard, 
as though the desperate effort of the six suspended and 
desperate days had catapulted upon him at once; although 
they walked slowly, his naked scarred chest rose and fell 
above the close-clutched left arm. He looked this way and 
that continuously, as if he were not seeing, as though sight 
never quite caught up with the looking. His mouth was open 
a little upon his big white teeth; he began to pant. The 
already moving guests halted, pausing, looking back, some 
with pieces of meat in their hands, as the Negro looked 
about at their faces with his wild, restrained, unceasing eyes. 

"Will you eat first?" Basket said. He had to say it twice. 

"Yes," the Negro said. "That's it. I want to eat." 

The throng had begun to press back toward the center; 
the word passed to the outermost: "He will eat first." 

They reached the steamboat. "Sit down," Basket said. 
The Negro sat on the edge of the deck. He was still panting, 
his chest rising and falling, his head ceaseless with its white 



34 Tbe Wilderness 

eyeballs, turning from side to side. It was as if the inability 
to see came from within, from hopelessness, not from 
absence of vision. They brought food and watched quietly 
as he tried to eat it. He put the food into his mouth and 
chewed it, but chewing, the half-masticated matter began 
to emerge from the corners of his mouth and to drool down 
his chin, onto his chest, and after a while he stopped chewing 
and sat there, naked, covered with dried mud, the plate on 
his knees, and his mouth filled with a mass of chewed food, 
open, his eyes wide and unceasing, panting and panting. 
They watched him, patient, implacable, waiting. 

"Come," Basket said at last. 

"It's water I want," the Negro said. "I want water." 

The well was a little way down the slope toward the 
quarters. The slope lay dappled with the shadows of noon, 
of that peaceful hour when, Issetibbeha napping in his chair 
and waiting for the noon meal and the long afternoon to 
sleep in, the Negro, the body servant, would be free. He 
would sit in the kitchen door then, talking with the women 
who prepared the food. Beyond the kitchen the lane between 
the quarters would be quiet, peaceful, with the women talk- 
ing to one another across the lane and the smoke of the 
dinner fires blowing upon the pickaninnies like ebony toys 
in the dust. 

"Come," Basket said. 

The Negro walked among them, taller than any. The 
guests were moving on toward where Issetibbeha and the 
horse and the dog waited. The Negro walked with his high 
ceaseless head, his panting chest. "Come," Basket said. "You 
wanted water." 

"Yes," the Negro said. "Ys." He looked back at the 
house, then down to the quarters, where today no fire 
burned, no face showed in any door, no pickaninny in the 
dust, panting. "It struck me here, raking me across this arm; 
once, twice, three times. I said, 'Ole, Grandfather.' " 



Red Leaves 341 

"Come now," Basket said. The Negro was still going 
through the motion of walking, his knee action high, his 
head high, as though he were on a treadmill. His eyeballs 
had a wild, restrained glare, like those of a horse. u You 
wanted water," Basket said. "Here it is." 

There was a gourd in the well. They dipped it full and 
gave it to the Negro, and they watched him try to drink. 
His eyes had not ceased as he tilted the gourd slowly against 
his caked face. They could watch his throat working and the 
bright water cascading from either side of the gourd, down 
his chin and breast. Then the water stopped. "Come," Basket 
said. 

"Wait," the Negro said. He dipped the gourd again and 
tilted it against his face, beneath his ceaseless eyes. Again 
they watched his throat working and the unswallowed water 
sheathing broken and myriad down his chin, channeling his 
caked chest. They waited, patient, grave, decorous, im- 
placable; clansman and guest and kin. Then the water ceased, 
though still the empty gourd tilted higher and higher, and 
still his black throat aped the vain motion of his frustrated 
swallowing. A piece of water-loosened mud carried away 
from his chest and broke at his muddy feet, and in the empty 
gourd they could hear his breath: ah-ah-ah. 

"Come," Basket said, taking the gourd from the Negro 
and hanging it back in the well. 



A Justice 



i 

UNTIL GRANDFATHER DIED, we would go out to the farm 
every Saturday afternoon. We would leave home right after 
dinner in the surrey, I in front with Roskus, and Grand- 
father and Caddy and Jason in the back. Grandfather and 
Roskus would talk, with the horses going fast, because it was 
the best team in the county. They would carry the surrey 
fast along the levels and up some of the hills even. But this 
was in north Mississippi, and on some of the hills Roskus 
and I could smell Grandfather's cigar. 

The farm was four miles away. There was a long, low 
house in the grove, not painted but kept whole and sound by 
a clever carpenter from the quarters named Sam Fathers, 
and behind it the barns and smokehouses, and further still, 
the quarters themselves, also kept whole and sound by Sam 
Fathers. He did nothing else, and they said he was almost a 
hundred years old. He lived with the Negroes and they 
the white people; the Negroes called him a blue-gum 
called him a Negro. But he wasn't a Negro. That's what I'm 
going to tell about. 

When we got there, Mr. Stokes, the manager, would send 
a Negro boy with Caddy and Jason to the creek to fish, 
because Caddy was a girl and Jason was too little, but I 
wouldn't go with them. I would go to Sam Fathers' shop, 

343 



344 The Wilderness 

where he would be making breast-yokes or wagon wheels, 
and I would always bring him some tobacco. Then he would 
stop working and he would fill his pipe he made them him- 
self, out of creek clay with a reed stem and he would tell 
me about the old days. He talked like a nigger that is, he 
said his words like niggers do, but he didn't say the same 
words and his hair was nigger hair. But his skin wasn't 
quite the color of a light nigger and his nose and his mouth 
and chin were not nigger nose and mouth and chin. And his 
shape was not like the shape of a nigger when he gets old. 
He was straight in the back, not tall, a little broad, and his 
face was still all the time, like he might be somewhere else 
all the while he was working or when people, even white 
people, talked to him, or while he talked to me. It was just 
the same all the time, like he might be away up on a roof 
by himself, driving nails. Sometimes he would quit work 
with something half-finished on the bench, and sit down and 
smoke. And he wouldn't jump up and go back to work when 
Mr. Stokes or even Grandfather came along. 

So I would give him the tobacco and he would stop work 
and sit down and fill his pipe and talk to me. 

"These niggers," he said. u They call me Uncle Blue-Gum. 
And the white folks, they call me Sam Fathers." 

* Isn't that your name?" I said. 

"No. Not in the old days. I remember. I remember how I 
never saw but one white man until I was a boy big as you 
are; a whisky trader that came every summer to the Planta- 
tion. It was the Man himself that named me. He didn't name 
me Sam Fathers, though." 

"The Man?" I said. 

"He owned the Plantation, the Negroes, my mammy too, 
He owned all the land that I knew of until I was grown. He 
was a Choctaw chief. He sold my mammy to your great- 
grandpappy. He said I didn't have to go unless I wanted to, 



A Justice 345 

because I was a warrior too then. He was the one who 
named me Had-Two-Fathers." 

"Had-Two-Fathers? " I said. "That's not a name. That's 
not anything." 

"It was my name once. Listen." 

II 

THIS is HOW Herman Basket told it when I was big enough 
to hear talk. He said that when Doom came back from New 
Orleans, he brought this woman with him. He brought six 
black people, though Herman Basket said they already had 
more black people in the Plantation than they could find use 
for. Sometimes they would run the black men with dogs, 
like you would a fox or a cat or a coon. And then Doom 
brought six more when he came home from New Orleans. 
He said he won them on the steamboat, and so he had to 
take them. He got off the steamboat with the six black 
people, Herman Basket said, and a big box in which some- 
thing was alive, and the gold box of New Orleans salt about 
the size of a gold watch. And Herman Basket told how 
Doom took a puppy out of the box in which something was 
alive, and how he made a bullet of bread and a pinch of the 
salt in the gold box, and put the bullet into the puppy and 
the puppy died. 

That was the kind of a man that Doom was, Herman 
Basket said. He told how, when Doom got off the steamboat 
that night, he wore a coat with gold all over it, and he had 
three gold watches, but Herman Basket said that even after 
seven years, Doom's eyes had not changed. He said that 
Doom's eyes were just the same as before he went away, 
before his name was Doom, and he and Herman Basket and 
my pappy were sleeping on the same pallet and talking at 
night, as boys will. 



346 The Wilderness 

Doom's name was Ikkemotubbe then, and he was not born 
to be the Man, because Doom's mother's brother was the 
Man, and the Man had a son of his own, as well as a brother. 
But even then, and Doom no bigger than you are, Herman 
Basket said that sometimes the Man would look at Doom and 
he would say: "O Sister's Son, your eye is a bad eye, like 
the eye of a bad horse." 

So the Man was not sorry when Doom got to be a young 
man and said that he would go to New Orleans, Herman 
Basket said. The Man was getting old then. He used to like 
to play mumble-peg and to pitch horseshoes both, but now 
he just liked mumble-peg. So he was not sorry when Doom 
went away, though he didn't forget about Doom. Herman 
Basket said that each summer when the whisky-trader came, 
the Man would ask him about Doom. u He calls himself 
David Callicoat now," the Man would say. "But his name 
is Ikkemotubbe. You haven't heard maybe of a David Calli- 
coat getting drowned in the Big River, or killed in the white 
man's fight at New Orleans?" 

But Herman Basket said they didn't hear from Doom at all 
until he had been gone seven years. Then one day Herman 
Basket and my pappy got a written stick from Doom to meet 
him at the Big River. Because the steamboat didn't come up 
our river any more then. The steamboat was still in our river, 
but it didn't go anywhere any more. Herman Basket told 
how one day during the high water, about three years after 
Doom went away, the steamboat came and crawled up on 
a sand-bar and died. 

That was how Doom got his second name, the one before 
Doom. Herman Basket told how four times a year the steam- 
boat would come up our river, and how the People would go 
to the river and camp and wait to see the steamboat pass, and 
he said that the white man who told the steamboat where to 
swim was named David Callicoat. So when Doom told Her- 



A Justice 347 

man Basket and pappy that he was going to New Orleans, 
he said, "And I'll tell you something else. From now on, my 
name is not Ikkemotubbe. It's David Callicoat. And some 
day I'm going to own a steamboat, too." That was the kind 
of man that Doom was, Herman Basket said. 

So after seven years he sent them the written stick and 
Herman Basket and pappy took the wagon and went to meet 
Doom at the Big River, and Doom got off the steamboat with 
the six black people. "I won them on the steamboat," Doom 
said. "You and Craw-ford (my pappy's name was Crawfish- 
ford, but usually it was Craw-ford) can divide them." 

"I don't want them," Herman Basket said that pappy said. 

"Then Herman can have them all," Doom said. 

"I don't want them either," Herman Basket said. 

"All right," Doom said. Then Herman Basket said he 
asked Doom if his name was still David Callicoat, but in- 
stead of answering, Doom told one of the black people some- 
thing in the white man's talk, and the black man lit a pine 
knot. Then Herman Basket said they were watching Doom 
take the puppy from the box and make the bullet of bread 
and the New Orleans salt which Doom had in the little gold 
box, when he said that pappy said: 

"I believe you said that Herman and I were to divide these 
black people." 

Then Herman Basket said he saw that one of the black 
people was a woman. 

"You and Herman don't want them," Doom said. 

"I wasn't thinking when I said that," pappy said. "I will 
take the lot with the woman in it. Herman can have the 
other three." 

"I don't want them," Herman Basket said. 

"You can have four, then," pappy said. "I will take the 
woman and one other." 

"I don't want them," Herman Basket said. 



348 The Wilderness 

"I will take only the woman," pappy said. "You can have 
the other five." 

"I don't want them," Herman Basket said. 

"You don't want them, either/' Doom said to pappy. "You 
said so yourself." 

Then Herman Basket said that the puppy was dead. "You 
didn't tell us your new name," he said to Doom. 

"My name is Doom now," Doom said. "It was given me by 
a French chief in New Orleans. In French talking, Doo-um; 
in our talking, Doom." 

"What does it mean?" Herman Basket said. 

He said how Doom looked at him for a while. "It means 
the Man," Doom said. 

Herman Basket told how they thought about that. He said 
they stood there in the dark, with the other puppies in the 
box, the ones that Doom hadn't used, whimpering and scuf- 
fing, and the light of the pine knot shining on the eyeballs of 
the black people and on Doom's gold coat and on the puppy 
that had died. 

"You cannot be the Man," Herman Basket said. "You are 
only on the sister's side. And the Man has a brother and a 
son." 

"That's right," Doom said. "But if I were the Man, I 
would give Craw-ford those black people. I would give 
Herman something, too. For every black man I gave Craw- 
ford, I would give Herman a horse, if I were the Man." 

"Craw-ford only wants this woman," Herman Basket said. 

"I would give Herman six horses, anyway," Doom said. 
"But maybe the Man has already given Herman a horse." 

"No," Herman Basket said. "My ghost is still walking." 

It took them three days to reach the Plantation. They 
camped on the road at night. Herman Basket said that they 
did not talk. 

They reached the Plantation on the third day. He said 



4 Justice 349 

that the Man was not very glad to see Doom, even though 
Doom brought a present of candy for the Man's son. Doom 
had something for all his kinsfolk, even for the Man's 
srother. The Man's brother lived by himself in a cabin by 
the creek. His name was Sometimes- Wakeup. Sometimes 
the People took him food. The rest of the time they didn't 
see him. Herman Basket told how he and pappy went with 
Doom to visit Sometimes-Wakeup in his cabin. It was at 
light, and Doom told Herman Basket to close the door. 
Then Doom took the puppy from pappy and set it on the 
floor and made a bullet of bread and the New Orleans salt 
for Sometimes-Wakeup to see how it worked. When they 
[eft, Herman Basket said how Sometimes-Wakeup burned a 
stick and covered his head with the blanket. 

That was the first night that Doom was at home. On the 
next day Herman Basket told how the Man began to act 
strange at his food, and died before the doctor could get there 
and burn sticks. When the Willow-Bearer went to fetch the 
Man's son to be the Man, they found that he had acted 
strange and then died too. 

"Now Sometimes-Wakeup will have to be the Man," 
pappy said. 

So the Willow-Bearer went to fetch Sometimes-Wakeup 
to come and be the Man. The Willow-Bearer came back 
soon. "Sometimes-Wakeup does not want to be the Man," 
the Willow-Bearer said. "He is sitting in his cabin with his 
head in his blanket." 

"Then Ikkemotubbe will have to be the Man," pappy 
said. 

So Doom was the Man. But Herman Basket said that 
pappy's ghost would not be easy. Herman Basket said he 
told pappy to give Doom a little time. "I am still walking," 
Herman Basket said. 

"But this is a serious matter with me," pappy said. 



350 The Wilderness 

He said that at last pappy went to Doom, before the Man 
and his son had entered the earth, before the eating and 
the horse-racing were over. "What woman?" Doom said. 

"You said that when you were the Man," pappy said. 
Herman Basket said that Doom looked at pappy but that 
pappy was not looking at Doom. 

"I think you don't trust me," Doom said. Herman Basket 
said how pappy did not look at Doom. "I think you still 
believe that that puppy was sick," Doom said. "Think 
about it." 

Herman Basket said that pappy thought. 

"What do you think now?" Doom said. 

But Herman Basket said that pappy still did not look at 
Doom. "I think it was a well dog," pappy said. 

Ill 

AT LAST the eating and the horse-racing were over and the 
Man and his son had entered the earth. Then Doom said, 
"Tomorrow we will go and fetch the steamboat." Herman 
Basket told how Doom had been talking about the steam- 
boat ever since he became the Man, and about how the 
House was not big enough. So that evening Doom said, "To- 
morrow we will go and fetch the steamboat that died in the 



river." 



Herman Basket said how the steamboat was twelve miles 
away, and that it could not even swim in the water. So the 
next morning there was no one in the Plantation except 
Doom and the black people. He told how it took Doom all 
that day to find the People. Doom used the dogs, and he 
found some of the People in hollow logs in the creek bottom. 
That night he made all the men sleep in the House. He 
kept the dogs in the House, too. 

Herman Basket told how he heard Doom and pappy talk- 
ing in the dark. "I don't think you trust me," Doom said. 



A Justice 351 

"I trust you," pappy said. 

"That is what I would advise," Doom said. 

"I wish you could advise that to my ghost," pappy said. 

The next morning they went to the steamboat. The 
women and the black people walked. The men rode in the 
wagons, with Doom following behind with the dogs. 

The steamboat was lying on its side on the sand-bar. When 
they came to it, there were three white men on it. "Now 
we can go back home," pappy said. 

But Doom talked to the white men. "Does this steamboat 
belong to you?" Doom said. 

"It does not belong to you," the white men said. And 
though they had guns, Herman Basket said they did not 
look like men who would own a boat. 

"Shall we kill them?" he said to Doom. But he said that 
Doom was still talking to the men on the steamboat. 

"What will vou take for it?" Doom said. 

j 

"What will you give for it?" the white men said. 

"It is dead," Doom said. "It's not worth much." 

"Will you give ten black people?" the white men said. 

"All right," Doom said. "Let the black people who came 
with me from the Big River come forward." They came 
forward, the five men and the woman. "Let four more 
black people come forward." Four more came forward. 
"You are now to eat of the corn of those white men yonder," 
Doom said. "May it nourish you." The white men went 
away, the ten black people following them. "Now," Doom 
said, "let us make the steamboat get up and walk." 

Herman Basket said that he and pappy did not go into the 
river with the others, because pappy said to go aside and 
talk. They went aside. Pappy talked, but Herman Basket 
said that he said he did not think it was right to kill white 
men, but pappy said how they could fill the white men with 
rocks and sink them in the river and nobody would find 



352 The Wilderness 

them. So Herman Basket said they overtook the three white 
men and the ten black people, then they turned back toward 
the boat. Just before they came to the steamboat, pappy 
said to the black men: "Go on to the Man. Go and help 
make the steamboat get up and walk. I will take this woman 
on home." 

"This woman is my wife," one of the black men said. "I 
want her to stay with me." 

"Do you want to be arranged in the river with rocks in 
your inside too?" pappy said to the black man. 

"Do you want to be arranged in the river yourself?" the 
black man said to pappy. "There are two of you, and nine 
of us." 

Herman Basket said that pappy thought. Then pappy 
said, "Let us go to the steamboat and help the Man." 

They went to the steamboat. But Herman Basket said 
that Doom did not notice the ten black people until it was 
time to return to the Plantation. Herman Basket told how 
Doom looked at the black people, then looked at pappy. 
"It seems that the white men did not want these black 
people," Doom said. 

"So it seems," pappy said. 

"The white men went away, did they?" Doom said. 

"So it seems," pappy said. 

Herman Basket told how every night Doom would make 
all the men sleep in the House, with the dogs in the House 
too, and how each morning they would return to the steam- 
boat in the wagons. The wagons would not hold everybody, 
so after the second day the women stayed at home. But it 
was three days before Doom noticed that pappy was staying 
at home too. Herman Basket said that the woman's husband 
may have told Doom. "Craw-ford hurt his back lifting the 
steamboat/' Herman Basket said he told Doom. "He said 



A Justice 353 

he would stay at the Plantation and sit with his feet in the 
Hot Spring so that the sickness in his back could return to 
the earth." 

"That is a good idea," Doom said. "He has been doing 
this for three days, has he? Then the sickness should be down 
in his legs by now." 

When they returned to the Plantation that night, Doom 
sent for pappy. He asked pappy if the sickness had moved. 
Pappy said how the sickness moved very slow. "You must 
sit in the Spring more," Doom said. 

"That is what I think," pappy said. 

"Suppose you sit in the Spring at night too," Doom said. 

"The night air will make it worse," pappy said. 

"Not with a fire there," Doom said. "I will send one of 
the black people with you to keep the fire burning." 

"Which one of the black people?" pappy said. 

"The husband of the woman which I won on the steam- 
boat," Doom said. 

"I think my back is better," pappy said. 

"Let us try it," Doom said. 

"I know my back is better," pappy said. 

"Let us try it, anyway," Doom said. Just before dark 
Doom sent four of the People to fix pappy and the black 
man at the Spring. Herman Basket said the People returned 
quickly. He said that as they entered the House, pappy 
entered also. 

"The sickness began to move suddenly," pappy said. "It 
has reached my feet since noon today." 

"Do you think it will be gone by morning?" Doom said. 

"I think so," pappy said. 

"Perhaps you had better sit in the Spring tonight and 
make sure," Doom said. 

"I know it will be gone by morning," pappy said. 



354 The Wilderness 

IV 

WHEN IT GOT to be summer, Herman Basket said that the 
steamboat was out of the river bottom. It had taken them 
five months to get it out of the bottom, because they had to 
cut down the trees to make a path for it. But now he said 
the steamboat could walk faster on the logs. He told how 
pappy helped. Pappy had a certain place on one of the ropes 
near the steamboat that nobody was allowed to take, Herman 
Basket said. It was just under the front porch of the steam- 
boat where Doom sat in his chair, with a boy with a branch 
to shade him and another boy with a branch to drive away 
the flying beasts. The dogs rode on the boat too. 

In the summer, while the steamboat was still walking, Her- 
man Basket told how the husband of the woman came to 
Doom again. "I have done what I could for you," Doom 
said. "Why don't you go to Craw-ford and adjust this matter 
yourself?" 

The black man said that he had done that. He said that 
pappy said to adjust it by a cock-fight, pappy's cock against 
the black man's, the winner to have the woman, the one 
who refused to fight to lose by default. The black man said 
he told pappy he did not have a cock, and that pappy said 
that in that case the black man lost by default and that the 
woman belonged to pappy. "And what am I to do?" the 
black man said. 

Doom thought. Then Herman Basket said that Doom 
called to him and asked him which was pappy's best cock 
and Herman Basket told Doom that pappy had only one. 
"That black one?" Doom said. Herman Basket said he told 
Doom that was the one. "Ah," Doom said. Herman Basket 
told how Doom sat in his chair on the porch of the steam- 
boat while it walked, looking down at the People and 
the black men pulling the ropes, making the steamboat walk. 



A Justice 355 

"Go and tell Craw-ford you have a cock," Doom said to 
the black man. "Just tell him you will have a cock in the 
pit. Let it be tomorrow morning. We will let the steamboat 
sit down and rest." The black man went away. Then Her- 
man Basket said that Doom was looking at him, and that 
he did not look at Doom. Because he said there was but 
one better cock in the Plantation than pappy's, and that 
one belonged to Doom. "I think that that puppy was not 
sick," Doom said. "What do you think?" 

Herman Basket said that he did not look at Doom. "That 
is what I think," he said. 

"That is what I would advise," Doom said. 

Herman Basket told how the next day the steamboat sat 
and rested. The pit was in the stable. The People and the 
black people were there. Pappy had his cock in the pit. Then 
the black man put his cock into the pit. Herman Basket said 
that pappy looked at the black man's cock. 

"This cock belongs to Ikkemotubbe," pappy said. 

"It is his," the People told pappy. "Ikkemotubbe gave it 
to him with all to witness." 

Herman Basket said that pappy had already picked up his 
cock. "This is not right," pappy said. "We ought not to let 
him risk his wife on a cock-fight." 

"Then you withdraw?" the black man said. 

"Let me think," pappy said. He thought. The People 
watched. The black man reminded pappy of what he had 
said about defaulting. Pappy said he did not mean to say 
that and that he withdrew it. The People told him that he 
could only withdraw by forfeiting the match. Herman 
Basket said that pappy thought again. The People watched. 
"All right," pappy said. "But I am being taken advantage of." 

The cocks fought. Pappy's cock fell. Pappy took it up 
quickly. Herman Basket said it was like pappy had been wait- 
ing for his cock to fall so he could pick it quickly up. "Wait," 



356 The Wilderness 

he said. He looked at the People. "Now they have fought. 
Isn't that true?" The People said that it was true. "So that 
settles what I said about forfeiting." 

Herman Basket said that pappy began to get out of the pit. 

"Aren't you going to fight?" the black man said. 

"I don't think this will settle anything," pappy said. "Do 
you?" 

Herman Basket told how the black man looked at pappy. 
Then he quit looking at pappy. He was squatting. Herman 
Basket said the People looked at the black man looking at: 
the earth between his feet. They watched him take up a clod 
of dirt, and then they watched the dust come out between 
the black man's fingers. "Do you think that this will settle 
anything?" pappy said. 

"No," the black man said. Herman Basket said that the 
People could not hear him very good. But he said that pappy 
could hear him. 

"Neither do I," pappy said. "It would not be right to risk 
your wife on a cock-fight." 

Herman Basket told how the black man looked up, with 
the dry dust about the fingers of his hand. He said the black 
man's eyes looked red in the dark pit, like the eyes of a fox. 
"Will you let the cocks fight again?" the black man said. 

"Do you agree that it doesn't settle anything?" pappy said. 

"Yes," the black man said. 

Pappy put his cock back into the ring. Herman Basket 
said that pappy's cock was dead before it had time to act 
strange, even. The black man's cock stood upon it and 
started to crow, but the black man struck the live cock away 
and he jumped up and down on the dead cock until it did 
not look like a cock at all, Herman Basket said. 

Then it was fall, and Herman Basket told how the steam- 
boat came to the Plantation and stopped beside the House 
and died again. He said that for two months they had been 



A Justice 357 

in sight of the Plantation, making the steamboat walk on the 
logs, but now the steamboat was beside the House and the 
House was big enough to please Doom. He gave an eating. 
It lasted a week. When it was over, Herman Basket told how 
the black man came to Doom a third time. Herman Basket 
said that the black man's eyes were red again, like those of 
a fox, and that they could hear his breathing in the room. 
"Come to my cabin," he said to Doom. "I have something 
to show you." 

"I thought it was about that time," Doom said. He looked 
about the room, but Herman Basket told Doom that pappy 
had just stepped out. "Tell him to come also," Doom said. 
When they came to the black man's cabin, Doom sent two 
of the People to fetch pappy. Then they entered the cabin. 
What the black man wanted to show Doom was a new man. 

"Look," the black man said. "You are the Man. You are 
to see justice done." 

"What is wrong with this man?" Doom said. 

"Look at the color of him," the black man said. He began 
to look around the cabin. Herman Basket said that his eyes 
went red and then brown and then red, like those of a fox. 
He said they could hear the black man's breathing. "Do I 
get justice?" the black man said. "You are the Man." 

"You should be proud of a fine yellow man like this," 
Doom said. Fie looked at the new man. "I don't see that 
justice can darken him any," Doom said. He looked about 
the cabin also. "Come forward, Craw-ford," he said. "This 
is a man, not a copper snake; he will not harm you." But 
Herman Basket said that pappy would not come forward. 
He said the black man's eyes went red and then brown and 
then red when he breathed. "Yao," Doom said, "this is not 
right. Any man is entitled to have his melon patch protected 
from these wild bucks of the woods. But first let us name this 
man." Doom thought. Herman Basket said the black man's 



358 The Wilderness 

eyes went quieter now, and his breath went quieter too. "We 
will call him Had-Two-Fathers," Doom said. 



V 

SAM FATHERS lit his pipe again. He did it deliberately, rising 
and lifting between thumb and forefinger from his forge a 
coal of fire. Then he came back and sat down. It was getting 
late. Caddy and Jason had come back from the creek, and I 
could see Grandfather and Mr. Stokes talking beside the 
carriage, and at that moment, as though he had felt my gaze, 
Grandfather turned and called my name. 

"What did your pappy do then?" I said. 

"He and Herman Basket built the fence," Sam Fathers 
said. "Herman Basket told how Doom made them set two 
posts into the ground, with a sapling across the top of them. 
The nigger and pappy w r ere there. Doom had not told them 
about the fence then. Flerman Basket said it was just like 
when he and pappy and Doom were boys, sleeping on the 
same pallet, and Doom would wake them at night and make 
them get up and go hunting with him, or when he would 
make them stand up with him and fight with their fists, just 
for fun, until Herman Basket and pappy would hide from 
Doom. 

"They fixed the sapling across the two posts and Doom 
said to the nigger: 'This is a fence. Can you climb it? ' 

"Flerman Basket said the nigger put his hand on the 
sapling and sailed over it like a bird. 

"Then Doom said to pappy: 'Climb this fence.' 

" 'This fence is too high to climb/ pappy said. 

" 'Climb this fence, and I will give you the woman,' 
Doom said. 

"Herman Basket said pappy looked at the fencv . a while. 
'Let me go under this fence.' he said. 



A Justice 359 

" 'No,' Doom said. 

"Herman Basket told me how pappy began to sit down on 
the ground. 'It's not that I don't trust you,' pappy said. 

" 'We will build the fence this high,' Doom said. 

" 'What fence?' Herman Basket said. 

" 'The fence around the cabin of this black man,' Doom 
said. 

" 'I can't build a fence I couldn't climb,' pappy said. 

" 'Herman will help you,' Doom said. 

"Herman Basket said it was just like when Doom used to 
wake them and make them go hunting. He said the dogs 
found him and pappy about noon the next day, and that they 
began the fence that afternoon. He told me how they had 
to cut the saplings in the creek bottom and drag them in by 
hand, because Doom would not let them use the wagon. So 
sometimes one post would take them three or four days. 
'Never mind,' Doom said. 'You have plenty of time. And 
the exercise will make Craw-ford sleep at night.' 

"He told me how they worked on the fence all that winter 
and all the next summer, until after the whisky trader had 
come and gone. Then it was finished. He said that on the 
day they set the last post, the nigger came out of the cabin 
and put his hand on the top of a post (it was a palisade fence, 
the posts set upright in the ground) and flew out like a bird. 
'This is a good fence,' the nigger said. 'Wait,' he said. 'I have 
something to show you.' Herman Basket said he flew back 
over the fence again and went into the cabin and came back. 
Herman Basket said that he was carrying a new man and that 
he held the new man up so they could see it above the fence. 
'What do you think about this for color?' he said." 

Grandfather called me again. This time I got up. The sun 
was already down beyond the peach orchard. I was just 
twelve then, and to me the story did not seem to have got 
anywhere, to have had point or end. Yet I obeyed Grand- 



360 The Wilderness 

father's voice, not that I was tired of Sam Fathers' talking, 
but with that immediacy of children with which they flee 
temporarily something which they do not quite understand; 
that, and the instinctive promptness with which we all obeyed 
Grandfather, not from concern of impatience or reprimand, 
but because we all believed that he did fine things, that his 
waking life passed from one fine (if faintly grandiose) pic- 
ture to another. 

They were in the surrey, waiting for me. I got in; the 
horses moved at once, impatient too for the stable. Caddy 
had one fish, about the size of a chip, and she was wet to the 
waist. We drove on, the team already trotting. When we 
passed Mr. Stokes' kitchen we could smell ham cooking. 
The smell followed us on to the gate. When we turned onto 
the road home it was almost sundown. Then we couldn't 
smell the cooking ham any more. "What were you and Sam 
talking about?" Grandfather said. 

We went on, in that strange, faintly sinister suspension of 
twilight in which I believed that I could still see Sam Fathers 
back there, sitting on his wooden block, definite, immobile, 
and complete, like something looked upon after a long time 
in a preservative bath in a museum. That was it. I was just 
twelve then, and I would have to wait until I had passed on 
and through and beyond the suspension of twilight. Then I 
knew that I would know. But then Sam Fathers would be 
dead. 

"Nothing, sir," I said. "We were just talking." 



A Courtship 



THIS is HOW it was in the old days, when old Issetibbeha was 
still the Man, and Ikkemotubbe, Issetibbeha's nephew, and 
David Hogganbeck, the white man who told the steamboat 
where to walk, courted Herman Basket's sister. 

The People all lived in the Plantation now. Issetibbeha 
and General Jackson met and burned sticks and signed a 
paper, and now a line ran through the woods, although you 
could not see it. It ran straight as a bee's flight among the 
woods, with the Plantation on one side of it, where Issetib- 
beha was the Man, and America on the other side, where 
General Jackson was the Man. So now when something 
happened on one side of the line, it was a bad fortune for 
some and a good fortune for others, depending on what the 
white man happened to possess, as it had always been. But 
merely by occurring on the other side of that line which 
you couldn't even see, it became what the white men called 
a crime punishable by death if they could just have found 
who did it. Which seemed foolish to us. There was one 
uproar which lasted off and on for a week, not that the 
white man had disappeared, because he had been the sort 
of white man which even other white men did not regret, 
but because of a delusion that he had been eaten. As if any 
man, no matter how hungry, would risk eating the flesh of 
a coward or thief in this country where even in \yjnter there 

361 



362 The Wilderness 

is always something to be found to eat; this land for which, 
as Issetibbeha used to say after he had become so old that 
nothing more was required of him except to sit in the sun 
and criticise the degeneration of the People and the folly and 
rapacity of politicians, the Great Spirit has done more and 
man less than for any land he ever heard of. But it was a 
free country, and if the white man wished to make a rule 
even that foolish in their half of it, it was all right with us. 

Then Ikkemotubbe and David Hogganbeck saw Herman 
Basket's sister. As who did not, sooner or later, young men 
and old men too, bachelors and \vidowcrs too, and some who 
were not even widowers yet, who for more than one reason 
within the hut had no business looking anywhere else, 
though who is to say what age a man must reach or just 
how unfortunate he must have been in his youthful com- 
pliance, when he shall no longer look at the Herman Basket's 
sisters of this world and chew his bitter thumbs too, aihee. 
Because she walked in beauty. Or she sat in it, that is, be- 
cause she did not walk at all unless she had to. One of the 
earliest sounds in the Plantation would be the voice of 
Herman Basket's aunt crying to know why she had not risen 
and gone to the spring for water with the other girls, which 
she did not do sometimes until Herman Basket himself rose 
and made her, or in the afternoon crying to know why she 
did not go to the river with the other girls and women to 
wash, which she did not do very often either. But she did 
not need to. Anyone who looks as Herman Basket's sister 
did at seventeen and eighteen and nineteen does not need 
to wash. 

Then one day Ikkemotubbe saw her, who had known her 
all his life except during the first two years. He was Issetib- 
beha's sister's son. One night he got into the steamboat with 
David Hogganbeck and went away. And suns passed and 
then moons and then three high waters came and went and 



A Courtship 363 

old Issetibbeha had entered the earth a year and his son 
Moketubbe was the Man when Ikkemotubbe returned, 
named Doom now, with the white friend called the Chev- 
alier Sceur-Blonde de Vitry and the eight new slaves which 
we did not need either, and his gold-laced hat and cloak and 
the little gold box of strong salt and the wicker wine hamper 
containing the four other puppies which were still alive, and 
within two days Moketubbe 's little son was dead and within 
three Ikkemotubbe whose name was Doom now was him- 
self the Man. But he was not Doom yet. He was still just 
Ikkemotubbe, one of the young men, the best one, who rode 
the hardest and fastest and danced the longest and got the 
drunkest and was loved the best, by the young men and the 
girls and the older women too who should have had other 
things to think about. Then one day he saw Herman Basket's 
sister, whom he had known all his life except for the first 
two years. 

After Ikkemotubbe looked at her, my father and Owl-by- 
Night and Sylvester's John and the other young men looked 
away. Because he was the best of them and they loved him 
then while he was still just Ikkemotubbe. They would hold 
the other horse for him as, stripped to the waist, his hair 
and body oiled with bear's grease as when racing (though 
with honey mixed into the bear's grease now) and with only 
a rope hackamore and no saddle as when racing, Ikkemo- 
tubbe would ride on his new racing pony past the gallery 
where Herman Basket's sister sat shelling corn or peas into 
the silver wine pitcher which her aunt had inherited from 
her second cousin by marriage's great-aunt who was old 
David Colbert's wife, while Log-in-the-Creek (one of the 
young men too, though nobody paid any attention to him. 
He raced no horses and fought no cocks and cast no dice, 
and even when forced to, he would not even dance fast 
enough to keep out of the other dancers' way, and disgraced 



364 The Wilderness 

both himself and the others each time by becoming sick after 
only five or six horns of what was never even his whisky) 
leaned against one of the gallery posts and blew into his 
harmonica. Then one of the young men held the racing 
pony, and on his gaited mare now and wearing his flower- 
painted weskit and pigeon-tailed coat and beaver hat in 
which he looked handsomer than a steamboat gambler and 
richer even than the whisky-trader, Ikkemotubbe would ride 
past the gallery where Herman Basket's sister shelled another 
pod of peas into the pitcher and Log-in-the-Creek sat with 
his back against the post and blew into the harmonica. Then 
another of the young men would take the mare too and 
Ikkemotubbe would walk to Herman Basket's and sit on the 
gallery too in his fine clothes while Herman Basket's sister 
shelled another pod of peas perhaps into the silver pitcher 
and Log-in-the-Creek lay on his back on the floor, blowing 
into the harmonica. Then the whisky-trader came and 
Ikkemotubbe and the young men invited Log-in-the-Creek 
into the woods until they became tired of carrying him. And 
although a good deal wasted outside, as usual Log-in-the- 
Creek became sick and then asleep after seven or eight horns, 
and Ikkemotubbe returned to Herman Basket's gallery, 
where for a day or two at least he didn't have to not listen 
to the harmonica. 

Finally Owl-at-Night made a suggestion. "Send Herman 
Basket's aunt a gift." But the only thing Ikkemotubbe 
owned which Herman Basket's aunt didn't, was the new 
racing pony. So after a while Ikkemotubbe said, "So it seems 
I want this girl even worse than I believed," and sent Owl- 
at-Night to tie the racing pony's hackamore to Herman 
Basket's kitchen door handle. Then he thought how Herman 
Basket's aunt could not even always make Herman Basket's 
sister just get up and go to the spring for water. Besides, 
she was the second cousin by marriage to the grand-niece 



A Courtship 365 

of the wife of old David Colbert, the chief Man of all the 
Chickasaws in our section, and she looked upon Issetibbeha's 
whole family and line as mushrooms. 

"But Herman Basket has been known to make her get up 
and go to the spring," my father said. "And I never heard 
him claim that old Dave Colbert's wife or his wife's niece 
or anybody else's wife or niece or aunt was any better than 
anybody else. Give Herman the horse." 

"I can beat that," Ikkemotubbe said. Because there was no 
horse in the Plantation or America either between Natchez 
and Nashville whose tail Ikkemotubbe's new pony ever 
looked at. "I will run Herman a horse-race for his influence," 
he said. "Run," he told my father. "Catch Owl-at-Night 
before he reaches the house." So my father brought the 
pony back in time. But just in case Herman Basket's aunt 
had been watching from the kitchen window or something, 
Ikkemotubbe sent Owl-at-Night and Sylvester's John home 
for his crate of gamecocks, though he expected little from 
this since Herman Basket's aunt already owned the best 
cocks in the Plantation and won all the money every Sun- 
day morning anyway. And then Herman Basket declined 
to commit himself, so a horse-race would have been merely 
for pleasure and money. And Ikkemotubbe said how money 
could not help him, and with that damned girl on his mind 
day and night his tongue had forgotten the savor of pleasure. 
But the whisky-trader always came, and so for a day or two 
at least he wouldn't have to not listen to the harmonica. 

Then David Hogganbeck also looked at Herman Basket's 
sister, whom he too had been seeing once each year since the 
steamboat first walked to the Plantation. After a while even 
winter would be over and we would begin to watch the 
mark which David Hogganbeck had put on the landing to 
show us when the water would be tall enough for the steam- 
boat to walk in. Then the river would reach the mark, and 



3 66 The Wilderness 

sure enough within two suns the steamboat would cry in 
the Plantation. Then all the People men and women and 
children and dogs, even Herman Basket's sister because 
Ikkemotubbe would fetch a horse for her to ride and so 
only Log-in-the-Creek would remain, not inside the house 
even though it was still cold, because Herman Basket's aunt 
wouldn't let him stay inside the house where she would 
have to step over him each time she passed, but squatting in 
his blanket on the gallery with an old cooking-pot of fire 
inside the blanket with him would stand on the landing, 
to watch the upstairs and the smokestack moving among the 
trees and hear the puffing of the smokestack and its feet 
walking fast in the water too when it was not crying. Then 
we would begin to hear David Hogganbeck's fiddle, and 
then the steamboat would come walking up the last of the 
river like a race-horse, with the smoke rolling black and its 
feet flinging the water aside as a running horse flings dirt, 
and Captain Studenmare who owned the steamboat chewing 
tobacco in one window and David Hogganbeck playing his 
fiddle in the other, and between them the head of the boy 
slave who turned the wheel, who was not much more than 
half as big as Captain Studenmare and not even a third as 
big as David Hogganbeck. And all day long the trading 
would continue, though David Hogganbeck took little part 
in this. And all night long the dancing would continue, and 
David Hogganbeck took the biggest part in this. Because he 
was bigger than any two of the young men put together 
almost, and although you would not have called him a man 
built for dancing or running either, it was as if that very 
double size which could hold twice as much whisky as any 
other, could also dance twice as long, until one by one the 
young men fell away and only he was left. And there was 
horse-racing and eating, and although David Hogganbeck 
had no horses and did not ride one since no horse could 



A Courtship 367 

have carried him and run fast too, he would eat a match 
each year for money against any two of the young men 
whom the People picked, and David Hogganbeck always 
won. Then the water would return toward the mark he had 
made on the landing, and it would be time for the steamboat 
to leave while there was still enough water in the river for it 
to walk in. 

And then it did not go away. The river began to grow 
little, yet still David Hogganbeck played his fiddle on 
Herman Basket's gallery while Herman Basket's sister stirred 
something for cooking into the silver wine pitcher and 
Ikkemotubbe sat against a post in his fine clothes and his 
beaver hat and Log-in-the-Creek lay on his back on the 
floor with the harmonica cupped in both hands to his mouth, 
though you couldn't hear now whether he was blowing into 
it or not. Then you could see the mark which David Hog- 
ganbeck had marked on the landing while he still played his 
fiddle on Herman Basket's gallery where Ikkemotubbe had 
brought a rocking chair from his house to sit in until David 
Hogganbeck would have to leave in order to show the steam- 
boat the way back to Natchez. And all that afternoon the 
People stood along the landing and watched the steamboat's 
slaves hurling wood into its stomach for steam to make it 
walk; and during most of that night, while David Hoggan- 
beck drank twice as much and danced twice as long as even 
David Hogganbeck, so that he drank four times as much 
and danced four times as long as even Ikkemotubbe, even 
an Ikkemotubbe who at last had looked at Herman Basket's 
sister or at least had looked at someone else looking at her, 
the older ones among the People stood along the landing and 
watched the slaves hurling wood into the steamboat's stom- 
ach, not to make it walk but to make its voice cry while 
Captain Studenmare leaned out of the upstairs with the end 
of the crying-rope tied to the door-handle. And the next 



368 The Wilderness 

day Captain Studenmare himself came onto the gallery and 
grasped the end of David Hogganbeck's fiddle. 

"You're fired," he said. 

"All right," David Hogganbeck said. Then Captain 
Studenmare grasped the end of David Hogganbeck's fiddle. 

"We will have to go back to Natchez where I can get 
money to pay you off," he said. 

"Leave the money at the saloon," David Hogganbeck 
said. "I'll bring the boat back out next spring." 

Then it was night. Then Herman Basket's aunt came out 
and said that if they were going to stay there all night, at 
least David Hogganbeck would have to stop playing his 
fiddle so other people could sleep. Then she came out and 
said for Herman Basket's sister to come in and go to bed. 
Then Herman Basket came out and said, "Come on now, 
fellows. Be reasonable." Then Herman Basket's aunt came 
out and said that the next time she was going to bring Her- 
man Basket's dead uncle's shotgun. So Ikkemotubbe and 
David Hogganbeck left Log-in-the-Creek lying on the floor 
and stepped down from the gallery. "Goodnight," David 
Hogganbeck said. 

"I'll walk home with you," Ikkemotubbe said. So they 
walked across the Plantation to the steamboat. It was dark 
and there was no fire in its stomach now because Captain 
Studenmare was still asleep under Issetibbeha's back porch. 
Then Ikkemotubbe said, "Goodnight." 

"I'll walk home with you," David Hogganbeck said. So 
they walked back across the Plantation to Ikkemotubbe's 
house. But David Hogganbeck did not have time to say 
goodnight now because Ikkemotubbe turned as soon as they 
reached his house and started back toward the steamboat. 
Then he began to run, because David Hogganbeck still did 
not look like a man who could run fast. But he had not 
looked like a man who could dance a long time either, so 



A Courtship 369 

when Ikkemotubbe reached the steamboat and turned and 
ran again, he was only a little ahead of David Hogganbeck. 
And when they reached Ikkemotubbe's house he was still 
only a little ahead of David Hogganbeck when he stopped, 
breathing fast but only a little fast, and held the door open 
for David Hogganbeck to enter. 

"My house is not very much house," he said. "But it is 
yours." So they both slept in Ikkemotubbe's bed in his house 
that night. And the next afternoon, although Herman Bas- 
ket would still do no more than wish him success, Ikkemo- 
tubbe sent my father and Sylvester's John with his saddle 
mare for Herman Basket's aunt to ride on, and he and Her- 
man Basket ran the horse-race. And he rode faster than any- 
one had ever ridden in the Plantation. He won by lengths and 
lengths and, with Herman Basket's aunt watching, he made 
Herman Basket take all the money, as though Herman Bas- 
ket had won, and that evening he sent Owl-at-Night to tie 
the racing pony's hackamore to the door-handle of Herman 
Basket's kitchen. But that night Herman Basket's aunt did 
not even warn them. She came out the first time with Her- 
man Basket's dead uncle's gun, and hardly a moment had 
elapsed before Ikkemotubbe found out that she meant him 
too. So he and David Hogganbeck left Log-in-tiie-Creek 
lying on the gallery and they stopped for a moment at my 
father's house on the first trip between Ikkemotubbe's house 
and the steamboat, though when my father and Owl-at- 
Night finally found Ikkemotubbe to tell him that Herman 
Basket's aunt must have sent the racing pony far into the 
woods and hidden it because they had not found it yet, 
Ikkemotubbe and David Hogganbeck were both asleep in 
David Hogganbeck's bed in the steamboat. 

And the next morning the whisky-trader came, and that 
afternoon Ikkemotubbe and the young men invited Log-in- 
the-Creek into the woods and my father and Sylvester's 



370 The Wilderness 

John returned for the whisky-trader's buckboard and, with 
my father and Sylvester's John driving the buckboard and 
Log-in-the-Creek lying on his face on top of the little house 
on the back of the buckboard where the whisky-kegs rode 
and Ikkemotubbe standing on top of the little house, wear- 
ing the used general's coat which General Jackson gave 
Issetibbeha, with his arms folded and one foot advanced 
onto Log-in-the-Creek 's back, they rode slow past the gal- 
lery where David Hogganbeck played his fiddle while 
Herman Basket's sister stirred something for cooking into 
the silver wine pitcher. And when my father and Owl-at- 
Night found Ikkemotubbe that night to tell him they still 
had not found where Herman Basket's aunt had hidden the 
pony, Ikkemotubbe and David Hogganbeck were at Ikke- 
motubbe's house. And the next afternoon Ikkemotubbe and 
the young men invited David Hogganbeck into the woods 
and it was a long time this time and when they came out, 
David Hogganbeck was driving the buckboard while the 
legs of Ikkemotubbe and the other young men dangled from 
the open door of the little whisky-house like so many strands 
of vine hay and Issetibbeha's general's coat was tied by its 
sleeves about the neck of one of the mules. And nobody 
hunted for the racing pony that night, and when Ikkemo- 
tubbe waked up, he didn't know at first even where he was. 
And he could already hear David Hogganbeck's fiddle be- 
fore he could move aside enough of the young men to get 
out of the little whisky-house, because that night neither 
Herman Basket's aunt nor Herman Basket and then finally 
Herman Basket's dead uncle's gun could persuade David 
Hogganbeck to leave the gallery and go away or even to 
stop playing the fiddle. 

So the next morning Ikkemotubbe and David Hoggan- 
beck squatted in a quiet place in the woods while the young 
men, except Sylvester's John and Owl-by-Night who were 



A Courtship 371 

still hunting for the horse, stood on guard. "We could fight 
for her then," David Hogganbeck said. 

"We could fight for her," Ikkemotubbe said. "But white 
men and the People fight differently. We fight with knives, 
to hurt good and to hurt quickly. That would be all right, 
if I were to lose. Because I would wish to be hurt good. 
But if I am to win, I do not wish you to be hurt good. If 
I am to truly win, it will be necessary for you to be there 
to see it. On the day of the wedding, I wish you to be 
present, or at least present somewhere, not lying wrapped 
in a blanket on a platform in the woods, waiting to enter the 
earth." Then my father said how Ikkemotubbe put his hand 
on David Hogganbeck's shoulder and smiled at him. "If that 
could satisfy me, we would not be squatting here discussing 
what to do. I think you see that." 

"I think I do," David Hogganbeck said. 

Then my father said how Ikkemotubbe removed his hand 
from David Hogganbeck's shoulder. "And we have tried 
whisky," he said. 

"We have tried that," David Hogganbeck said. 

"Even the racing pony and the general's coat failed me," 
Ikkemotubbe said. "I had been saving them, like a man with 
two hole-cards." 

"I wouldn't say that the coat completely failed," David 
Hogganbeck said. "You looked fine in it." 

"Aihee," Ikkemotubbe said. "So did the mule." Then my 
father said how he was not smiling either as he squatted 
beside David Hogganbeck, making little marks in the earth 
with a twig. "So there is just one other thing," he said. "And 
I am already beaten at that too before we start." 

So all that day they ate nothing. And that night when 
they left Log-in-the-Creek lying on Herman Basket's gal- 
lery, instead of merely walking for a while and then running 
for a while back and forth between Ikkemotubbe's house 



372 The Wilderness 

and the steamboat, they began to run as soon as they left 
Herman Basket's. And when they lay down in the woods 
to sleep, it was where they would not only be free of temp- 
tation to eat but of opportunity too, and from which it 
would take another hard run as an appetiser to reach the 
Plantation for the match. Then it was morning and they ran 
back to where my father and the young men waited on 
horses to meet them and tell Ikkemotubbe that they still 
hadn't found where under the sun Herman Basket's aunt 
could have hidden the pony and to escort them back across 
the Plantation to the race-course, where the People waited 
around the table, with Ikkemotubbe's rocking chair from 
Herman Basket's gallery for Issetibbeha and a bench behind 
it for the judges. First there was a recess while a ten-year-old 
boy ran once around the race-track, to let them recover 
breath. Then Ikkemotubbe and David Hogganbeck took 
their places on either side of the table, facing each other 
across it, and Owl-at-Night gave the word. 

First, each had that quantity of stewed bird chitterlings 
which the other could scoop with two hands from the pot. 
Then each had as many wild turkey eggs as he was old, 
Ikkemotubbe twenty-two and David Hogganbeck twenty- 
three, though Ikkemotubbe refused the advantage and said 
he would eat twenty-three too. Then David Hogganbeck 
said he was entitled to one more than Ikkemotubbe so he 
would eat twenty-four, until Issetibbeha told them both to 
hush and get on, and Owl-at-Night tallied the shells. Then 
there was the tongue, paws and melt of a bear, though for 
a little while Ikkemotubbe stood and looked at his half of 
it while David Hogganbeck was already eating. And at the 
half-way he stopped and looked at it again while David 
Hogganbeck was finishing. But it was all right; there was a 
faint smile on his face such as the young men had seen on 
it at the end of a hard running when he was going from 



A Courtship 373 

now on not on the fact that he was still alive but on the 
fact that he was Ikkemotubbe. And he went on, and Owl- 
at-Night tallied the bones, and the women set the roasted 
shote on the table and Ikkemotubbe and David Hogganbeck 
moved back to the tail of the shote and faced one another 
across it and Owl-at-Night had even given the word to start 
until he gave another word to stop. "Give me some water," 
Ikkemotubbe said. So my father handed him the gourd and 
he even took a swallow. But the water returned as though 
it had merely struck the back of his throat and bounced, 
and Ikkemotubbe put the gourd down and raised the tail of 
his shirt before his bowed face and turned and walked away 
as the People opened aside to let him pass. 

And that afternoon they did not even go to the quiet place 
in the woods. They stood in Ikkemotubbe's house while my 
father and the others stood quietly too in the background. 
My father said that Ikkemotubbe was not smiling now. "I 
was right yesterday," he said. "If I am to lose to thee, we 
should have used the knives. You see," he said, and now my 
father said he even smiled again, as at the end of the long 
hard running when the young men knew that he would go 
on, not because he was still alive but because he was Ikkemo- 
tubbe; " you see, although I have lost, I still cannot recon- 
cile." 

"I had you beat before we started," David Hogganbeck 
said. "We both knew that." 

"Yes," Ikkemotubbe said. "But I suggested it." 

"Then what do you suggest now?" David Hogganbeck 
said. And now my father said how they loved David Hog- 
ganbeck at that moment 'as they loved Ikkemotubbe; that 
they loved them both at that moment while Ikkemotubbe 
stood before David Hogganbeck with the smile on his face 
and his right hand flat on David Hogganbeck's chest, be- 
cause there were men in those days. 



374 The Wilderness 

"Once more then, and then no more," Ikkemotubbe said. 
"The Cave." Then he and David Hogganbeck stripped and 
my father and the others oiled them, body and hair too, 
with bear's grease mixed with mint, not just for speed this 
time but for lasting too, because the Cave was a hundred 
and thirty miles away, over in the country of old David 
Colbert a black hole in the hill which the spoor of wild 
creatures merely approached and then turned away and 
which no dog could even be beaten to enter and where the 
boys from among all the People would go to lie on their first 
Night-away-from-Fire to prove if they had the courage to 
become men, because it had been known among the People 
from a long time ago that the sound of a whisper or even the 
disturbed air of a sudden movement would bring parts of 
the roof down and so all believed that not even a very big 
movement or sound or maybe none at all at some time 
would bring the whole mountain into the cave. Then Ikke- 
motubbe took the two pistols from the trunk and drew the 
loads and reloaded them. "Whoever reaches the Cave first 
can enter it alone and fire his pistol," he said. "If he comes 
back out, he has won." 

"And if he does not come back out?" David Hogganbeck 
said. 

"Then you have won," Ikkemotubbe said. 

"Or you," David Hogganbeck said. 

And now my father said how Ikkemotubbe smiled again 
at David Hogganbeck. "Or me," he said. "Though I think 
I told you yesterday that such as that for me will not be 
victory." Then Ikkemotubbe put another charge of powder, 
with a wadding and bullet, into each of two small medicine 
bags, one for himself and one for David Hogganbeck, just 
in case the one who entered the Cave first should not lose 
quick enough, and, wearing only their shirts and shoes and 
each with his pistol and medicine bag looped on a cord 



A Courtship 375 

around his neck, thjey emerged from Ikkemotubbe's house 
and began to run. 

It was evening then. Then it was night, and since David 
Hogganbeck did not know the way, Ikkemotubbe continued 
to set the pace. But after a time it was daylight again and 
now David Hogganbeck could run by the sun and the land- 
marks which Ikkemotubbe described to him while they 
rested beside a creek, if he wished to go faster. So some- 
times David Hogganbeck would run in front and sometimes 
Ikkemotubbe, then David Hogganbeck would pass Ikkemo- 
tubbe as he sat beside a spring or a stream with his feet in 
the water and Ikkemotubbe would smile at David Hoggan- 
beck and wave his hand. Then he would overtake David 
Hogganbeck and the country was open now and they would 
run side by side in the prairies with his hand lying lightly 
on David Hogganbeck's shoulder, not on the top of the 
shoulder but lightly against the back of it until after a while 
he would smile at David Hogganbeck and draw ahead. But 
then it was sundown, and then it was dark again so Ikkemo- 
tubbe slowed and then stopped until he heard David Hog- 
ganbeck and knew that David Hogganbeck could hear him 
and then he ran again so that David Hogganbeck could fol- 
low the sound of his running. So when David Hogganbeck 
fell, Ikkemotubbe heard it and went back and found David 
Hogganbeck in the dark and turned him onto his back and 
found water in the dark and soaked his shirt in it and re- 
turned and wrung the water from the shirt into David Hog- 
ganbeck's mouth. And then it was daylight and Ikkemotubbe 
waked also and found a nest containing five unfledged birds 
and ate and brought the other three to David Hogganbeck 
and then he went on until he was just this side of where 
David Hogganbeck could no longer see him and sat down 
again until David Hogganbeck got up onto his feet, 

And he gave David Hogganbeck the landmarks for that 



376 The Wilderness 

day too, talking back to David Hogganbeck over his shoul- 
der as they ran, though David Hogganbeck did not need 
them because he never overtook Ikkemotubbe again. He 
never came closer than fifteen or twenty paces, although it 
looked at one time like he was. Because this time it was 
Ikkemotubbe who fell. And the country was open again so 
Ikkemotubbe could lie there for a long time and watch 
David Hogganbeck coming. Then it was sunset again, and 
then it was dark again, and he lay there listening to David 
Hogganbeck coming for a long time until it was time for 
Ikkemotubbe to get up and he did and they went on slowly 
in the dark with David Hogganbeck at least a hundred 
paces behind him, until he heard David Hogganbeck fall 
and then he lay down too. Then it was day again and he 
watched David Hogganbeck get up onto his feet and come 
slowly toward him and at last he tried to get up too but he 
did not and it looked like David Hogganbeck was going to 
come up with him. But he got up at last while David Hog- 
ganbeck was still four or five paces away and they went on 
until David Hogganbeck fell, and then Ikkemotubbe thought 
he was just watching David Hogganbeck fall until he found 
that he had fallen too but he got up onto his hands and knees 
and crawled still another ten or fifteen paces before he too 
lay down. And there in the sunset before him was the hill 
in which the Cave was, and there through the night, and 
there still in the sunrise. 

So Ikkemotubbe ran into the Cave first, with his pistol 
already cocked in his hand. He told how he stopped perhaps 
for a second at the entrance, perhaps to look at the sun 
again or perhaps just to see where David Hogganbeck had 
stopped. But David Hogganbeck was running too and he 
was still only that fifteen or twenty paces behind, and be- 
sides, because of that damned sister of Herman Basket's, 
there had been no light nor heat either in that sun for moon? 



A Courtship 377 

and moons. So he ran into the Cave and turned and saw 
David Hogganbeck also running into the Cave and he cried, 
"Back, fool!" But David Hogganbeck still ran into the Cave 
even as Ikkemotubbe pointed his pistol at the roof and fired. 
And there was a noise, and a rushing, and a blackness and a 
dust, and Ikkemotubbe told how he thought, Aihec. It 
comes. But it did not, and even before the blackness he saw 
David Hogganbeck cast himself forward onto his hands and 
knees, and there was not a complete blackness either because 
he could see the sunlight and air and day beyond the tunnel 
of David Hogganbeck's arms and legs as, still on his hands 
and knees, David Hogganbeck held the fallen roof upon 
his back. "Hurry," David Hogganbeck said. "Between my 
legs. I can't " 

"Nay, brother," Ikkemotubbe said. "Quickly thyself, 
before it crushes thee. Crawl back." 

"Hurry," David Hogganbeck said behind his teeth. 
"Hurry, damn you." And Ikkemotubbe did, and he remem- 
bered David Hogganbeck's buttocks and legs pink in the 
sunrise and the slab of rock which supported the fallen roof 
pink in the sunrise too across David Hogganbeck's back. 
But he did not remember where he found the pole nor how 
he carried it alone into the Cave and thrust it into the hole 
beside David Hogganbeck and stooped his own back under 
it and lifted until he knew that some at least of the weight 
of the fallen roof was on the pole. 

"Now," he said. "Quickly." 

"No," David Hogganbeck said. 

"Quickly, brother," Ikkemotubbe said. "The weight is 
off thee." 

"Then I can't move," David Hogganbeck said. But Ikke- 
motubbe couldn't move either, because now he had to hold 
the fallen roof up with his back and legs. So he reached one 
hand and grasped David Hogganbeck by the meat and 



378 The Wilderness 

jerked him backward out of the hole until he lay face-down 
upon the earth. And maybe some of the weight of the fallen 
roof was on the pole before, but now all of the weight was 
on it and Ikkemotubbe said how he thought, This time surely 
aihee. But it was the pole and not his back which snapped 
and flung him face-down too across David Hogganbeck like 
two flung sticks, and a bright gout of blood jumped out of 
David Hogganbeck's mouth. 

But by the second day David Hogganbeck had quit 
vomiting blood, though Ikkemotubbe had run hardly forty 
miles back toward the Plantation when my father met him 
with the horse for David Hogganbeck to ride. Presently my 
father said, "I have a news for thee." 

"So you found the pony," Ikkemotubbe said. "All right. 
Come on. Let's get that damned stupid fool of a white 
man " 

"No, wait, my brother," my father said. "I have a news 
for thee." 

And presently Ikkemotubbe said, "All right." 

But when Captain Studenmare borrowed Issetibbeha's 
wagon to go back to Natchez in, he took the steamboat 
slaves too. So my father and the young men built a fire in 
the steamboat's stomach to make steam for it to walk, while 
David Hogganbeck sat in the upstairs and drew the crying- 
rope from time to time to see if the steam was strong enough 
yet, and at each cry still more of the People came to the 
landing until at last all the People in the Plantation except 
old Issetibbeha perhaps stood along the bank to watch the 
young men hurl wood into the steamboat's stomach: a 
thing never before seen in our Plantation at least. Then the 
steam was strong and the steamboat began to walk and then 
the People began to walk too beside the steamboat, watch- 
ing the young men for a while then Ikkemotubbe and David 
Hogganbeck for a while as the steamboat walked out of the 
Plantation where hardly seven suns ago Ikkemotubbe and 



A Courtship 379 

David Hogganbeck would sit all day long and half the night 
too until Herman Basket's aunt would come out with Her- 
man Basket's dead uncle's gun, on the gallery of Herman 
Basket's house while Log-in-the-Creek lay on the floor with 
his harmonica cupped to his mouth and Log-in-the-Creek's 
wife shelled corn or peas into old Dave Colbert's wife's 
grand-niece's second cousin by marriage's wine pitcher. 
Presently Ikkemotubbe was gone completely away, to be 
gone a long time before he came back named Doom, with 
his new white friend whom no man wished to love either 
and the eight more slaves which we had no use for either 
because at times someone would have to get up and walk 
somewhere to find something for the ones we already owned 
to do, and the fine gold- trimmed clothes and the little gold 
box of salt which caused the other four puppies to become 
dead too one after another, and then anything else which 
happened to stand between Doom and what he wanted. But 
he was not quite gone yet. He was just Ikkemotubbe yet, 
one of the young men, another of the young men who loved 
and was not loved in return and could hear the words and 
see the fact, yet who, like the young men who had been 
before him and the ones who would come after him, still 
could not understand it. 

"But not for her!" Ikkemotubbe said. "And not even 
because it was Log-in-the-Creek. Perhaps they are for my- 
self: that such a son as Log-in-the-Creek could cause them 
to wish to flow." 

"Don't think about her," David Hogganbeck said. 

"I don't. I have already stopped. See?" Ikkemotubbe said 
while the sunset ran down his face as if it had already been 
rain instead of light when it entered the window. "There 
was a wise man of ours who said once how a woman's fancy 
is like a butterfly which, hovering from flower to flower, 
pauses at the last as like as not where a horse has stood." 

"There was a wise man of ours named Solomon who often 



380 The Wilderness 

said something of that nature too," David Hogganbeck said. 
"Perhaps there is just one wisdom for all men, no matter 
who speaks it." 

"Aihee. At least, for all men one same heart-break.^ 
Ikkemotubbe said. Then he drew the crying-rope, because 
the boat was now passing the house where Log-in-the-Creek 
and his wife lived, and now the steamboat sounded like it 
did the first night while Captain Studenmare still thought 
David Hogganbeck would come and show it the way back 
to Natchez, until David Hogganbeck made Ikkemotubbe 
stop. Because they would need the steam because the steam- 
boat did not always walk. Sometimes it crawled, and each 
time its feet came up there was mud on them, and sometimes 
it did not even crawl until David Hogganbeck drew the 
crying-rope as the rider speaks to the recalcitrant horse to 
remind it with his voice just who is up. Then it crawled 
again and then it walked again, until at last the People could 
no longer keep up, and it cried once more beyond the last 
bend and then there was no longer either the black shapes 
of the young men leaping to hurl wood into its red stomach 
or even the sound of its voice in the Plantation or the night. 
That's how it was in the old days. 



Lof 



THE PRESIDENT STOOD motionless at the door of the Dressing 
Room, fully dressed save for his boots. It was half-past six in 
the morning and it was snowing; already he had stood for an 
hour at the window, watching the snow. Now he stood just 
inside the door to the corridor, utterly motionless in his 
stockings, stooped a little from his lean height as though lis- 
tening, on his face an expression of humorless concern, since 
humor had departed from his situation and his view of it 
almost three weeks before. Hanging from his hand, low 
against his flank, was a hand mirror of elegant French design, 
such as should have been lying upon a lady's dressing table: 
certainly at this hour of a February day. 

At last he put his hand on the knob and opened the door 
infinitesimally; beneath his hand the door crept by inches and 
without any sound; still with that infinitesimal silence he put 
his eye to the crack and saw, lying upon the deep, rich pile 
of the corridor carpet, a bone. It was a cooked bone, a rib; 
to it still adhered close shreds of flesh holding in mute and 
overlapping halfmoons the marks of human teeth. Now that 
the door was open he could hear the voices too. Still without 
any sound, with that infinite care, he raised and advanced the 
mirror. For an instant he caught his own reflection in it and 
he paused for a time and with a kind of cold unbelief he 
examined his own face the face of the shrewd and coura- 



382 The Wilderness 

geous fighter, of that wellnigh infallible expert in the antici- 
pation of and controlling of man and his doings, overlaid 
now with the baffled helplessness of a child. Then he slanted 
the glass a little further until he could see the corridor re- 
flected in it. Squatting and facing one another across the 
carpet as across a stream of water were two men. He did not 
know the faces, though he knew the Face, since he had 
looked upon it by day and dreamed upon it by night for 
three weeks now. It was a squat face, dark, a little flat, a little 
Mongol; secret, decorous, impenetrable, and grave. He had 
seen it repeated until he had given up trying to count it or 
even estimate it; even now, though he could see the two men 
squatting before him and could hear the two quiet voices, it 
seemed to him that in some idiotic moment out of attenuated 
sleeplessness and strain he looked upon a single man facing 
himself in a mirror. 

They wore beaver hats and new frock coats; save for the 
minor detail of collars and waistcoats they were impeccably 
dressed though a little early for the forenoon of the time, 
down to the waist. But from here down credulity, all sense 
of fitness and decorum, was outraged. At a glance one would 
have said that they had come intact out of Pickwickian Eng- 
land, save that the tight, light-colored smallclothes ended not 
in Hessian boots nor in any boots at all, but in dark, naked 
feet. On the floor beside each one lay a neatly rolled bundle 
of dark cloth; beside each bundle in turn, mute toe and toe 
and heel and heel, as though occupied by invisible sentries 
facing one another across the corridor, sat two pairs of new 
boots. From a basket woven of whiteoak withes beside one 
of the squatting men there shot suddenly the snake-like head 
and neck of a game cock, which glared at the faint flash of 
the mirror with a round, yellow, outraged eye. It was from 
these that the voices came, pleasant, decorous, quiet: 

"That rooster hasn't done you much good up here." 



Lo! 383 

"That's true. Still, who knows? Besides, I certainly couldn't 
have left him at home, with those damned lazy Indians. I 
wouldn't find a feather left. You know that. But it is a nui- 
sance, having to lug this cage around with me day and night." 

"This whole business is a nuisance, if you ask me." 

"You said it. Squatting here outside this door all night long, 
without a gun or anything. Suppose bad men tried to get in 
during the night: what could we do? If anyone would want 
to get in. I don't." 

"Nobody does. It's for honor." 

"Whose honor? Yours? Mine? Frank Weddel's?" 

"White man's honor. You don't understand white people. 
They are like children: you have to handle them careful be- 
cause you never know what they are going to do next. So 
if it's the rule for guests to squat all night long in the cold 
outside this man's door, we'll just have to do it. Besides, 
hadn't you rather be in here than out yonder in the snow in 
one of those damn tents?" 

"You said it. What a climate. What a country. I wouldn't 
have this town if they gave it to me." 

"Of course you wouldn't. But that's white men: no ac- 
counting for taste. So as long as we are here, we'll have to try 
to act like these people believe that Indians ought to act. Be- 
cause you never know until afterward just what you have 
done to insult or scare them. Like this having to talk white 
talk all the time. . . ." 

The President withdrew the mirror and closed the door 
quietly. Once more he stood silent and motionless in the mid- 
dle of the room, his head bent, musing, baffled yet indom- 
itable: indomitable since this was not the first time that he 
had faced odds; baffled since he faced not an enemy in the 
open field, but was besieged within his very high and lonely 
office by them to whom he was, by legal if not divine appoint- 
ment, father. In the iron silence of the winter dawn he 



384 The Wilderness 

seemed, clairvoyant of walls, to be ubiquitous and one with 
the waking of the stately House. Invisible and in a kind of 
musing horror he seemed to be of each group of his Southern 
guests that one squatting without the door, that larger one 
like so many figures carved of stone in the very rotunda it- 
self of this concrete and visible apotheosis of the youthful 
Nation's pride in their new beavers and frock coats and 
woolen drawers. With their neatly rolled pantaloons under 
their arms and their virgin shoes in the other hand; dark, 
timeless, decorous and serene beneath the astonished faces and 
golden braid, the swords and ribbons and stars, of European 
diplomats. 

The President said quietly, "Damn. Damn. Damn." He 
moved and crossed the room, pausing to take up his boots 
from where they sat beside a chair, and approached the op- 
posite door. Again he paused and opened this door too 
quietly and carefully, out of the three weeks' habit of expect- 
ant fatalism, though there was only his wife beyond it, 
sleeping peacefully in bed. He crossed this room in turn, car- 
rying his boots, pausing to replace the hand glass on the 
dressing table, among its companion pieces of the set which 
the new French Republic had presented to a predecessor, 
and tiptoed on and into the anteroom, where a man in a long 
cloak looked up and then rose, also in his stockings. They 
looked at one another soberly. "All clear?" the President said 
in a low tone. 

"Yes, General." 

"Good. Did you . . ." The other produced a second long, 
plain cloak. "Good, good," the President said. He swung the 
cloak about him before the other could move. "Now the . . ." 
This time the other anticipated him; the President drew the 
hat well down over his face. They left the room on tiptoe, 
carrying their boots in their hands. 

The back stairway was cold: their stockinged toes curled 



Lo! 385 

away from the treads, their vaporized breath wisped about 
their heads. They descended quietly and sat on the bottom 
step and put on their boots. 

Outside it still snowed; invisible against snow-colored sky 
and snow-colored earth, the flakes seemed to materialize with 
violent and silent abruptness against the dark orifice of the 
stables. Each bush and shrub resembled a white balloon 
whose dark shroud lines descended, light and immobile, to 
the white earth. Interspersed among these in turn and with a 
certain regularity were a dozen vaguely tent-shaped mounds, 
from the ridge of each of which a small column of smoke 
rose into the windless snow, as if the snow itself were in a 
state of peaceful combustion. The President looked at these, 
once, grimly. "Get along," he said. The other, his head low- 
ered and his cloak held closely about his face, scuttled on 
and ducked into the stable. Perish the day when these two 
words were applied to the soldier chief of a party and a na- 
tion, yet the President was so close behind him that their 
breaths made one cloud. And perish the day when the word 
flight were so applied, yet they had hardly vanished into the 
stable when they emerged, mounted now and already at a 
canter, and so across the lawn and past the snow-hidden tents 
and toward the gates which gave upon that Avenue in em- 
bryo yet but which in time would be the stage upon which 
each four years would parade the proud panoply of the 
young Nation's lusty man's estate for the admiration and 
envy and astonishment of the weary world. At the moment, 
though, the gates were occupied by those more immediate 
than splendid augurs of the future. 

"Look out," the other man said, reining back. They reined 
aside the President drew the cloak about his face and al- 
lowed the party to enter: the squat, broad, dark men dark 
against the snow, the beaver hats, the formal coats, the solid 
legs clad from thigh to ankle in woolen drawers. Among 



386 The Wilderness 

them moved three horses on whose backs were lashed the 
carcasses of six deer. They passed on, passing the two horse- 
men without a glance. 

"Damn, damn, damn," the President said; then aloud: 
"You found good hunting." 

One of the group glanced at him, briefly. He said cour- 
teously, pleasantly, without inflection, going on: "So so." 

The horses moved again. "I didn't see any guns," the other 
man said. 

"Yes," the President said grimly. "I must look into this, 
too. I gave strict orders. . . ." He said fretfully, "Damn. 
Damn. Do they carry their pantaloons when they go hunting 
too, do you know?" 

The Secretary was at breakfast, though he was not eating. 
Surrounded by untasted dishes he sat, in his dressing gown 
and unshaven; his expression too was harried as he perused 
the paper which lay upon his empty plate. Before the fire 
were two men one a horseman with unmelted snow still 
upon his cloak, seated on a wooden settle, the other standing, 
obviously the secretary to the Secretary. The horseman rose 
as the President and his companion entered. "Sit down, sit 
down," the President said. He approached the table, slipping 
off the cloak, which the secretary came forward and took. 
"Give us some breakfast," the President said. "We don't dare 
go home." He sat down; the Secretary served him in person. 
"What is it now?" the President said. 

"Do you ask?" the Secretary said. He took up the paper 
again and glared at it. "From Pennsylvania, this time." He 
struck the paper. "Maryland, New York, and now Pennsyl- 
vania; apparently the only thing that can stop them is the 
temperature of the water in the Potomac River." He spoke 
in a harsh, irascible voice. "Complaint, complaint, complaint: 
here is a farmer near Gettysburg. His Negro slave was in the 



Lo! 387 

barn, milking by lantern light after dark, when the Negro 
doubtless thought about two hundred, since the farmer esti- 
mated them at ten or twelve springing suddenly out of the 
darkness in plug hats and carrying knives and naked from the 
waist down. Result, item: One barn and loft of hay and cow 
destroyed when the lantern was kicked over; item: one able- 
bodied slave last seen departing from the scene at a high rate 
of speed, headed for the forest, and doubtless now dead of 
fear or by the agency of wild beasts. Debit the Government 
of the United States: for barn and hay, one hundred dollars; 
for cow, fifteen dollars; for Negro slave, two hundred dollars. 
He demands it in gold." 

"Is that so?" the President said, eating swiftly. "I suppose 
the Negro and the cow took them to be ghosts of Hessian 
.soldiers." 

"I wonder if they thought the cow was a deer," the horse- 
man said. 

"Yes," the President said. "That's something else I 
want. . . ." 

"Who wouldn't take them for anything on earth or under 
it?" the Secretary said. "The entire Atlantic seaboard north 
of the Potomac River overrun by creatures in beaver hats 
and frock coats and woolen drawers, frightening women and 
children, setting fire to barns and running off slaves, killing 
deer. . . ." 

"Yes," the President said. "I want to say a word about that, 
myself. I met a party of them returning as I came out. They 
had six deer. I thought I gave strict orders that they were not 
tD be permitted guns." 

Again it was the horseman who spoke. "They don't use 
guns." 

"What?" the President said. "But I saw myself . . ." 

"No, sir. They use knives. They track the deer down and 
slip up on them and cut their throats." 



388 The Wilderness 

"What?" the President said. 

"All right, sir. I seen one of the deer. It never had a mark 
on it except its throat cut up to the neckbone with one lick." 

Again the President said, "Damn. Damn. Damn." Then the 
President ceased and the Soldier cursed steadily for a while. 
The others listened, gravely, their faces carefully averted, 
save the Secretary, who had taken up another paper. "If you 
could just persuade them to keep their pantaloons on," the 
President said. "At least about the House. . . ." 

The Secretary started back, his hair upcrested like an out- 
raged, iron-gray cockatoo. "I, sir? / persuade them?" 

"Why not? Aren't they subject to your Department? I'm 
just the President. Confound it, it's got to where my wife no 
longer dares leave her bedroom, let alone receive lady guests. 
How am I to explain to the French Ambassador, for instance, 
why his wife no longer dares call upon my wife because the 
corridors and the very entrance to the House are blocked by 
half-naked Chickasaw Indians asleep on the floor or gnawing 
at half-raw ribs of meat? And I, myself, having to hide away 
from my own table and beg breakfast, while the official rep- 
resentative of the Government has nothing to do but . . ." 

". . . but explain again each morning to the Treasury," the 
Secretary said in shrill rage, "why another Dutch farmer in 
Pennsylvania or New York must have three hundred dollars 
in gold in payment for the destruction of his farm and live- 
stock, and explain to the State Department that the capital is 
not being besieged by demons from hell itself, and explain to 
the War Department why twelve brand-new army tents 
must be ventilated at the top with butcher knives. . . ." 

"I noticed that, too," the President said mildly. "I had for- 
got it." 

"Ha. Your Excellency noted it," the Secretary said 
fiercely. "Your Excellency saw it and then forgot it. I have 
neither seen it nor been permitted to forget it. And now 



Lo! 389 

Your Excellency wonders why / do not persuade them to 
wear their pantaloons." 

"It does seem like they would," the President said fretfully. 
"The other garments seem to please them well enough. But 
there's no accounting for taste." He ate again. The Secretary 
looked at him, about to speak. Then he did not. As he 
watched the oblivious President a curious, secret expression 
came into his face; his gray and irate crest settled slowly, as 
if it were deflating itself. When he spoke now his tone was 
bland, smooth; now the other three men were watching the 
President with curious, covert expressions. 

"Yes," the Secretary said, "there's no accounting for taste. 
Though it does seem that when one has been presented with 
a costume as a mark of both honor and esteem, let alone 
decorum, and by the chief of a well, tribe . . ." 

"That's what I thought," the President said innocently. 
Then he ceased chewing and said "Eh?" sharply, looking up. 
The three lesser men looked quickly away, but the Secretary 
continued to watch the President with that bland, secret ex- 
pression. "What the devil do you mean?" the President said. 
He knew what the Secretary meant, just as the other three 
knew. A day or two after his guest had arrived without 
warning, and after the original shock had somewhat abated, 
the President had decreed the new clothing for them. He 
commanded, out of his own pocket, merchants and hatters as 
he would have commanded gunsmiths and bulletmakers in 
war emergency; incidentally he was thus able to estimate the 
number of them, the men at least, and within forty-eight 
hours he had transformed his guest's grave and motley train 
into the outward aspect of decorum at least. Then, two morn- 
ings after that, the guest the half Chickasaw, half French- 
man, the squat, obese man with the face of a Gascon brigand 
and the mannerisms of a spoiled eunuch and dingy lace at 
throat and wrist, who for three weeks now had doerged his 



390 The Wilderness 

waking hours and his sleeping dreams with bland inescapa- 
bility called formally upon him while he and his wife were 
still in bed at five o'clock in the morning, with two of his 
retainers carrying a bundle and what seemed to the President 
at least a hundred others, men, women and children, throng- 
ing quietly into the bedroom, apparently to watch him array 
himself in it. For it was a costume even in the shocked 
horror of the moment, the President found time to wonder 
wildly where in the capital Weddel (or Vidal) had found it 
a mass, a network, of gold braid frogs, epaulets, sash and 
sword held loosely together by bright green cloth and pre- 
sented to him in return. This is what the Secretary meant, 
while the President glared at him and while behind them both 
the three other men stood looking at the fire with immobile 
gravity. "Have your joke," the President said. "Have it 
quickly. Are you done laughing now?" 

"I laugh?" the Secretary said. "At what?" 

"Good," the President said. He thrust the dishes from him. 
"Then we can get down to business. Have you any docu- 
ments you will need to refer to?" 

The Secretary's secretary approached. "Shall I get the 
other papers, sir?" 

"Papers?" the Secretary said; once more his crest began to 
rise. "What the devil do I need with papers? What else have 
I thought about night and day for three weeks?" 

"Good; good," the President said. "Suppose you review 
the matter briefly, in case I have forgot anything else." 

"Your Excellency is indeed a fortunate man, if you have 
been able to forget," the Secretary said. From the pocket of 
his dressing gown he took a pair of steel-bowed spectacles. 
But he used them merely to glare again at the President in 
cockatoo-crested outrage. "This man, Weddel, Vidal whats 
ever his name is he and his family or clan or whatever they 
are claim to own the entire part of Mississippi which lies 



Lo! 391 

on the west side of this river in question. Oh, the grant is in 
order: that French father of his from New Orleans saw to 
that. Well, it so happens that facing his home or plantation 
is the only ford in about three hundred miles." 

"I know all this," the President said impatiently. "Nat- 
urally I regret now that there was any way of crossing the 
river at all. But otherwise I don't see . . ." 

"Neither did they," the Secretary said. "Until the white 
man came." 

"Ah," the President said. "The man who was mur . . ." 

The Secretary raised his hand. "Wait. He stayed about a 
month with them, ostensibly hunting, since he would be ab- 
sent all day long, though obviously what he was doing was 
assuring himself that there was no other ford close by. He 
never brought any game in; I imagine they laughed at that a 
good deal, in their pleasant way." 

"Yes," the President said. "Weddel must have found that 
very amusing." 

". . . or Vidal whatever his name is," the Secretary said 
fretfully. "He don't even seem to know or even to care what 
his own name is." 

"Get on," the President said. "About the ford." 

"Yes. Then one day, after a month, the white man offered 
to buy some of Weddel's land Weddel, Vidal Damn, 
da . . ." 

"Call him Weddel," the President said. 

". . . from Weddel. Not much; a piece about the size of this 

room, for which Weddel or V charged him about ten 

prices. Not out of any desire for usufruct, you understand; 
doubtless Weddel would have given the man the land or 
anyway wagered it on a game of mumble peg, it not having 
yet occurred to any of them apparently that the small plot 
which the man wanted contained the only available entrance 
to or exit from the ford. Doubtless the trading protracted it- 



392 The Wilderness 

self over several days or perhaps weeks, as a kind of game to 
while away otherwise idle afternoons or evenings, with the 
bystanders laughing heartily and pleasantly at the happy 
scene. They must have laughed a great deal, especially when 
the man paid Weddel's price; they must have laughed hugely 
indeed later when they watched the white man out in the 
sun, building a fence around his property, it doubtless not 
even then occurring to them that what the white man had 
done was to fence off the only entrance to the ford." 

"Yes," the President said impatiently. "But I still don't 
see . . ." 

Again the Secretary lifted his hand, pontifical, admonitory. 
"Neither did they; not until the first traveler came along and 
crossed at the ford. The white man had built himself a toll- 
gate." 

"Oh," the President said. 

"Yes. And now it must have been, indeed, amusing for 
them to watch the white man sitting now in the shade he 
had a deerskin pouch fastened to a post for the travelers to 
drop their coins in, and the gate itself arranged so he could 
operate it by a rope from the veranda of his one-room domi- 
cile without having to even leave his seat; and to begin to 
acquire property among which was the horse." 

"Ah," the President said. "Now we are getting at it." 

"Yes. They got at it swiftly from then on. It seems that 
the match was between the white man's horse and this neph- 
ew's horse, the wager the ford and tollgate against a thousand 
or so acres of land. The nephew's horse lost. And that 
night . . ." 

"Ah," the President said. "I see. And that night the white 
man was mur . . ." 

"Let us say, died," the Secretary said primly, "since it is so 
phrased in the agent's report. Though he did add in a private 



Lo! 393 

communication that the white man's disease seemed to be a 
split skull. But that is neither here nor there." 

"No," the President said. "It's up yonder at the House." 
Where they had been for three weeks now, men, women, 
children and Negro slaves, coming for fifteen hundred miles 
in slow wagons since that day in late autumn when the 
Chickasaw agent had appeared to inquire into the white man's 
death. For fifteen hundred miles, across winter swamps and 
rivers, across the trackless eastern backbone of the continent, 
led by the bland, obese mongrel despot and patriarch in a 
carriage, dozing, his nephew beside him and one fat, ringed 
hand beneath its fall of soiled lace lying upon the nephew's 
knee to hold him in charge. "Why didn't the agent stop 
him?" the President said. 

"Stop him?" the Secretary cried. "He finally compromised 
to the extent of offering to allow the nephew to be tried on 
the spot, by the Indians themselves, he reserving only the in- 
tention of abolishing the tollgate, since no one knew the 
white man anyway. But no. The nephew must come to you, 
to be absolved or convicted in person." 

"But couldn't the agent stop the rest of them? Keep the 
rest of them from . . ." 

"Stop them?" the Secretary cried again. "Listen. He 
moved in there and lived Weddel, Vi Damn! damn!! 
Where was Yes. Weddel told him that the house was his; 
soon it was. Because how could he tell there were fewer faces 
present each morning than the night before? Could you have? 
Could you now?" 

"I wouldn't try," the President said. "I would just declare 
a national thanksgiving. So they slipped away at night." 

"Yes. Weddel and the carriage and a few forage wagons 
went first; they had been gone about a month before the 
agent realized that each morning the number which remained 
had diminished somewhat. They would load the wagons and 



394 The Wilderness 

go at night, by families grandparents, parents, children; 
slaves, chattels and dogs everything. And why not? Why 
should they deny themselves this holiday at the expense of 
the Government? Why should they miss, at the mere price 
of a fifteen-hundred-mile journey through unknown coun- 
try in the dead of winter, the privilege and pleasure of spend- 
ing a few weeks or months in new beavers and broadcloth 
coats and underdrawers, in the home of the beneficent White 
Fafher?" 

"Yes," the President said. He said: "And you have told him 
that there is no charge here against this nephew? " 

"Yes. And that if they will go back home, the agent him- 
self will declare the nephew innocent publicly, in whatever 
ceremony they think fit. And he said how was it he put it?" 
The Secretary now spoke in a pleasant, almost lilting tone, in 
almost exact imitation of the man whom he repeated: 'All 
we desire is justice. If this foolish boy has murdered a white 
man, I think that we should know it." 

"Damn, damn, damn," the President said. "All right. We'll 
hold the investigation. Get them down here and let's have it 
over with." 

"Here?" The Secretary started back. "In my house?" 

"Why not? I've had them for three weeks; at least you can 
have them for an hour." He turned to the companion. 
"Hurry. Tell them we are waiting here to hold his nephew's 
trial." 

And now the President and the Secretary sat behind the 
cleared table and looked at the man who stood as though 
framed by the opened doors through which he had entered, 
holding his nephew by the hand like an uncle conducting for 
the first time a youthful provincial kinsman into a metro- 
politan museum of wax figures. Immobile, they contem- 
plated the soft, paunchy man facing them with his soft, bland, 



Lo! 395 

inscrutable face the long, monk-like nose, the slumbrous 
lids, the flabby, cafe-au-lait-colored jowls above a froth of 
soiled lace of an elegance fifty years outmoded and vanished; 
the mouth was full, small, and very red. Yet somewhere be- 
hind the face's expression of flaccid and weary disillusion, as 
behind the bland voice and the almost feminine mannerisms, 
there lurked something else: something willful, shrewd, un- 
predictable and despotic. Behind him clotted, quiet and 
gravely decorous, his dark retinue in beavers and broadcloth 
and woolen drawers, each with his neatly rolled pantaloons 
beneath his arm. 

For a moment longer he stood, looking from face to face 
until he found the President. He said, in a voice of soft re- 
proach: "This is not your house/' 

"No," the President said. "This is the house of this chief 
whom I have appointed myself to be the holder of justice 
between me and my Indian people. He will deal justice to 
you." 

The uncle bowed slightly. "That is all that we desire." 

"Good," the President said. On the table before him sat 
inkstand, quill, and sandbox, and many papers with ribbons 
and golden seals much in evidence, though none could have 
said if the heavy gaze had remarked them or not. The Presi- 
dent looked at the nephew. Young, lean, the nephew stood, 
his right wrist clasped by his uncle's fat, lace-foamed hand, 
and contemplated the President quietly, with grave and alert 
repose. The President dipped the quill into the ink. "Is this 
the man who . . ." 

"Who performed this murder?" the uncle said pleasantly. 
"That is what we made this long winter's journey to dis- 
cover. If he did, if this white man really did not fall from that 
swift horse of his perhaps and strike his head upon a sharp 
stone, then this nephew of mine should be punished. We do 
not think that it is right to slay white men like a confounded 



396 The Wilderness 

Cherokee or Creek." Perfectly inscrutable, perfectly deco- 
rous, he looked at the two exalted personages playing behind 
the table their clumsy deception with dummy papers; for an 
instant the President himself met the slumbrous eyes and 
looked down. The Secretary though, upthrust, his crest 
roached violently upward, glared at the uncle. 

"You should have held this horse-race across the ford it- 
self," he said. "Water wouldn't have left that gash in the 
white man's skull." 

The President, glancing quickly up, saw the heavy, secret 
face musing upon the Secretary with dark speculation. But 
almost immediately the uncle spoke. "So it would. But this 
white man would have doubtless required a coin of money 
from my nephew for passing through his gate." Then he 
laughed, mirthful, pleasant, decorous. "Perhaps it would have 
been better for that white man if he had allowed my nephew 
to pass through free. But that is neither here nor there now." 

"No," the President said, almost sharply, so that they 
looked at him again. He held the quill above the paper, 
"What is the correct name? Weddel or Vidal?" 

Again the pleasant, inflectionless voice came: "Weddel or 
Vidal. What does it matter by what name the White Chief 
calls us? We are but Indians: remembered yesterday and for- 
gotten tomorrow." 

The President wrote upon the paper. The quill scratched 
steadily in the silence in which there was but one other 
sound: a faint, steady, minor sound which seemed to emerge 
from the dark and motionless group behind the uncle and 
nephew. He sanded what he had written and folded it and 
rose and stood for a moment so while they watched him 
quietly the soldier who had commanded men well on more 
occasions than this. "Your nephew is not guilty of this mur- 
der. My chief whom I have appointed to hold justice be* 



Lo! 397 

tween us says for him to return home and never do this again, 
because next time he will be displeased." 

His voice died into a shocked silence; even for that instant 
the heavy lids fluttered, while from the dark throng behind 
him that faint, unceasing sound of quiet scratching by heat 
and wool engendered, like a faint, constant motion of the 
sea, also ceased for an instant. The uncle spoke in a tone of 
shocked unbelief: "My nephew is free?" 

"He is free," the President said. The uncle's shocked gaze 
traveled about the room. 

"This quick? And in here? In this house? I had thought. 
. . . But no matter." They watched him; again the face was 
smooth, enigmatic, blank. "We are only Indians; doubtless 
these busy white men have but little time for our small affairs. 
Perhaps we have already incommoded them too much." 

"No, no," the President said quickly. "To me, my Indian 
and my white people are the same." But again the uncle's 
gaze was traveling quietly about the room; standing side by 
side, the President and the Secretary could feel from one to 
another the same dawning alarm. After a while the President 
said: "Where had you expected this council to be held?" 

The uncle looked at him. "You will be amused. In my ig- 
norance I had thought that even our little affair would have 
been concluded in ... But no matter." 

"In what?" the President said. 

The bland, heavy face mused again upon him for a mo- 
ment. "You will laugh; nevertheless, I will obey you. In the 
big white council house beneath the golden eagle." 

"What?" the Secretary cried, starting again. "In the . . ." 

The uncle looked away. "I said that you would be amused. 
But no matter. We will have to wait, anyway." 

"Have to wait?" the President said. "For what?" 

"This is really amusing," the uncle said. He laughed again, 
in his tone of mirthful detachment. "More of my people are 



398 The Wilderness 

about to arrive. We can wait for them, since they will wish 
to see and hear also." No one exclaimed at all now, not even 
the Secretary. They merely stared at him while the bland 
voice went on: "It seems that some of them mistook the 
town. They had heard the name of the White Chief's capital 
spoken, but it so happens that there is also a town in our coun- 
try with the same name, so that when some of the People 
inquired on the road, they became misdirected and went 
there instead, poor ignorant Indians." He laughed, with fond 
and mirthful tolerance behind his enigmatic and sleepy face. 
"But a messenger has arrived; they will arrive themselves 
within the week. Then we will see about punishing this head- 
strong boy." He shook the nephew's arm lightly. Except for 
this the nephew did not move, watching the President with 
his grave and unwinking regard. 

For a long moment there was no sound save the faint, 
steady scratching of the Indians. Then the Secretary began to 
speak, patiently, as though addressing a child: "Look. Your 
nephew is free. This paper says that he did not slay the white 
man and that no man shall so accuse him again, else both I 
and the great chief beside me will be angered. He can return 
home now, at once. Let all of you return home at once. For 
is it not well said that the graves of a man's fathers are never 
quiet in his absence?" 

Again there was silence. Then the President said, "Besides, 
the white council house beneath the golden eagle is being 
used now by a council of chiefs who are more powerful there 
than I am." 

The uncle's hand lifted; foamed with soiled lace, his fore- 
finger waggled in reproachful deprecation. "Do not ask even 
an ignorant Indian to believe that," he said. Then he said, 
with no change of inflection whatever; the Secretary did not 
know until the President told him later, that the uncle was 
now addressing him: "And these chiefs will doubtless be oc- 



Lo! 399 

copying the white council hut for some time yet, I suppose." 

"Yes," the Secretary said. "Until the last snow of winter 
has melted among the flowers and the green grass." 

"Good," the uncle said. "We will wait, then. Then the 
rest of the People will have time to arrive." 

And so it was that up that Avenue with a high destiny the 
cavalcade moved in the still falling snow, led by the carriage 
containing the President and the uncle and nephew, the fat, 
ringed hand lying again upon the nephew's knee, and fol- 
lowed by a second carriage containing the Secretary and his 
secretary, and this followed in turn by two files of soldiers 
between which walked the dark and decorous cloud of men, 
women and children on foot and in arms; so it was that be- 
hind the Speaker's desk of that chamber which was to womb 
and contemplate the high dream of a destiny superior to the 
injustice of events and the folly of mankind, the President 
and the Secretary stood, while below them, ringed about by 
the living manipulators of, and interspersed by the august 
and watching ghosts of the dreamers of, the destiny, the 
uncle and nephew stood, with behind them the dark throng 
of kin and friends and acquaintances from among which 
came steadily and unabated that faint sound of wool and 
flesh in friction. The President leaned to the Secretary. 

"Are they ready with the cannon?" he whispered. "Are 
you sure they can see my arm from the door? And suppose 
those damned guns explode: they have not been fired since 
Washington shot them last at Cornwallis: will they impeach 
me?" 

"Yes," the Secretary hissed. 

"Then God help us. Give me the book." The Secretary 
passed it to him: it was Petrarch's Sonnets, which the Secre- 
tary had snatched from his table in passing. "Let us hope that 
I remember enough law Latin to keep it from sounding like 
either English or Chickasaw," the President said. He opened 



400 The Wilderness 

the book, and then again the President, the conqueror of 
men, the winner of battles diplomatic, legal and martial, drew 
himself erect and looked down upon the dark, still, intent, 
waiting faces; when he spoke his voice was the voice which 
before this had caused men to pause and attend and then 
obey: "Francis Weddel, chief in the Chickasaw Nation, and 
you, nephew of Francis Weddel and some day to be a chief, 
hear my words." Then he began to read. His voice was full, 
sonorous, above the dark faces, echoing about the august 
dome in profound and solemn syllables. He read ten sonnets. 
Then, with his arm lifted, he perorated; his voice died pro- 
foundly away and he dropped his arm. A moment later, from 
outside the building, came a ragged crash of artillery. And 
now for the first time the dark throng stirred; from among 
them came a sound, a murmur, of pleased astonishment. The 
President spoke again: "Nephew of Francis Weddel, you are 
free. Return to your home." 

And now the uncle spoke; again his finger waggled from 
out its froth of lace. "Heedless boy," he said. "Consider the 
trouble which you have caused these busy men." He turned 
to the Secretary, almost briskly; again his voice was bland, 
pleasant, almost mirthful: "And now, about the little matter 
of this cursed ford. . . ." 

With the autumn sun falling warmly and pleasantly across 
his shoulders, the President said, "That is all," quietly and 
turned to his desk as the secretary departed. While he took 
up the letter and opened it the sun fell upon his hands and 
upon the page, with its inference of the splendid dying of 
the year, of approaching harvests and of columns of quiet 
wood smoke serene pennons of peace above peaceful 
chimneys about the land. 

Suddenly the President started; he sprang up, the letter in 
his hand, glaring at it in shocked and alarmed consternation 



Lo! 401 

while the bland words seemed to explode one by one in his 
comprehension like musketry: 

Dear sir and friend: 

This is really amusing. Again this hot-headed nephew 
he must have taken his character from his father's people, 
since it is none of mine has come to trouble you and me. It 
is this cursed ford again. Another white man came among us, 
to hunt in peace we thought, since God's forest and the deer 
which He put in it belong to all. But he too became obsessed 
with the idea of owning this ford, having heard tales of his 
own kind who, after the curious and restless fashion of white 
men, find one side of a stream of water superior enough to 
the other to pay coins of money for the privilege of reaching 
it. So the affair was arranged as this white man desired it. 
Perhaps I did wrong, you will say. But do I need to tell 
you? / am a simple man and some day I shall be old, I trust, 
and the continuous interruption of these white men who 
wish to cross and the collecting and care of the coins of 
money is only a nuisance. For what can money be to me, 
whose destiny it apparently is to spend my declining years 
beneath the shade of familiar trees from whose peaceful 
shade my great white friend and chief has removed the face 
of every enemy save death? That was my thought, but when 
you read farther you will see that it was not to be. 

Once more it is this rash and heedless boy. It seems that he 
challenged this new white man of ours (or the white man 
challenged him: the truth / will leave to your unerring wis- 
dom to unravel) to a swimming race in the river, the stakes 
to be this cursed ford against a few miles of land, which 
(this will amuse you) this wild nephew of mine did not even 
own. The race took place, but unfortunately our white man 
failed to emerge from the river until after he was dead. And 
now your agent has arrived* and he seems to feel that perhaps 



402 The Wilderness 

this swimming race should not have taken place at all. And 
so now there is nothing for me to do save to bestir old bones 
and bring this rash boy to you for you to reprimand him. We 
'" arrive in about . . . 



The President sprang to the bell and pulled it violently. 
When his secretary entered, he grasped the man by the 
shoulders and whirled him toward the door again. "Get me 
the Secretary of War, and maps of all the country between 
here and New Orleans!" he cried. "Hurry." 

And so again we see him; the President is absent now and 
it is the Soldier alone who sits with the Secretary of War 
behind the map-strewn table, while there face them the 
officers of a regiment of cavalry. At the table his secretary is 
writing furiously while the President looks over his shoulder. 
"Write it big," he says, "so that even an Indian cannot mis- 
take it. Know all men by these presents" he quotes. "Francis 
Weddel his heirs, descendants and assigns from now on in 
perpetuity . . . provided Have you got provided? Good 
provided that neither he nor his do ever again cross to the 
eastern side of the above described River. . . . And now to 
that damned agent," he said. "The sign must be in duplicate, 
at both ends of the ford: The United States accepts no re- 
sponsibility for any man, woman or child, black, white, yel- 
low or red, who crosses this ford, and no white man shall buy, 
lease or accept it as a gift save under the severest penalty of 
the law. Can I do that?" 

"I'm afraid not, Your Excellency," the Secretary said. 
The President mused swiftly. "Damn," he said. "Strike out 
The United States, then." The Secretary did so. The Presi- 
dent folded the two papers and handed them to the cavalry 
colonel. "Ride," he said. "Your orders are, Stop them." 

"Suppose they refuse to stop," the colonel said. "Shall I 
fire then?" 



Lo! 403 

"Yes," the President said. "Shoot every horse, mule, and 
ox. I know they won't walk. Off with you, now." The offi- 
cers withdrew. The President turned back to the maps the 
Soldier still: eager, happy, as though he rode himself with 
the regiment, or as if in spirit already he deployed it with 
that shrewd cunning which could discern and choose the 
place most disadvantageous to the enemy, and get there first. 
"It will be here," he said. He put his finger on the map. "A 
horse, General, that I may meet him here and turn his flank 
and drive him." 

"Done, General," the Secretary said. 



IV THE WASTELAND 



Ad Astra 

Victory 

Crevasse 

Turnabout 

All the Dead Pilots 



Ad Astra 



I DONT KNOW what we were. With the exception of Comyn, 
we had started out Americans, but after three years, in our 
British tunics and British wings and here and there a ribbon, 
I dont suppose we had even bothered in three years to 
wonder what we were, to think or to remember. 

And on that day, that evening, we were even less than 
that, or more than that: either beneath or beyond the knowl- 
edge that we had not even wondered in three years. The 
subadar after a while he was there, in his turban and his 
trick major's pips said that we were like men trying to 
move in water. "But soon it will clear away," he said. "The 
effluvium of hatred and of words. We are like men trying 
to move in water, with held breath watching our terrific 
and infinitesimal limbs, watching one another's terrific stasis 
without touch, without contact, robbed of all save the im- 
potence and the need." 

We were in the car then, going to Amiens, Sartoris driv- 
ing and Comyn sitting half a head above him in the front 
seat like a tackling dummy, the subadar, Bland and I in 
back, each with a bottle or two in his pockets. Except the 
subadar, that is. He was squat, small and thick, yet his so- 
briety was colossal. In that maelstrom of alcohol where the 
rest of us had fled our inescapable selves he was like a rock, 



408 The Wasteland 

talking quietly in a grave bass four sizes too big for him: 
"In my country I was prince. But all men are brothers." 

But after twelve years I think of us as bugs in the surface 
of the water, isolant and aimless and unflagging. Not on the 
surface; in it, within that line of demarcation not air and not 
water, sometimes submerged, sometimes not. You have 
watched an unbreaking groundswell in a cove, the water 
shallow, the cove quiet, a little sinister with satiate famili- 
arity, while beyond the darkling horizon the dying storm 
has raged on. That was the water, we the flotsam. Even 
after twelve years it is no clearer than that. It had no begin- 
ning and no ending. Out of nothing we howled, unwitting 
the storm which we had escaped and the foreign strand 
which we could not escape; that in the interval between two 
surges of the swell we died who had been too young to have 
ever lived. 

We stopped in the middle of the road to drink again. The 
land was dark and empty. And quiet: that was what you 
noticed, remarked. You could hear the earth breathe, like 
coming out of ether, like it did not yet know, believe, that 
it was awake. "But now it is peace," the subadar said. "All 
men are brothers." 

"You spoke before the Union once," Bland said. He was 
blond and tall. When he passed through a room where 
women were he left a sighing wake like a ferry boat enter- 
ing the slip. He was a Southerner, too, like Sartoris; but 
unlike Sartoris, in the five months he had been out, no one 
had ever found a bullet hole in his machine. But he had trans- 
ferred out of an Oxford battalion he was a Rhodes scholar 
with a barnacle and a wound-stripe. When he was tight 
he would talk about his wife, though we all knew that he 
was not married. 

He took the bottle from Sartoris and drank. "I've got the 
sweetest little wife," he said. "Let me tell YOU about her." 



Ad Astra 409 

"Dont tell us," Sartoris said. "Give her to Comyn. He 
wants a girl." 

"All right," Bland said. "You can have her, Comyn." 

"Is she blonde?" Comyn said. 

"I dont know," Bland said. He turned back to the subadar, 
"You spoke before the Union once. I remember you." 

"Ah," the subadar said. "Oxford. Yes." 

"He can attend their schools among the gentleborn, the 
bleach-skinned," Bland said. "But he cannot hold their com- 
mission, because gentility is a matter of color and not lineage 
or behavior." 

"Fighting is more important than truth," the subadar said. 
"So we must restrict the prestige and privileges of it to the 
few so that it will not lose popularity with the many who 
have to die." 

"Why more important?" I said. "I thought this one was 
being fought to end war forevermore." 

The subadar made a brief gesture, dark, deprecatory, 
tranquil. "I was a white man also for that moment. It is more 
important for the Caucasian because he is only what he can 
do; it is the sum of him." 

"So you see further than we see?" 

"A man sees further looking out of the dark upon the 
light than a man does in the light and looking out upon the 
light. That is the principle of the spyglass. The lens is only to 
tease him with that which the sense that suffers and desires 
can never affirm." 

"What do you see, then?" Bland said. 

"I see girls," Comyn said. "I see acres and acres of the 
yellow hair of them like wheat and me among the wheat. 
Have ye ever watched a hidden dog quartering a wheat field, 
any of yez?" 

"Not hunting bitches," Bland said. 

Comyn turned in the seat, thick and huge. He was big as 



410 The Wasteland 

all outdoors. To watch two mechanics shoehorning him into 
the cockpit of a Dolphin like two chambermaids putting an 
emergency bolster into a case too small for it, was a sight to 
see. "I will beat the head off ye for a shilling," he said. 

"So you believe in the Tightness of man?" I said. 

"I will beat the heads off yez all for a shilling," Comyn 
said. 

"I believe in the pitiableness of man," the subadar said. 
"That is better." 

"I will give yez a shilling, then, v/ Comyn said. 

"All right," Sartoris said. "Did you ever try a little whisky 
for the night air, any of you all?" 

Comyn took the bottle and drank. "Acres and acres of 
them," he said, "with their little round white woman parts 
gleaming among the moiling wheat." 

So we drank again, on the lonely road between two beet 
fields, in the dark quiet, and the turn of the inebriation 
began to make. It came back from wherever it had gone, 
rolling down upon us and upon the grave sober rock of the 
subadar until his voice sounded remote and tranquil and 
dreamlike, saying that we were brothers. Monaghan was 
there then, standing beside our car in the full glare of the 
headlights of his car, in an R.F.C. cap and an American tunic 
with both shoulder straps flapping loose, drinking from 
Comyn's bottle. Beside him stood a second man, also in a 
tunic shorter and trimmer than ours, with a bandage about 
his head. 

"I'll fight you," Comyn told Monaghan. "I'll give you 
the shilling." 

"All right," Monaghan said. He drank again. 

"We are all brothers," the subadar said. "Sometimes we 
pause at the wrong inn. We think it is night and we stop, 
when it is not night. That is all." 

"I'll give you a sovereign," Comyn told Monaghan. 



Ad Astra 411 

"All right," Monaghan said. He extended the bottle to 
the other man, the one with the bandaged head. 

"I thangk you," the man said. "I haf plenty yet." 

"I'll fight him," Comyn said. 

"It is because we can do only within the heart," the 
subadar said. "While we see beyond the heart." 

"I'll be damned if you will," Monaghan said. "He's mine." 
He turned to the man with the bandaged head. "Aren't you 
mine? Here; drink." 

"I haf plenty, I thangk you, gentlemen," the other said. 
But I dont think any of us paid much attention to him until 
we were inside the Cloche-Clos. It was crowded, full of 
noise and smoke. When we entered all the noise ceased, like 
a string cut in two, the end raveling back into a sort of 
shocked consternation of pivoting faces, and the waiter an 
old man in a dirty apron falling back before us, slack- 
jawed, with an expression of outraged unbelief, like an 
atheist confronted with either Christ or the devil. We 
crossed the room, the waiter retreating before us, paced by 
the turning outraged faces, to a table adjacent to one where 
three French officers sat watching us with that same expres- 
sion of astonishment and then outrage and then anger. As 
one they rose; the whole room, the silence, became staccato 
with voices, like machine guns. That was when I turned and 
looked at Monaghan's companion for the first time, in his 
green tunic and his black snug breeks and his black boots 
and his bandage. He had cut himself recently shaving, and 
with his bandaged head and his face polite and dazed and 
bloodless and sick, he looked like Monaghan had been using 
him pretty hard. Roundfaced, not old, with his immaculately 
turned bandage which served only to emphasize the genera- 
tions of difference between him and the turbaned subadar, 
flanked by Monaghan with his wild face and wild tunic and 
surrounded by the French people's shocked and outraged 



412 The Wasteland 

faces, he appeared to contemplate with a polite and alert 
concern his own struggle against the inebriation which 
Monaghan was forcing upon him. There was something 
Anthony-like about him: rigid, soldierly, with every button 
in place, with his unblemished bandage and his fresh razor 
cuts, he appeared to muse furiously upon a clear flame of a 
certain conviction of individual behavior above a violent 
and inexplicable chaos. Then I remarked Monaghan's sec- 
ond companion: an American military policeman. He was 
not drinking. He sat beside the German, rolling cigarettes 
from a cloth sack. 

On the German's other side Monaghan was filling his 
glass. "I brought him down this morning," he said. "I'm 
going to take him home with me." 

"Why?" Bland said. "What do you want with him?" 

"Because he belongs to me," Monaghan said. He set the 
full glass before the German. "Here; drink." 

"I once thought about taking one home to my wife," 
Bland said. "So I could prove to her that I have only been 
to a war. But I never could find a good one. A whole one, 
I mean." 

"Come on," Monaghan said. u Drink." 

"I haf plenty," the German said. "All day I haf plenty." 

"Do you want to go to America with him?" Bland said: 

"Yes. I would ligk it. Thanks." 

"Sure you'll like it," Monaghan said. "I'll make a man of 
you. Drink," 

The German raised the glass, but he merely held it in his 
hand. His face was strained, deprecatory, yet with a kind 
of sereneness, like that of a man who has conquered himself. 
I imagine some of the old martyrs must have looked at the 
lions with that expression. He was sick, too. Not from the 
liquor: from his head. "I haf in Beyreuth a wife and a little 
wohn. Mine son. I haf not him yet seen." 



Ad Astra 413 

"Ah," the subadar said. "Beyreuth. I was there one 
spring." 

"Ah," the German said. He looked quickly at the subadar. 
"So? The music?" 

"Yes," the subadar said. "In your music a few of you have 
felt, tasted, lived, the true brotherhood. The rest of us can 
only look beyond the heart. But we can follow them for a 
little while in the music." 

"And then we must return," the German said. "That iss 
not good. Why must we yet return always?" 

"It is not the time for that yet," the subadar said. "But 
soon ... It is not as far as it once was. Not now." 

"Yes," the German said. "Defeat will be good for us. 
Defeat iss good for art; victory, it iss not good." 

"So you admit you were whipped," Comyn said. He was 
sweating again, and Sartoris' nostrils were quite white, I 
thought of what the subadar had said about men in water. 
Only our water was drunkenness: that isolation of alcohol- 
ism which drives men to shout and laugh and fight, not with 
one another but with their unbearable selves which, drunk, 
they are even more fain and still less fell to escape. Loud and 
overloud, unwitting the black thunderhead of outraged 
France (steadily the other tables were being emptied; the 
other customers were now clotted about the high desk 
where the patronne, an old woman in steel spectacles, sat, a 
wad of knitting on the ledge before her) we shouted at one 
another, speaking in foreign tongues out of our inescapable 
isolations, reiterant, unlistened to by one another; while sub- 
merged by us and more foreign still, the German and the 
subadar talked quietly of music, art, the victory born of 
defeat. And outside in the chill November darkness was the 
suspension, the not-quite-believing, not-quite-awakened 
nightmare, the breathing spell of the old verbiaged lusts and 
the buntinged and panoplied greeds. 



414 The Wasteland 

"By God, I'm shanty Irish," Monaghan said. "That's what 
I am." 

"What about it?" Sartoris said, his nostrils like chalk 
against his high-colored face. His twin brother had been 
killed in July. He was in a Camel squadron below us, and 
Sartoris was down there when it happened. For a week 
after that, as soon as he came in from patrol he would fill 
his tanks and drums and go out again, alone. One day some- 
body saw him, roosting about five thousand feet above an 
old Ak.W. I suppose the other guy who was with his brother 
that morning had seen the markings on the Hun patrol 
leader's crate; anyway, that's what Sartoris was doing, using 
the Ak.W. for bait. Where he got it and who he got to fly 
it, we didn't know. But he got three Huns that week, catch- 
ing them dead when they dived on the Ak.W., and on the 
eighth day he didn't go out again. "He must have got him," 
Hume said. But we didn't know. He never told us. But after 
that, he was all right again. He never did talk much; just 
did his patrols and maybe once a week he'd sit and drink his 
nostrils white in a quiet sort of way. 

Bland was filling his glass, a drop at a time almost, with 
a catlike indolence. I could see why men didn't like him 
and why women did. Comyn, his arms crossed on the table, 
his cuff in a pool of spilt liquor, was staring at the German. 
His eyes were bloodshot, a little protuberant. Beneath his 
downcrushed monkey cap the American M.P. smoked his 
meager cigarettes, his face quite blank. The steel chain of 
his whistle looped into his breast pocket, his pistol was 
hunched forward onto his lap. Beyond, the French people, 
the soldiers, the waiter, the patronne, clotted at the desk. I 
could hear their voices like from a distance, like crickets in 
September grass, the shadows of their hands jerking up the 
wall and flicking away. 

"Fm not a soldier," Monaghan said. "I'm not a gentleman. 



Ad Astra 415 

I'm not anything." At the base of each flapping shoulder 
strap there was a small rip; there were two longer ones 
parallel above his left pocket where His wings and ribbon had 
been. "I dont know what I am. I have been in this damn war 
for three years and all I know is, I'm not dead. I " 

"How do you know you're not dead?" Bland said. 

Monaghan looked at Bland, his mouth open upon his un- 
completed word. 

"I'll kill you for a shilling," Comyn said. "I dont like your 
bloody face, Lootenant. Bloody lootenant." 

"I'm shanty Irish," Monaghan said. "That's what I am. 
My father was shanty Irish, by God. And I dont know what 
my grandfather was. I dont know if I had one. My father 
dont remember one. Likely it could have been one of several. 
So he didn't even have to be a gentleman. He never had to 
be. That's why he could make a million dollars digging 
sewers in the ground. So he could look up at the tall glitter- 
ing windows and say I've heard him, and him smoking the 
pipe would gas the puking guts out of you damn, niggling, 
puny " 

"Are you bragging about your father's money or about 
his sewers?" Bland said. 

" would look up at them and he'd say to me, he'd say, 
'When you're with your fine friends, the fathers and mothers 
and sisters of them you met at Yale, ye might just remind 
them that every man is the slave of his own refuse and so 
your old dad they would be sending around to the forty- 
story back doors of their kitchens is the king of them all ' 
What did you say?" He looked at Bland. 

"Look here, buddy," the M.P. said. "This is about enough 
of this. I've got to report this prisoner." 

"Wait," Monaghan said. He did not cease to look at 
Bland. "What did you say?" 



4i 6 The Wasteland 

"Are you bragging about your father's money or about 
his sewers?" Bland said. 

"No," Monaghan saW. "Why should I? Any more than 
I would brag about the thirteen Huns I got, or the two rib- 
bons, one of which his damned king " he jerked his head at 
Comyn "gave me." 

"Dont call him my damned king," Comyn said, his cuff 
soaking slowly in the spilt liquor. 

"Look," Monaghan said. He jerked his hand at the rips on 
his flapping shoulder straps, at the two parallel rips on his 
breast. "That's what I think of it. Of all your goddamn 
twaddle about glory and gentlemen. I was young; I thought 
you had to be. Then I was in it and there wasn't time to 
stop even when I found it didn't count. But now it's over; 
finished now. Now I can be what I am. Shanty Irish; son of 
an immigrant that knew naught but shovel and pick until 
youth and the time for pleasuring was wore out of him 
before his time. Out of a peat bog he came, and his son went 
to their gentlemen's school and returned across the water to 
swank it with any of them that owned the peat bogs and the 
bitter sweat of them that mired it, and the king said him 
well." 

"I will give yez the shilling and I will beat the head off 
yez," Comyn said. 

"But why do you want to take him back with you?" 
Bland said. Monaghan just looked at Bland. There was some- 
thing of the crucified about Monaghan, too: furious, inar- 
ticulate not with stupidity but at it, like into him more than 
any of us had distilled the ceased drums of the old lust and 
greed waking at last aghast at their own impotence and ac- 
crued despair. Bland sat on his spine, legs extended, his hands 
in his slacks, his handsome face calmly insufferable. "What 
stringed pick would he bow? maybe a shovel strung with 
the ejut of an alley-cat? he will create perhaps in music the 



Ad Astra 417 

flushed toilets of Manhattan to play for your father after 
supper of an evening?" Monaghan just looked at Bland with 
that wild, rapt expression. Bland turned his lazy face a little 
to the German. 

"Look here," the M.P. said. 

"You have a wife, Herr Lcutnant?" Bland said. 

The German looked up. He glanced swiftly from face to 
face. "Yes, thank you," he said. He still had not touched his 
full glass save to hold it in his hand. But he was no nearer 
sober than before, the liquor become the hurting of his head, 
his head the pulse and beat of alcohol in him. "My people 
are of Prussia little barons. There are four brothers: the sec- 
ond for the Army, the third who did nothing in Berlin, the 
little one a cadet of dragoons; I, the eldest, in the University. 
There I learned. There wass a time then. It was as though 
we, young from the quiet land, were brought together, 
chosen and worthy to witness a period quick like a woman 
with a high destiny of the earth and of man. It iss as though 
the old trash, the old litter of man's blundering, iss to be 
swept away for a new race that will in the heroic simplicity 
of olden time walk the new earth. You knew that time, 
not? When the eye sparkled, the blut ran quick?" He 
looked about at our faces. "No? Well, in America perhaps 
not. America iss new; in a new house it is not the litter so 
much as in old." He looked at his glass for a moment, his 
face tranquil. "I return home; I say to my father, in the 
University I haf learned it iss not good; baron I will not be. 
He cannot believe. He talks of Germany, the fatherland; I 
say to him, It iss there; so. You say fatherland; I, brother- 
land, I say, the word father iss that barbarism which 
will be first swept away; it iss the symbol of that hierarchy 
which hass stained the history of man with injustice of arbi- 
trary instead of moral; force instead of love. 

"From Berlin they send for that one; from the Army that 



4 i 8 The Wasteland 

one comes. I still say baron I will not be, for it iss not good. 
We are in the little hall where my ancestors on the walls 
hang; I stand before them like court-martial; I say that 
Franz must be baron, for I will not be. My father says you 
can; you will; it iss for Germany. Then I say, For Germany 
then will my wife be baroness? And like a court-martial I 
tell them I haf married the daughter of a musician who wass 
peasant. 

"So it iss that. That one of Berlin iss to be baron. He and 
Franz are twin, but Franz iss captain already, and the most 
humble of the Army may eat meat with our kaiser; he does 
not need to be baron. So I am in Beyreuth with my wife 
and my music. It iss as though I am dead. I do not get letter 
until to say my father iss dead and I haf killed him, and that 
one iss now home from Berlin to be baron. But he does not 
stay at home. In 1912 he iss in Berlin newspaper dead of a 
lady's husband and so Franz iss baron after all. 

"Then it iss war. But I am in Beyreuth with my wife and 
my music, because we think that it will not be long, since 
it was not long before. The fatherland in its pride needed 
us of the schools, but when it needed us it did not know it. 
And when it did realize that it needed us it wass too late and 
any peasant who would be hard to die would do. And so " 

"Why did you go, then?" Bland said. "Did the women 
make you? throw eggs at you, maybe?" 

The German looked at Bland. "I am German; that iss 
beyond the I, the I am. Not for baron and kaiser." Then he 
quit looking at Bland without moving his eyes. "There wass 
a Germany before there wass barons," he said. "And after, 
there will be." 

"Even after this?" 

"More so. Then it was pride, a word in the mouth. Now 
it is a how you call it? . . ." 



Ad Astra 419 

"A nation vanquishes its banners," the subadar said. "A 
man conquers himself." 

"Or a woman a child bears," the German said. 

"Out of the lust, the travail," the subadar said; "out of 
the travail, the affirmation, the godhead; truth." 

The M.P. was rolling another cigarette. He watched the 
subadar, upon his face an expression savage, restrained, and 
cold. He licked the cigarette and looked at me. 

"When I came to this goddamn country," he said, "I 
thought niggers were niggers. But now I'll be damned if I 
know what they are. What's he? snake-charmer?" 

"Yes," I said. "Snake-charmer." 

"Then he better get his snake out and beat it. I've got to 
report this prisoner. Look at those frogs yonder." As I 
turned and looked three of the Frenchmen were leaving the 
room, insult and outrage in the shapes of their backs. The 
German was talking again. 

"I hear by the newspapers how Franz is colonel and then 
general, and how the cadet, who wass still the round-headed 
boy part of a gun always when I last saw him, iss now ace 
with iron cross by the kaiser's own hand. Then it iss 1916. 
I see by the paper how the cadet iss killed by your Bishop " 
he bowed slightly to Comyn "that good man. So now I 
am cadet myself. It iss as though I know. It iss as though I 
see what iss to be. So I transfer to be aviator, and yet though 
I know now that Franz iss general of staff and though to 
myself each night I say, 'You have again returned,' I know 
that it iss no good. 

"That, until our kaiser fled. Then I learn that Franz iss 
now in Berlin; I believe that there iss a truth, that we haf 
not forfeited all in pride, because we know it will not be 
much longer now, and Franz in Berlin safe, the fighting 
away from. 

"Then it iss this morning. Then comes the letter in my 



420 The Wasteland 

mother's hand that I haf not seen in seven years, addressed 
to me as baron. Franz iss shot from his horse by German 
soldier in Berlin street. It iss as though all had been forgotten, 
because women can forget all that quick, since to them 
nothing iss real truth, justice, all nothing that cannot be 
held in the hands or cannot die. So I burn all my papers, the 
picture of my wife and my son that I haf not yet seen, 
destroy my identity disk and remove all insignia from my 
tunic " he gestured toward his collar. 

"You mean," Bland said, "that you had no intention of 
coming back? Why didn't you take a pistol to yourself and 
save your government an aeroplane?" 

"Suicide iss just for the body," the German said. "The 
body settles nothing. It iss of no importance. It iss just to 
be kept clean when possible." 

"It is merely a room in the inn," the subadar said. "It is 
just where we hide for a little while." 

"The lavatory," Bland said; "the toilet." 

The M.P. rose. He tapped the German on the shoulder. 
Comyn was staring at the German. 

"So you admit you were whipped," he said. 

"Yes," the German said. "It wass our time first, because 
we were the sickest. It will be your England's next. Then 
she too will be well." 

"Dont say my England," Comyn said. "I am of the Irish 
nation." He turned to Monaghan. "You said, my damned 
king. Dont say my damned king. Ireland has had no king 
since the Ur Neill, God bless the red-haired stern of him." 

Rigid, controlled, the German made a faint gesture. "You 
see?" he said to no one at all. 

"The victorious lose that ^hich the vanquished gain," the 
subadar said. 

"And what will vou do now?" Bland said. 



Ad Astra 42 1 

The German did not answer. He sat bolt upright with 
his sick face and his immaculate bandage. 

"What will you do?" the subadar said to Bland. "What 
will any of us do? All this generation which fought in the 
war are dead tonight. But we do not yet know it." 

We looked at the subadar: Comyn with his bloodshot 
pig's eyes, Sartoris with his white nostrils, Bland slumped 
in his chair, indolent, insufferable, with his air of a spoiled 
woman. Above the German the M.P. stood. 

"It seems to worry you a hell of a lot," Bland said. 

"You do not believe?" the subadar said. "Wait. You will 
see." 

"Wait?" Bland said. "I dont think I've done anything in 
the last three years to have acquired that habit. In the last 
twenty-six years. Before that I dont remember. I may have." 

"Then you will see sooner than waiting," the subadar said. 
"You will see." He looked about at us, gravely serene. 
"Those who have been four years rotting out yonder " 
he waved his short thick arm "are not more dead than we." 

Again the M.P. touched the German's shoulder. "Hell," 
he said. "Come along, buddy." Then he turned his head and 
we all looked up at the two Frenchmen, an officer and a 
sergeant, standing beside the table. For a while we just re- 
mained so. It was like all the little bugs had suddenly found 
that their orbits had coincided and they wouldn't even have 
to be aimless any more or even to keep on moving. Beneath 
the alcohol I could feel that hard, hot ball beginning in my 
stomach, like in combat, like when you know something is 
about to happen; that instant when you think Now. Now 
I can dump everything overboard and just be. Now. Now. 
It is quite pleasant. 

"Why is that here, monsieur?" the officer said. Monaghan 
looked up at him, thrust backward and sideways in his chair, 
poised on the balls of his thighs as though they were feet, 



422 The Wasteland 

his arm lying upon the table. "Why do you make desagre- 
able for France, monsieur, eh?" the officer said. 

Someone grasped Monaghan as he rose; it was the M.P. 
behind him, holding him half risen. "Wa-a-a-i-daminute," 
the M.P. said; "wa-a-a-i-daminute." The cigarette bobbed 
on his lower lip as he talked, his hands on Monaghan's shoul- 
ders, the brassard on his arm lifted into bold relief. "What's 
it to you, Frog? " he said. Behind the officer and the sergeant 
the other French people stood, and the old woman. She was 
trying to push through the circle. "This is my prisoner," the 
M.P. said. "I'll take him anywhere I please and keep him 
there as long as I like. What do you think about that?" 

"By which authority, monsieur?" the officer said. He was 
tall, with a gaunt, tragic face. I saw then that one of his eyes 
was glass. It was motionless, rigid in a face that looked even 
deader than the spurious eye. 

The M.P. glanced toward his brassard, then instead he 
looked at the officer again and tapped the pistol swinging 
low now against his flank. "I'll take him all over your god- 
damn lousy country. I'll take him into your goddamn senate 
and kick your president up for a chair for him and you can 
suck your chin until I come back to wipe the latrine off 
your feet again." 

"Ah," the officer said, "a devil-dog, I see." He said "dehvil- 
dahg" between his teeth, with no motion of his dead face, 
in itself insult. Behind him the patronne began to shriek in 
French: 

"Boche! Boche! Broken! Broken! Every cup, every saucer, 
glass, plate all, all! I will show you! I have kept them for this 
day. Eight months since the obus I have kept them in a box 
against this day: plates, cups, saucers, glasses, all that I have 
had since thirty years, all gone, broken at one time! And it 
costing me fifty centimes the glass for such that I shame 
myself to have my patrons " 



Ad Astra 423 

There is an unbearable point, a climax, in weariness. Even 
alcohol cannot approach it. Mobs are motivated by it, by 
a sheer attenuation of sameness become unbearable. As 
Monaghan rose, the M.P. flung him back. Then it was as 
though we all flung everything overboard at once, facing 
unbashed and without shame the specter which for four 
years we had been decking out in high words, leaping for- 
ward with concerted and orderly promptitude each time 
the bunting slipped. I saw the M.P. spring at the officer, then 
Corny n rose and met him. I saw the M.P. hit Corny n three 
times on the point of the jaw with his fist before Corny n 
picked him up bodily and threw him clean over the crowd, 
where he vanished, horizontal in midair, tugging at his pistol. 
I saw three poilus on Monaghan's back and the officer trying 
to hit him with a bottle, and Sartoris leaping upon the offi- 
cer from behind. Comyn was gone; through the gap which 
he had made the patronne emerged, shrieking. Two men 
caught at her and she strove forward, trying to spit on the 
German. "Boche! Boche!" she shrieked, spitting and slob- 
bering, her gray hair broken loose about her face; she turned 
and spat full at me. "Thou, too!" she shrieked, "it was not 
England that was devastated! Thou, too, come to pick the 
bones of France. Jackal! Vulture! Animal! Broken, broken! 
All! All! All!" And beneath it all, unmoved, unmoving, alert, 
watchful and contained, the German and the subadar sat, 
the German with his high, sick face, the subadar tranquil as 
a squat idol, the both of them turbaned like prophets in the 
Old Testament. 

It didn't take long. There was no time in it. Or rather, we 
were outside of time; within, not on, that surface, that de- 
marcation between the old where we knew we had not died 
and the new where the subadar said that we were dead. 
Beyond the brandished bottles, the blue sleeves and the 
grimed hands, the faces like masks grimaced into rigid and 



424 The Wasteland 

soundless shouts to frighten children, I saw Comyn again. 
He came plowing up like a laden ship in a chop sea; beneath 
his arm was the ancient waiter, to his lips he held the M.P.'s 
whistle. Then Sartoris swung a chair at the single light. 

It was cold in the street, a cold that penetrated the cloth- 
ing, the alcohol-distended pores, and murmured to the skele- 
ton itself. The plaza was empty, the lights infrequent and 
remote. So quiet it was that I could hear the faint water in 
the fountain. From some distance away came sound, remote 
too under the thick low sky shouting, far-heard, on a thin 
female note like all shouting, even a mob of men, broken now 
and then by the sound of a band. In the shadow of the wall 
Monaghan and Comyn held the German on his feet. He was 
unconscious; the three of them invisible save for the faint 
blur of the bandage, inaudible save for the steady monotone 
of Monaghan's cursing. 

"There should never have been an alliance between 
Frenchmen and Englishmen," the subadar said. He spoke 
without effort; invisible, his effortless voice had an organ 
quality, out of all proportion to his size. "Different nations 
should never join forces to fight for the same object. Let each 
fight for something different; ends that do not conflict, each 
in his own way." Sartoris passed us, returning from the foun- 
tain, carrying his bulging cap carefully before him, bottom- 
up. We could hear the water dripping from it between his 
footsteps. He became one of the blob of thicker shadow 
where the bandage gleamed and where Monaghan cursed 
steadily and quietly. "And each after his own tradition," the 
subadar said. "My people. The English gave them rifles. They 
looked at them and came to me: 'This spear is too short and 
too heavy: how can a man slay a swift enemy with a spear 
of this size and weight?' They gave them tunics with buttons 
to be kept buttoned; I have passed a whole trench of them 
sauatting, motionless, buried to the ears in blankets, straw, 



Ad Astra 425 

empty sand bags, their faces gray with cold; I have lifted the 
blankets away from patient torsos clad only in a shirt. 

"The English officers would say to them, 'Go there and do 
thus'; they would not stir. Then one day at full noon the 
whole battalion, catching movement beyond a crater, sprang 
from the trench, carrying me and an officer with it. We 
carried the trench without firing a shot; what was left of us 
the officer, I, and seventeen others lived three days in a 
traverse of the enemy's front line; it required a whole brigade 
to extricate us. 'Why didn't you shoot? ' the officer said. 'You 
let them pick you off like driven pheasant.' They did not 
look at him. Like children they stood, murmurous, alert, 
without shame. I said to the headman, 'Were the rifles loaded, 
O Das?' Like children they stood, diffident, without shame. 
'O Son of many kings,' Das said. 'Speak the truth of thy 
knowing to the sahib,' I said. 'They were not loaded, sahib,' 
Das said." 

Again the band came, remote, thudding in the thick air. 
They were giving the German drink from a bottle. Mon- 
aghan said: "Now. Feel better now?" 

"It iss mine head," the German said. They spoke quietly, 
like they were discussing wall-paper. 

Monaghan cursed again. "I'm going back. By God, I " 

"No, no," the German said. "I will not permit. You haf 
already obligated " 

We stood in the shadow beneath the wall and drank. We 
had one bottle left. Comyn crashed it, empty, against the 
wall. 

"Now what?" Bland said. 

"Girls," Comyn said. "Would ye watch Comyn of the 
Irish nation among the yellow hair of them like a dog among 
the wheat?" 

We stood there, hearing the far band, the far shouting. 
"You sure you feel all right?" Monaghan said. 

"Thanks," the German said. "I feel goot." 



426 The Wasteland 

"Come on, then," Comyn said. 

"You going to take him with you?" Bland said. 

"Yes," Monaghan said. "What of it?" 

"Why not take him on to the A.P.M.? He's sick." 

"Do you want me to bash your bloody face in?" Mon- 
aghan said. 

"All right," Bland said. 

"Come on," Comyn said. "What fool would rather fight 
than fush? All men are brothers, and all their wives are sis- 
ters. So come along, yez midnight fusileers." 

"Look here," Bland said to the German, "do you want to 
go with them?" With his bandaged head, he and the subadar 
alone were visible, like two injured men among five spirits. 

"Hold him up a minute," Monaghan told Comyn. Mona- 
ghan approached Bland. He cursed Bland. "I like fighting," 
he said, in that same monotone. "I even like being whipped." 

"Wait," the German said. "Again I will not permit." Mon- 
aghan halted, he and Bland not a foot apart. "I haf wife and 
son in Beyreuth," the German said. He was speaking to me, 
He gave me the address, twice, carefully. 

"I'll write to her," I said. "What shall I tell her?" 

"Tell her it iss nothing. You will know." 

"Yes. I'll tell her you are all right." 

"Tell her this life iss nothing." 

Comyn and Monaghan took his arms again, one on either 
side. They turned and went on, almost carrying him. Comyn 
looked back once. "Peace be with you," he said. 

"And with you, peace," the subadar said. They went on. 
We watched them come into silhouette in the mouth of an 
alley where a light was. There was an arch there, and the 
faint cold pale light on the arch and on the walls so that it 
was like a gate and they entering the gate, holding the Ger- 
man up between them. 

"What will they do with him?" Bland said. "Prop him in 



Ad Astra 427 

the corner and turn the light off? Or do French brothels have 
he-beds too?" 

"Who the hell's business is that?" I said. 

The sound of the band came, thudding; it was cold. Each 
time my flesh jerked with alcohol and cold I believed that I 
could hear it rasp on the bones. 

"Since seven years now I have been in this climate," the 
subadar said. "But still I do not like the cold." His voice was 
deep, quiet, like he might be six feet tall. It was like when 
they made him they said among themselves, "We'll give him 
something to carry his message around with." "Why? Who'll 
listen to his message?" "He will. So we'll give him something 
to hear it with." 

"Why dont you go back to India then?" Bland said. 

"Ah," the subadar said. "I am like him; I too will not be 
baron." 

"So you clear out and let foreigners who will treat the 
people like oxen or rabbits come in and take it." 

"By removing myself I undid in one day what it took two 
thousand years to do. Is not that something?" 

We shook with the cold. Now the cold was the band, the 
shouting, murmuring with cold hands to the skeleton, not 
the ears. 

"Well," Bland said, "I suppose the English government is 
doing more to free your people than you could." 

The subadar touched Bland on the chest, lightly. "You are 
wise, my friend. Let England be glad that all Englishmen are 
not so wise." 

"So you will be an exile for the rest of your days, eh?" 

The subadar jerked his short, thick arm toward the empty 
arch where Comyn and the German and Monaghan had dis- 
appeared. "Did you not hear what he said? This life is 
nothing." 

"You can think so," Bland said. "But, by God, I'd hate to 



428 The Wasteland 

think that what I saved out of the last three years is nothing." 

"You saved a dead man," the subadar said serenely. "You 
will see." 

"I saved my destiny," Bland said. "You nor nobody else 
knows what that will be." 

"What is your destiny except to be dead? It is unfortunate 
that your generation had to be the one. It is unfortunate that 
for the better part of your days you will walk the earth a 
spirit. But that was your destiny." From far away came the 
shouting, on that sustained note, feminine and childlike all at 
once, and then the band again, brassy, thudding, like the 
voices, forlornly gay, hysteric, but most of all forlorn. The 
arch in the cold glow of the light yawned empty, profound, 
silent, like the gate to another city, another world. Suddenly 
Sartoris left us. He walked steadily to the wall and leaned 
against it on his propped arms, vomiting. 

"Hell," Bland said. "I want a drink." He turned to me. 
"Where's your bottle?" 

"It's gone." 

"Gone where? You had two." 

"I haven't got one now, though. Drink water." 

"Water?" he said. "Who the hell drinks water?" 

Then the hot hard ball came into my stomach again, pleas- 
ant, unbearable, real; again that instant when you say Now. 
Now I can dump everything. "You will, you goddamn son," 
I said. 

Bland was not looking at me. "Twice," he said in a quiet, 
detached tone. "Twice in an hour. How's that for high?" 
He turned and went toward the fountain. Sartoris came back, 
walking steadily erect. The band blent with the cold along 
the bones. 

"What time is it?" I said. 

Sartoris peered at his wrist. "Twelfth." 

"It's later than midnight," I said. "It must be." 



Ad Astra 429 

"I said it was the twelfth," Sartoris said. 

Bland was stooping at the fountain. There was a little light 
there. As we reached him he stood up, mopping at his face. 
The light was on his face and I thought for some time that he 
must have had his whole head under to be mopping that 
high up his face before I saw that he was crying. He stood 
there, mopping at his face, crying hard but quiet. 

"My poor little wife," he said. "My poor little wife." 



Victory 



i 

THOSE WHO SAW HIM descend from the Marseilles express in 
the Gare de Lyon on that damp morning saw a tall man, a 
little stiff, with a bronze face and spike-ended moustaches 
and almost white hair. "A milord," they said, remarking his 
sober, correct suit, his correct stick correctly carried, his 
sparse baggage; "a milord military. But there is something 
the matter with his eyes." But there was something the mat- 
ter with the eyes of so many people, men and women too, 
in Europe since four years now. So they watched him go on, 
a half head above the French people, with his gaunt, strained 
eyes, his air strained, purposeful, and at the same time as- 
sured, and vanish into a cab, thinking, if they thought about 
him any more at all: "You will see him in the Legation 
offices or at a table on the Boulevards, or in a carriage with 
the fine English ladies in the Bois." That was all. 

And those who saw him descend from the same cab at the 
Gare du Nord, they thought: "This milord returns home by 
haste"; the porter who took his bag wished him good morn- 
ing in fair English and told him that he was going to Eng- 
land, receiving for reply the English glare which the porter 
perhaps expected, and put him into a first-class carriage of 
the boat train. And that was all, too. That was all right, too, 
even when he got down at Amiens. English milords even did 

43 l 



432 The Wasteland 

that. It was only at Rozieres that they began to look at him 
and after him when he had passed. 

In a hired car he jounced through a gutted street between 
gutted walls rising undoored and unwindowed in jagged 
shards in the dusk. The street was partially blocked now and 
then by toppled walls, with masses of masonry in the cracks 
of which a thin grass sprouted, passing empty and ruined 
courtyards, in one of which a tank, mute and tilted, rusted 
among rank weeds. This was Rozieres, but he didn't stop 
there because no one lived there and there was no place to 
stop. 

So the car jounced and crept on out of the ruin. The 
muddy and unpaved street entered a village of harsh new 
brick and sheet iron and tarred paper roofs made in America, 
and halted before the tallest house. It was flush with the 
street: a brick wall with a door and one window of Amer- 
ican glass bearing the word RESTAURANT. "Here you are, sir," 
the driver said. 

The passenger descended, with his bag, his ulster, his cor- 
rect stick. He entered a biggish, bare room chill with new 
plaster. It contained a billiard table at which three men 
played. One of the men looked over his shoulder and said, 

"Bonjour, monsieur." 

The newcomer did not reply at all. He crossed the room, 
passing the new zinc bar, and approached an open door be- 
yond which a woman of any age around forty looked at 
him above the sewing on her lap. 

"Bong jour, madame," he said. "Dormie, madame?" 

The woman gave him a single glance, brief, still. "C'est ga, 
monsieur," she said, rising. 

"Dormie, madame?" he said, raising his voice a little, his 
spiked moustache beaded a little with rain, dampness be- 
neath his strained yet assured eyes. "Dormie, madame?" 

"Bon, monsieur," the woman said. "Bon. Bon." 



Victory 433 

"Dor " the newcomer essayed again. Someone touched 
his arm. It was the man who had spoken from the billiard 
table when he entered. 

"Regardez, Monsieur 1'Anglais," the man said. He took 
the bag from the newcomer and swept his other arm toward 
the ceiling. "La chambre." He touched the traveler again; 
he laid his face upon his palm and closed his eyes; he ges- 
tured again toward the ceiling and went on across the room 
toward a wooden stair without balustrade. As he passed the 
bar he took a candle stub from it and lit the candle (the big 
room and the room beyond the door where the woman sat 
were lighted by single bulbs hanging naked on cords from 
the ceiling) at the foot of the stair. 

They mounted, thrusting their fitful shadows before them, 
into a corridor narrow, chill, and damp as a tomb. The walls 
were of rough plaster not yet dried. The floor was of pine, 
without carpet or paint. Cheap metal doorknobs glinted sym- 
metrically. The sluggish air lay like a hand upon the very 
candle. They entered a room, smelling too of wet plaster, and 
even colder than the corridor; a sluggish chill almost sub- 
stantial, as though the atmosphere between the dead and 
recent walls were congealing, like a patent three-minute 
dessert. The room contained a bed, a dresser, a chair, a wash- 
stand; the bowl, pitcher, and slop basin were of American 
enamel. When the traveler touched the bed the linen was 
soundless under his hand, coarse as sacking, clinging damply 
to the hand in the dead air in which their two breathings 
vaporized in the faint candle. 

The host set the candle on the dresser. "Diner, monsieur?" 
he said. The traveler stared down at the host, incongruous in 
his correct clothes, with that strained air. His waxed mous- 
taches gleamed like faint bayonets above a cravat stripeG 
with what the host could not have known was the patterned 
coloring of a Scottish regiment. "Manger?" the host shouted. 



434 The Wasteland 

He chewed violently in pantomime. "Manger?" he roared, 
his shadow aping his gesture as he pointed toward the floor. 

"Yes," the traveler shouted in reply, their faces not a yard 
apart. "Yes. Yes." 

The host nodded violently, pointed toward the floor and 
then at the door, nodded again, went out. 

He returned below stairs. He found the woman now in 
the kitchen, at the stove. "He will eat," the host said. 

"I knew that," the woman said. 

"You would think that they would stay at home," the host 
said. "Fm glad I was not born of a race doomed to a place 
too small to hold all of us at one time." 

"Perhaps he has come to look at the war," the woman said. 

"Of course he has," the host said. "But he should have 
come four years ago. That was when we needed Englishmen 
to look at the war." 

"He was too old to come then," the woman said. "Didn't 
you see his hair?" 

"Then let him stay at home now," the host said. "He is 
no younger." 

"He may have come to look at the grave of his son," the 
woman said. 

"Him?" the host said. "That one? Fie is too cold to ever 
have had a son." 

"Perhaps you are right," the woman said. "After all, that 
is his affair. It is our affair only that he has money." 

"That's right," the host said. "A man in this business, he 
cannot pick and choose." 

"He can pick, though," the woman said. 

"Good!" the host said. "Very good! Pick! That is worth 
telling to the English himself." 

"Why not let him find it out when he leaves?" 

"Good!" the host said. "Better still. Good! Oh, good!" 

"Attention," the woman said. "Here he comes." 



Victory 435 

They listened to the traveler's steady tramp, then he ap- 
peared in the door. Against the lesser light of the biggei 
room, his dark face and his white hair looked like a kodak 
negative. 

The table was set for two, a carafe of red wine at each 
place. As the traveller seated himself, the other guest en- 
tered and took the other place a small, rat-faced man who 
appeared at first glance to have no eyelashes at all. He 
tucked his napkin into the top of his vest and took up the 
soup ladle (the tureen sat between them in the center of the 
table) and offered it to the other. "Faites-moi Thonneur, 
monsieur," he said. The other bowed stiffly, accepting the 
ladle. The small man lifted the cover from the tureen. "Vous 
venez examiner ce scene de nos victoires, monsieur?" he said, 
helping himself in turn. The other looked at him. "Monsieur 
1'Anglais a peut-etre beaucoup des amis qui sont tombes en 
voisinage." 

"A speak no French," the other said, eating. 

The little man did not eat. He held his yet unwetted spoon 
above his bowl. "What agreeable for me. I speak the Eng- 
leesh. I am Suisse, me. I speak all langue." The other did not 
reply. He ate steadily, not fast. "You ave return to see the 
grave of your galant countreemans, eh? You ave son here, 
perhaps, eh?" 

"No," the other said. He did not cease to eat. 

"No?" The other finished his soup and set the bowl aside. 
He drank some wine. "What deplorable, that man who ave," 
the Swiss said. "But it is finish now. Not?" Again the other 
said nothing. He was not looking at the Swiss. He did not 
seem to be looking at anything, with his gaunt eyes, his rigid 
moustaches upon his rigid face. "Me, I suffer too. All suffer. 
But I tell myself, What would you? It is war." 

Still the other did not answer. He ate steadily, deliberately, 
and finished his meal and rose and left the room. He lit his 



43 6 The Wasteland 

candle at the bar, where the host, leaning beside a second 
man in a corduroy coat, lifted a glass slightly to him. "Au 
bon dormir, monsieur," the host said. 

The traveler looked at the host, his face gaunt in the 
candle, his waxed moustaches rigid, his eyes in shadow. 
"What?" he said. "Yes. Yes." He turned and went toward 
the stairs. The two men at the bar watched him, his stiff, 
deliberate back. 

Ever since the train left Arras, the two women had been 
watching the other occupant of the carriage. It was a third- 
class carriage because no first-class trains ran on this line, and 
they sat with their shawled heads and the thick, still hands of 
peasants folded upon closed baskets on their laps, watching 
the man sitting opposite them the white distinction of the 
hair against the bronze, gaunt face, the needles of the mous- 
taches, the foreign-made suit and the stick on a worn and 
greasy wooden seat, looking out the window. At first they 
had just looked, ready to avert their gaze, but as the man did 
not seem to be aware of them, they began to whisper quietly 
to one another behind their hands. But the man did not seem 
to notice this, so they soon were talking in undertone, watch- 
ing with bright, alert, curious eyes the stiff, incongruous 
figure leaning a little forward on the stick, looking out a foul 
window beyond which there was nothing to see save an 
occasional shattered road and man-high stump of shattered 
tree breaking small patches of tilled land whorled with ap- 
parent unreason about islands of earth indicated by low 
signboards painted red, the islands inscrutable, desolate above 
the destruction which they wombed. Then the train, slow- 
ing, ran suddenly among tumbled brick, out of which rose 
a small house of corrugated iron bearing a name in big letters; 
they watched the man lean forward. 

"See!" one of the women said. "His mouth. He is reading 



Victory 437 

the name. What did I tell you? It is as I said. His son fell 
here." 

"Then he had lots of sons," the other woman said. "He has 
read the name each time since we left Arras. Eh! Eh! Him a 
son? That cold?" 

"They do get children, though." 

"That is why they drink whisky. Otherwise . . ." 

"That's so. They think of nothing save money and eating, 
the English." 

Presently they got out; the train went on. Then others 
entered the carriage, other peasants with muddy boots, 
carrying baskets or live or dead beasts; they in turn watched 
the rigid, motionless figure leaning at the window while the 
train ran across the ruined land and past the brick or iron 
stations among the tumbled ruins, watching his lips move as 
he read the names. "Let him look at the war, about which he 
has apparently heard at last," they told one another. "Then 
he can go home. It was not in his barnyard that it was 
fought." 

"Nor in his house," a woman said. 

II 

THE BATTALION stands at ease in the rain. It has been in rest 
billets two days, equipment has been replaced and cleaned, 
vacancies have been filled and the ranks closed up, and it now 
stands at ease with the stupid docility of sheep in the ceaseless 
rain, facing the streaming shape of the sergeant-major. 

Presently the colonel emerges from a door across the 
square. He stands in the door a moment, fastening his trench 
coat, then, followed by two A.D.C's, he steps gingerly into 
the mud in polished boots and approaches. 

"Para-a-a-de 'Shun!" the sergeant-major shouts. The 
battalion clashes, a single muffled, sullen sound. The sergeant- 



438 The Wasteland 

major turns, takes a pace toward the officers, and salutes, his 
stick beneath his armpit. The colonel jerks his stick toward 
his cap peak. 

"Stand at ease, men," he says. Again the battalion clashes, 
a single sluggish, trickling sound. The officers approach the 
guide file of the first platoon, the sergeant-major falling in 
behind the last officer. The sergeant of the first platoon takes 
a pace forward and salutes. The colonel does not respond at 
all. The sergeant falls in behind the sergeant-major, and the 
five of them pass down the company front, staring in turn 
at each rigid, forward-staring face as they pass it. First Com- 
pany. 

The sergeant salutes the colonel's back and returns to his 
original position and comes to attention. The sergeant of the 
second company has stepped forward, saluted, is ignored, and 
falls in behind the sergeant-major, and they pass down the 
second company front. The colonel's trench coat sheathes 
water onto his polished boots. Mud from the earth creeps up 
his boots and meets the water and is channelled by the water 
as the mud creeps up the polished boots again. 

Third Company. The colonel stops before a soldier, his 
trench coat hunched about his shoulders where the rain 
trickles from the back of his cap, so that he looks somehow 
like a choleric and outraged bird. The other two officers, the 
sergeant-major and the sergeant halt in turn, and the five of 
them glare at the five soldiers whom they are facing. The five 
soldiers stare rigid and unwinking straight before them, their 
faces like wooden faces, their eyes like wooden eyes. 

"Sergeant," the colonel says in his pettish voice, "has this 
man shaved today?" 

"Sir!" the sergeant says in a ringing voice; the sergeant- 
major says: 

"Did this man shave today, Sergeant?" and all five of them 
glare now at the soldier, whose rigid gaze seems to pass 



Victory 439 

through and beyond them, as if they were not there. "Take 
a pace forward when you speak in ranks!" the sergeant- 
major says. 

The soldier, who has not spoken, steps out of ranks, splash- 
ing a jet of mud yet higher up the colonel's boots. 

"What is your name?" the colonel says. 

"024 1 86. Gray," the soldier raps out glibly. The company, 
the battalion, stares straight ahead. 

"Sir!" the sergeant-major thunders. 

"Sir-r," the soldier says. 

"Did you shave this morning?" the colonel says. 

"Nae, sir-r." 

"Why not?" 

"A dinna shave, sir-r." 

"You dont shave?" 

"A am nae auld enough tae shave." 

"Sir!" the sergeant-major thunders. 

"Sir-r," the soldier says. 

"You are not . . ." The colonel's voice dies somewhere 
behind his choleric glare, the trickling water from his cap 
peak. "Take his name, Sergeant-major," he says, passing on. 

The battalion stares rigidly ahead. Presently it sees the 
colonel, the two officers and the sergeant-major reappear in 
single file. At the proper place the sergeant-major halts and 
salutes the colonel's back. The colonel jerks his stick hand 
again and goes on, followed by the two officers, at a trot 
toward the door from which he had emerged. 

The sergeant-major faces the battalion again. "Para-a-a- 
de " he shouts. An indistinguishable movement passes from 
rank to rank, an indistinguishable precursor of that damp arid 
sullen clash which dies borning. The sergeant-major's stick 
has come down from his armpit; he now leans on it, as officers 
do. For a time his eye roves along the battalion front. 

"Sergeant Cunninghame!" he says at last. 



440 The Wasteland 

"Sir!" 

"Did you take that man's name?" 

There is silence for a moment a little more than a short 
moment, a little less than a long one. Then the sergeant says: 
"What man, sir?" 

"You, soldier!" the sergeant-major says. 

The battalion stands rigid. The rain lances quietly into the 
mud between it and the sergeant-major as though it were 
too spent to either hurry or cease. 

"You soldier that dont shave!" the sergeant-major says. 

"Gray, sir! " the sergeant says. 

"Gray. Double out 'ere." 

The man Gray appears without haste and tramps stolidly 
before the battalion, his kilts dark and damp and heavy as a 
wet horse-blanket. He halts, facing the sergeant-major. 

"Why didn't you shave this morning?" the sergeant-major 
says. 

"A am nae auld enough tae shave," Gray says. 

"Sir!" the sergeant-major says. 

Gray stares rigidly beyond the sergeant-major's shoulder. 

"Say sir when addressing a first-class warrant officer!" the 
sergeant-major says. Gray stares doggedly past his shoulder, 
his face beneath his vizorless bonnet as oblivious of the cold 
lances of rain as though it were granite. The sergeant-major 
raises his voice: 

"Sergeant Cunninghame!" 

"Sir!" 

"Take this man's name for insubordination also." 

"Very good, sir! " 

The sergeant-major looks at Gray again. "And I'll see that 
you get the penal battalion, my man. Fall in!" 

Gray turns without haste and returns to his place in ranks, 
the sergeant-major watching him. The sergeant-major raises 
his voice again: 



Victory 441 

"Sergeant Cunninghame!" 

"Sir!" 

"You did not take that man's name when ordered. Let that 
happen again and you'll be for it yourself." 

"Very good, sir!" 

"Carry on!" the sergeant-major says. 

"But why did ye no shave?" the corporal asked him. They 
were back in billets: a stone barn with leprous walls, where 
no light entered, squatting in the ammoniac air on wet straw 
about a reeking brazier. "Ye kenned we were for inspection 
thae mor-rn." 

"A am nae auld enough tae shave," Gray said. 

"But ye kenned thae colonel would mar-rk ye on parade." 

"A am nae auld enough tae shave," Gray repeated dog- 
gedly and without heat. 

Ill 

"FOR TWO HUNDRED YEARS," Matthew Gray said, "there's 
never a day, except Sunday, has passed but there is a hull 
rising on Clyde or a hull going out of Clydemouth with a 
Gray-driven nail in it." He looked at young Alec across his 
steel spectacles, his neck bowed. "And not excepting their 
godless Sabbath hammering and sawing either. Because if a 
hull could be built in a day, Grays could build it," he added 
with dour pride. "And now, when you are big enough to 
go down to the yards with your grandadder and me and 
take a man's place among men, to be trusted manlike with 
hammer and saw yersel." 

"Whisht, Matthew," old Alec said. "The lad can saw as 
straight a line and drive as mony a nail a day as yersel or 
even me." 

Matthew paid his father no attention. He continued to 
speak his slow, considered words, watching his oldest son 



442 The Wasteland 

across the spectacles. "And with John Wesley not old 
enough by two years, and wee Matthew by ten, and your 
grandfather an auld man will soon be " 

"Whisht," old Alec said. "I'm no but sixty-eight. Will you 
be telling the lad he'll make his bit journey to London and 
come back to find me in the parish house, mayhap? 'Twill 
be over by Christmastide." 

"Christmasride or no," Matthew said, "a Gray, a ship- 
wright, has no business at an English war." 

"Whisht ye," old Alec said. He rose and went to the chim- 
ney cupboard and returned, carrying a box. It was of wood, 
dark and polished with age, the corners bound with iron, and 
fitted with an enormous iron lock which any child with a 
hairpin could have solved. From his pocket he took an iron 
key almost as big as the lock. He opened the box and lifted 
carefully out a small velvet-covered jeweler's box and opened 
it in turn. On the satin lining lay a medal, a bit of bronze on 
a crimson ribbon: a Victoria Cross. "I kept the hulls going out 
of Clydemouth while your uncle Simon was getting this bit 
of brass from the Queen," old Alec said. "I heard naught of 
complaint. And if need be, I'll keep them going out while 
Alec serves the Queen a bit himsel. Let the lad go," he said. 
He put the medal back into the wooden box and locked it. 
"A bit fighting winna hurt the lad. If I were his age, or yours 
either, for that matter, I'd gang mysel. Alec, lad, hark ye. 
Ye'll see if they'll no take a hale lad of sixty-eight and I'll 
gang wi ye and leave the auld folk like Matthew to do the 
best they can. Nay, Matthew; dinna ye thwart the lad; have 
no the Grays ever served the Queen in her need?" 

So young Alec went to enlist, descending the hill on a 
weekday in his Sunday clothes, with a New Testament and 
a loaf of homebaked bread tied in a handkerchief. And this 
was the last day's work which old Alec ever did, for soon 
after that, one morning Matthew descended the hill to the 



Victory 443 

shipyard alone, leaving old Alec at home. And after that, on 
the sunny days (and sometimes on the bad days too, until his 
daughter-in-law found him and drove him back into the 
house) he would sit shawled in a chair on the porch, gazing 
south and eastward, calling now and then to his son's wife 
within the house: "Hark now. Do you hear them? The 
guns." 

"I hear nothing,' 7 the daughter-in-law would say. "It's only 
the sea at Kinkeadbight. Come into the house, now. Matthew 
will be displeased." 

"Whisht, woman. Do you think there is a Gray in the 
world could let off a gun and me not know the sound of it?" 

They had a letter from him shortly after he enlisted, from 
England, in which he said that being a soldier, England, was 
different from being a shipwright, Clydeside, and that he 
would write again later. Which he did, each month or so, 
writing that soldiering was different from building ships and 
that it was still raining. Then they did not hear from him for 
seven months. But his mother and father continued to write 
him a joint letter on the first Monday of each month, letters 
almost identical with the previous one, the previous dozen: 

We are well. Ships are going out of Clyde faster than they 
can sink them. You still have the Book? 

This would be in his father's slow, indomitable hand. Then, 
in his mother's: 

Are you 'well? Do you need anything? Jessie and I are knit- 
ting the stockings and will send them. Alec, Alec. 

He received this one during the seven months, during his 
term in the penal battalion, forwarded to him by his old 
corporal, since he had not told his people of his changed life. 
He answered it, huddled among his fellow felons, squatting 



444 The Wastelana 

in the mud with newspapers buttoned inside his tunic and 
his head and feet wrapped in strips of torn blanket: 

/ am 'well. Yes I still have the Book (not telling them that his 
platoon was using it to light tobacco with and that they were 
now well beyond Lamentations). It still rains. Love to Gran- 
dadder and Jessie and Matthew and John Wesley. 

Then his time in the penal battalion was up. He returned 
to his old company, his old platoon, finding some new faces, 
and a letter: 

We are 'well. Ships are going out of Clyde yet. You have a 
new sister. Your Mother is well. 

He folded the letter and put it away. "A see mony new 
faces in thae battalion," he said to the corporal. "We ha a 
new sair-rgeant-major too, A doot not?" 

"Naw," the corporal said. " 'Tis the same one." He was 
looking at Gray, his gaze intent, speculative; his face cleared. 
"Ye ha shaved thae mor-rn," he said. 

"Ay," Gray said. "Am auld enough tae shave noo." 

That was the night on which the battalion was to go up to 
Arras. It was to move at midnight, so he answered the letter 
at once: 

/ am well. Love to Grandadder and Jessie and Matthew and 
John Wesley and the baby. 

"Morning! Morning!" The General, lap-robed and 
hooded, leans from his motor and waves his gloved hand and 
shouts cheerily to them as they slog past the car on the 
Bapaume road, taking the ditch to pass. 

"A's a cheery auld card," a voice says. 

"Awfficers," a second drawls; he falls to cursing as he slips 
in the greaselike mud, trying to cling to the crest of the 
kneedeep ditch. 



Victory 445 

"Aweel," a third says, "thae awfficers wud gang tae thae 
war-r too, A doot not." 

"Why dinna they gang then?" a fourth says. "Thae war-r 
is no back that way." 

Platoon by platoon they slip and plunge into the ditch and 
drag their heavy feet out of the clinging mud and pass the 
halted car and crawl terrifically onto the crown of the road 
again: "A says tae me, a says: 'Fritz has a new gun that will 
carry to Par-ris,' a says, and A says tae him: * 'Tis nawthin: 
a has one that will hit our Cor-rps Headquar-rters.' " 

"Morning! Morning!" The General continues to wave 
his glove and shout cheerily as the battalion detours into the 
ditch and heaves itself back onto the road again. 

They are in the trench. Until the first rifle explodes in their 
faces, not a shot has been fired. Gray is the third man. Dur- 
ing all the while that they crept between flares from shell- 
hole to shellhole, he has been working himself nearer to the 
sergeant-major and the Officer; in the glare of that first rifle 
he can see the gap in the wire toward which the Officer was 
leading them, the moiled rigid glints of the wire where bul- 
lets have nicked the mud and rust from it, and against the 
glare the tall, leaping shape of the sergeant-major. Then 
Gray, too, springs bayonet first into the trench full of grunt- 
ing shouts and thudding blows. 

Flares go up by dozens now, in the corpse glare Gray sees 
the sergeant-major methodically tossing grenades into the 
next traverse. He runs toward him, passing the Officer lean- 
ing, bent double, against the fire step. The sergeant-major 
has vanished beyond the traverse. Gray follows and comes 
upon the sergeant-major. Holding the burlap curtain aside 
with one hand, the sergeant-major is in the act of tossing a 
grenade into a dugout as if he might be tossing an orange 
hull into a cellar. 



446 The Wasteland 

The sergeant-major turns in the rocket glare. " 'Tis you, 
Gray," he says. The earth-muffled bomb thuds; the sergeant- 
major is in the act of catching another bomb from the sack 
about his neck as Gray's bayonet goes into his throat. The 
sergeant-major is a big man. He falls backward, holding the 
rifle barrel v/ith both hands against his throat, his teeth glar- 
ing, pulling Gray with him. Gray clings to the rifle. He tries 
to shake the speared body on the bayonet as he would shake 
a rat on an umbrella rib. 

He frees the bayonet. The sergeant-major falls. Gray 
reverses the rifle and hammers its butt into the sergeant- 
major's face, but the trench floor is too soft to supply any 
resistance. He glares about. His gaze falls upon a duckboard 
upended in the mud. He drags it free and slips it beneath the 
sergeant-major's head and hammers the face with his rifle- 
butt. Behind him in the first traverse the Officer is shouting: 
'Blow your whistle, Sergeant-major!" 

IV 

IN THE CITATION it told how Private Gray, on a night raid, 
one of four survivors, following the disablement of the 
Officer and the death of all the N.C.O.'s, took command of 
the situation and (the purpose of the expedition was a quick 
raid for prisoners) ; held a foothold in the enemy's front line 
until a supporting attack arrived and consolidated the posi- 
tion. The Officer told how he ordered the men back out, 
ordering them to leave him and save themselves, and how 
Gray appeared with a German machine gun from somewhere 
and, while his three companions built a barricade, overcame 
the Officer and took from him his Very pistol and fired the 
colored signal which called for the attack; all so quickly that 
support arrived before the enemy could counterattack or put 
down a barrage. 



Victory 447 

It is doubtful if his people ever saw the citation at all. Any- 
way, the letters which he received from them during his 
sojourn in hospital, the tenor of them, were unchanged: "We 
are well. Ships are still going out." 

His next letter home was once more months late. He wrote 
it when he was sitting up again, in London: 

/ have been sick but I am better noiv. I have a ribbon like in 
the box but not all red. The Queen ivas there. Love to Gran- 
dadder and Jessie and Mattheiv and John Wesley and the 
baby. 

The reply was written on Friday: 

Your mother is glad that you are better. Your grandfather is 
dead. The baby's name is Elizabeth. We are well. Your 
mother sends her love. 

His next letter was three months later, in winter again: 

My hurt is well. 1 am going to a school for officers. Love to 
Jessie and Matthew and John Wesley and Elizabeth. 

Matthew Gray pondered over this letter for a long while; 
so long that the reply was a week late, written on the second 
Monday instead of the first. He wrote it carefully, waiting 
until his family was in bed. It was such a long letter, or he 
had been at it so long, that after a time his wife came into the 
room in her nightdress. 

"Go back to bed," he told her. "I'll be coming soon. 'Tis 
something to be said to the lad." 

When at last he laid the pen down and sat back to reread 
the letter, it was a long one, written out slowly and deliber- 
ately and without retraction or blot: 

. . . your bit ribbon . . . for that way lies vainglory and pride. 
The pride and vainglory of going for an officer. Never mis- 



448 The Wasteland 

call your birth, Alec. You are not a gentleman. You are a 
Scottish shipwright. If your grandfather 'were here he would 
not be last to tell you so. . . . We are glad your hurt is well. 
Your mother sends her love. 

He sent home the medal, and his photograph in the new 
tunic with the pips and ribbon and the barred cuffs. But he 
did not go home himself. He returned to Flanders in the 
spring, with poppies blowing in the churned beet- and cab- 
bage-fields. When his leaves came, he spent them in London, 
in the haunts of officers, not telling his people that he had 
any leave. 

He still had the Book. Occasionally he came upon it among 
his effects and opened it at the jagged page where his life 
had changed: . . . and a voice said, Peter, raise thyself; kill 

Often his batman would watch him as, unawares and ob- 
livious, he turned the Book and mused upon the jagged page 
the ranker, the gaunt, lonely man with a face that belied 
his years or lack of them: a sobriety, a profound and mature 
calm, a grave and deliberate conviction of expression and 
gesture ("like a mout be Haig hissel," the batman said) 
watching him at his clean table, writing steadily and slowly, 
his tongue in his cheek as a child writes: 

/ am well. It has not rained in a fortnight. Love to Jessie and 
Matthew and John Wesley and Elizabeth. 

Four days ago the battalion came down from the lines. It 
has lost its major and two captains and most of the subalterns, 
so that now the remaining captain is major, and two sub- 
alterns and a sergeant have the companies. Meanwhile, re- 
placements have come up, the ranks are filled, and the 
battalion is going in again tomorrow. So today K Company 
stands with ranks open for inspection while the subaltern- 
captain (his name is Gray) moves slowly along each platoon 
front. 



Victory 449 

He passes from man to man, slowly, thoroughly, the ser- 
geant behind him. He stops. 

"Where is your trenching tool?" he says. 

"Blawn " the soldier begins. Then he ceases, staring 
rigidly before him. 

"Blawn out of your pack, eh?" the captain finishes for 
him. "Since when? What battles have ye taken par-rt in 
since four days?" 

The soldier stares rigidly across the drowsy street. The 
captain moves on. "Take his name, Sergeant." 

He moves on to the second platoon, to the third. He halts 
again. He looks the soldier up and down. 

"What is your name?" 

"010801 McLan, sir-r." 

"Replacement?" 

"Replacement, sir-r." 

The captain moves on. "Take his name, Sergeant. Rifle's 
filthy." 

The sun is setting. The village rises in black silhouette 
against the sunset; the river gleams in mirrored fire. The 
bridge across the river is a black arch upon which slowly and 
like figures cut from black paper, men are moving. 

The party crouches in the roadside ditch while the captain 
and the sergeant peer cautiously across the parapet of the 
road. "Do ye make them out?" the captain says in a low 
voice. 

"Huns, sir-r," the sergeant whispers. "A ken their-r hel- 
mets." 

Presently the column has crossed the bridge. The captain 
and the sergeant crawl back into the ditch, where the party 
crouches, among them a wounded man with a bandaged head. 
"Keep yon man quiet, now," the captain says. 

He leads the way along the ditch until they reach the out- 



450 The Wasteland 

skirts of the village. Here they are out of the sun, and here 
they sit quietly beneath a wall, surrounding the wounded 
man, while the captain and the sergeant again crawl away. 
They return in five minutes. "Fix bayonets," the sergeant 
says in a low voice. "Quiet, now." 

"Wull A stay wi thae hur-rt lad, Sair-rgent?" one whispers, 

"Nay," the sergeant says. "A'll tak's chance wi us. For- 
rard." 

They steal quietly along the wall, behind the captain. The 
wall approaches at right angles to the street, the road which 
crosses the bridge. The captain raises his hand. They halt 
and watch him as he peers around the corner. They are op- 
posite the bridgehead. It and the road are deserted; the village 
dreams quietly in the setting sun. Against the sky beyond the 
village the dust of the retreating column hangs, turning to 
rose and gold. 

Then they hear a sound, a short, guttural word. Not ten 
yards away and behind a ruined wall leveled breast-high and 
facing the bridge, four men squat about a machine gun. The 
captain raises his hand again. They grasp their rifles: a rush 
of hobnails on cobblestones, a cry of astonishment cut sharply 
off; blows, short, hard breaths, curses; not a shot. 

The man with the bandaged head begins to laugh, shrilly, 
until someone hushes him with a hand that tastes like brass 
Under the captain's direction they bash in the door of the 
house and drag the gun and the four bodies into it. They 
hoist the gun upstairs and set it up in a window looking down 
upon the bridgehead. The sun sinks further, the shadows fall 
long and quiet across village and river. The man with the 
bandaged head babbles to himself. 

Another column swings up the road, dogged and orderly 
beneath coalhod helmets. It crosses the bridge and passes on 
through the village. A party detaches itself from the rear of 
the column and splits into three squads. Two of them have 



Victory 45 1 

machine guns, which they set up on opposite sides of the 
street, the near one utilizing the barricade behind which the 
other gun had been captured. The third squad returns to the 
bridge, carrying sappers' tools and explosive. The sergeant 
tells off six of the nineteen men, who descend the stairs 
silently. The captain remains with the gun in the window. 

Again there is a brief rush, a scuffle, blows. From the win- 
dow the captain sees the heads of the machine-gun crew 
across the street turn, then the muzzle of the gun swings, 
firing. The captain rakes them once with his gun, then he 
sweeps with it the party on the bridge, watching it break 
like a covey of quail for the nearest wall. The captain holds 
the gun on them. They wilt running and dot the white road 
and become motionless. Then he swings the gun back to the 
gun across the street. It ceases. 

He gives another order. The remaining men, except the 
man with the bandage, run down the stairs. Half of them 
3top at the gun beneath the window and drag it around. The 
others dash on across the street, toward the second gun. 
They are halfway across when the other gun rattles. The 
running men plunge as one in midstep. Their kilts whip for- 
ward and bare their pale thighs. The gun rakes across the 
doorway where the others are freeing the first gun of bodies. 
As the captain sweeps his gun down again, dust puffs from 
the left side of the window, his gun rings metallically, some- 
thing sears along his arm and across his ribs, dust puffs from 
the right side of the window. He rakes the other gun again. 
It ceases. He continues to fire into the huddled clump about 
it long after the gun has ceased. 

The dark earth bites into the sun's rim. The street is now 
all in shadow; a final level ray comes into the room, and fades. 
Behind him in the twilight the wounded man laughs, then 
his laughter sinks into a quiet contented gibberish. 

Just before dark another column crosses the bridge. There 



452 The Wasteland 

is still enough light for it to be seen that these troops wear 
khaki and that their helmets are flat. But likely there is no 
one to see, because when a par^y mounted to the second 
story and found the captain propped in the window beside 
the cold gun, they thought that he was dead. 

This time Matthew Gray saw the citation. Someone 
clipped it from the Gazette and sent it to him, and he sent it 
in turn to his son in the hospital, with a letter: 

. . . Since you must go to a 'war we are glad that you are 
doing well in it. Your mother thinks that you have done your 
part and that you should come home. But women do not 
understand such things. But I myself think that it is time 
they stopped fighting. What is the good in the high wages 
when food is so high that there is profit -for none save the 
profiteers. When a war gets to where the battles do not even 
prosper the people who win them, it is time to stop. 



V 

IN THE BED NEXT HIS, and later in the chair next his on the 
long glassed veranda, there was a subaltern. They used to 
talk. Or rather, the subaltern talked while Gray listened. He 
talked of peace, of what he would do when it was over, talk- 
ing as if it were about finished, as if it would not last past 
Christmas. 

"We'll be back out there by Christmas," Gray said. 

"Gas cases? They don't send gas cases out again. They 
have to be cured." 

"We will be cured." 

"But not in time. It will be over by Christmas. It can't 
last another year. You don't believe me, do you? Sometimes 
I believe you want to go back. But it will be. It will be fin- 
ished by Christmas, and then I'm off, Canada. Nothing at 



Victory 453 

home for us now." He looked at the other, at the gaunt, 
wasted figure with almost white hair, lying with closed eyes 
in the fall sunlight. "You'd better come with me." 

"I'll meet you in Givenchy on Christmas Day," Gray said. 

But he didn't. He was in the hospital on the eleventh of 
November, hearing the bells, and he was still there on Christ- 
mas Day, where he received a letter from home: 

You can come on home now. It 'will not be too soon now. 
They will need ships worse than ever now, now that the 
pride and the vainglory have worn themselves out. 

The medical officer greeted him cheerfully. "Dammit, 
stuck here, when I know a place in Devon where I could 
hear a nightingale, by jove." He thumped Gray's chest. "Not 
much: just a bit of a murmur. Give you no trouble, if you'll 
stop away from wars from now on. Might keep you from 
getting in again, though." He waited for Gray to laugh, but 
Gray didn't laugh. "Well, it's all finished now, damn them. 
Sign here, will you." Gray signed. "Forget it as quickly as 
it began, I hope. Well " He extended his hand, smiling his 
antiseptic smile. "Cheer-O, Captain. And good luck." 

Matthew Gray, descending the hill at seven oclock in the 
morning, saw the man, the tall, hospital-colored man in city 
clothing and carrying a stick, and stopped. 

"Alec?" he said. "Alec." They shook hands. "I could not 
I did not . . ." He looked at his son, at the white hair, the 
waxed moustaches. "You have two ribbons now for the box, 
you have written." Then Matthew turned back up the hill at 
seven oclock in the morning. "We'll go to your mother." 

Then Alec Gray reverted for an instant. Perhaps he had 
not progressed as far as he thought, or perhaps he had been 
climbing a hill, and the return was not a reversion so much 



454 The Wasteland 

as something like an avalanche waiting the pebble, momen- 
tary though it was to be. "The shipyard, Father." 

His father strode firmly on, carrying his lunchpail. " 'Twill 
wait," he said. "We'll go to your mother." 

His mother met him at the door. Behind her he saw young 
Matthew, a man now, and John Wesley, and Elizabeth whom 
he had never seen. "You did not wear your uniform home," 
young Matthew said. 

"No/ he said. "No, I" 

"Your mother had wanted to see you in your regimentals 
and all," his father said. 

"No," his mother said. "No! Never! Never!" 

"Hush, Annie/ ' his father said. "Being a captain now, with 
two ribbons now for the box. This is false modesty. Ye hae 
shown course; ye should have But 'tis of no moment: the 
proper unifor - for a Gray is an overall and a hammer." 

"Ay, sir," Alec said, who had long since found out that 
no man has courage but that any man may blunder blindly 
into valor as one stumbles into an open manhole in the street. 

He did not tell his father until that night, after his mother 
and the children had gone to bed. "I am going back to Eng- 
land. I have work promised there." 

"Ah," his father said. "At Bristol, perhaps? They build 
ships there." 

The lamp glowed, touching with faint gleams the black 
and polished surface of the box on the mantel-shelf. There 
was a wind getting up, hollowing out the sky like a dark 
bowl, carving house and hill and headland out of dark space. 
" 'Twill be blowing out yon the night," his father said. 

"There are other things," Alec said. "I have made friends, 
you see." 

His father removed the iron-rimmed spectacles. "You have 
made friends. Officers and such, I doubt not?" 



Victory 455 

"Yes, sir." 

"And friends are good to have, to sit about the hearth of 
nights and talk with. But beyond that, only them that love 
you will bear your faults. You must love a man well to put 
up with all his trying ways, Alec." 

"But they are not that sort of friends, sir. They are . . ." 
He ceased. He did not look at his father. Matthew sat, slowly 
polishing the spectacles with his thumb. They could hear the 
wind. "If this fails, I'll come back to the shipyard." 

His father watched him gravely, polishing the spectacles 
slowly. "Ship wrights are not made like that, Alec. To fear 
God, to do your work like it was your own hull you were 
putting the ribs in . . ." He moved. "We'll see what the Book 
will say." He replaced the glasses. On the table was a heavy, 
brass-bound Bible. He opened it; the words seemed to him 
to rise to meet him from the page. Yet he read them, aloud: 
". . . and the captains of thousands and the captains of ten 
thousands ... A paragraph of pride. He faced his son, bowing 
his neck to see across the glasses. "You will go to London, 
then?" 

"Yes, sir," Alec said. 



VI 

His POSITION WAS WAITING. It was in an office. He had already 
had cards made: Captain A. Gray, M.C., D.S.M., and on 
his return to London he joined the Officers' Association, 
donating to the support of the widows and orphans. 

He had rooms in the proper quarter, and he would walk 
to and from the office, with his cards and his waxed mous- 
taches, his sober correct clothes and his stick carried in a 
manner inimitable, at once jaunty and unobtrusive, giving 
his coppers to blind and maimed in Piccadilly, asking of them 
the names of their regiments. Once a month he wrote home: 



456 The Wasteland 

I am 'well. Love to Jessie and Matthew and John Wesley and 
Elizabeth. 

During that first year Jessie was married. He sent her a 
gift of plate, stinting himself a little to do so, drawings from 
his savings. He was saving, not against old age; he believed 
too firmly in the Empire to do that, who had surrendered 
completely to the Empire like a woman, a bride. He was 
saving against the time when he would recross the Channel 
among the dead scenes of his lost and found life. 

That was three years later. He was already planning to 
ask for leave, when one day the manager broached the sub- 
ject himself. With one correct bag he went to France. But 
he did not bear eastward at once. He went to the Riviera; 
for a week he lived like a gentleman, spending his money 
like a gentleman, lonely, alone in that bright aviary of the 
svelte kept women of all Europe. 

That was why those who saw him descend from the Medi- 
terranean Express that morning in Paris said, "Here is a 
rich milord," and why they continued to say it in the hard- 
benched third-class trains, as he sat leaning forward on his 
stick, lip-moving the names on sheet-iron stations about the 
battered and waking land lying now three years quiet be- 
neath the senseless and unbroken battalions of days. 

He reached London and found what he should have known 
before he left. His position was gone. Conditions, the man- 
ager told him, addressing him punctiliously by his rank. 

What savings he had left melted slowly; he spent the last 
of them on a black silk dress for his mother, with the letter: 

/ ant 'well. Love to Matthew and John Wesley and Elizabeth. 

He called upon his friends, upon the officers whom he had 
known. One, the man he knew best, gave him whisky in a 
comfortable room with a fire: "You aren't working now? 



Victory 457 

Rotten luck. By the way, you remember Whiteby? He had 
a company in the th. Nice chap: no people, though. He 
killed himself last week. Conditions." 

"Oh. Did he? Yes. I remember him. Rotten luck." 

"Yes. Rotten luck. Nice chap." 

He no longer gave his pennies to the blind and the maimed 
in Piccadilly. He needed them for papers: 

Artisans needed 

Become stonemason 

Men to drive ?no tor cars. War record not necessary 

Shop-assistants (must be under twenty -one) 

Shipwrights needed 

and at last: 

Gentleman ivith social address and connections to meet out- 
of-toivn clients. Temporary 

He got the place, and with his waxed moustaches and his 
correct clothes he revealed the fleshpots of the West End 
to Birmingham and Leeds. It was temporary. 

Artisans 
Carpenters 
House pain ters 

Winter was temporary, too. In the spring he took his 
waxed moustaches and his ironed clothes into Surrey, with 
a set of books, an encyclopedia, on commission. He sold all 
his things save what he stood in, and gave up his rooms in 
town. 

He still had his stick, his waxed moustaches, his cards. 
Surrey, gentle, green, mild. A tight little house in a tight 
little garden. An oldish man in a smoking jacket puttering 
in a flower bed: "Good day, sir. Might I " 

The man in the smoking jacket looks up. "Go to the side, 
can't you? Don't come this way." 



458 The Wasteland 

He goes to the side entrance. A slatted gate, freshly white, 
bearing an enameled plate: 

^ Tx ^ HAWKERS 
NO 

BEGGARS 

He passes through and knocks at a tidy door smug beneath 
a vine. "Good day, miss. May I see the " 

"Go away. Didn't you see the sign on the gate?" 

"But I" 

"Go away, or I'll call the master." 

In the fall he returned to London. Perhaps he could not 
have said why himself. Perhaps it was beyond any saying, 
instinct perhaps bringing him back to be present at the in- 
stant out of all time of the manifestation, apotheosis, of his 
life which had died again. Anyway, he was there, still with 
his waxed moustaches, erect, his stick clasped beneath his 
left armpit, among the Household troops in brass cuirasses, 
on dappled geldings, and Guards in scarlet tunics, and the 
Church militant in stole and surplice and Prince defenders 
of God in humble mufti, all at attention for two minutes, 
listening to despair. He still had thirty shillings, and he re- 
plenished his cards: Captain A. Gray, M.C., D.S.M. 

It is one of those spurious, pale days like a sickly and 
premature child of spring while spring itself is still weeks 
away. In the thin sunlight buildings fade upward into misty 
pinks and golds. Women wear violets pinned to their furs, 
appearing to bloom themselves like flowers in the languorous, 
treacherous air. 

It is the women who look twice at the man standing against 
the wall at a corner: a gaunt man with white hair, and 
moustaches twisted into frayed points, with a bleached and 
frayed regimental scarf in a celluloid collar, a once-good 
suit now threadbare yet apparently pressed within twenty- 



Victory 459 

four hours, standing against the wall with closed eyes, a 
dilapidated hat held bottom-up before him. 

He stood there for a long time, until someone touched his 
arm. It was a constable. "Move along, sir. Against orders." 
In his hat were seven pennies and three halfpence. He 
bought a cake of soap and a little food. 

Another anniversary came and passed; he stood again, his 
stick at his armpit, among the bright, silent uniforms, the 
quiet throng in either frank or stubborn cast-offs, with 
patient, bewildered faces. In his eyes now is not that hopeful 
resignation of a beggar, but rather that bitterness, that echo 
as of bitter and unheard laugher of a hunchback. 

A meager fire burns on the sloping cobbles. In the fitful 
light the damp, fungus-grown wall of the embankment and 
the stone arch of the bridge loom. At the foot of the cobbled 
slope the invisible river clucks and gurgles with the tide. 

Five figures lie about the fire, some with heads covered 
as though in slumber, others smoking and talking. One man 
sits upright, his back to the wall, his hands lying beside him; 
he is blind: he sleeps that way. He says that he is afraid to 
lie down. 

"Cant you tell you are lying down, without seeing you 
are?" another says. 

"Something might happen," the blind man says. 

"What? Do you think they would give you a shell, even 
if it would bring back your sight?" 

"They'd give him the shell, all right," a third said. 

"Ow. Why dont they line us all up and put down a bloody 
barrage on us?" 

"Was that how he lost his sight?" a fourth says. "A shell?" 

"Ow. He was at Mons. A dispatch rider, on a motorbike. 
Tell them about it, mate." 

The blind man lifts his face a little. Otherwise he does not 



460 The Wasteland 

move. He speaks in a flat voice. "She had the bit of scar on 
her wrist. That was how I could tell. It was me put the scar 
on her wrist, you might say. We was working in the shop 
one day. I had picked up an old engine and we was fitting it 
onto a bike so we could " 

"What?" the fourth says. "What's he talking about?" 

"Shhhh," the first says. "Not so loud. He's talking about 
his girl. He had a bit of a bike shop on the Brighton Road 
and they were going to marry." He speaks in a low tone, his 
voice just under the weary, monotonous voice of the blind 
man. "Had their picture taken and all the day he enlisted 
and got his uniform. He had it with hii for a while, until one 
day he lost it. He was fair wild. So at last we got a bit of a 
card about the same size of the picture. 'Here's your picture, 
mate/ we says. 'Hold onto it this time.' So he's still got the 
card. Likely he'll show it to you before he's done. So dont 
you let on." 

"No," the other says. "I shant let on." 

The blind man talks. " got them at the hospital to write 
her a letter, and sure enough, here she come. I could tell her 
by the bit of scar on her wrist. Her voice sounded different, 
but then everything sounded different since. But I could tell 
by the scar. We would sit and hold hands, and I could touch 
the bit of scar inside her left wrist. In the cinema too. I 
would touch the scar and it would be like I " 

"The cinema?" the fourth says. "Him?" 

"Yes," the other says. "She would take him to the cinema, 
the comedies, so he could hear them laughing." 

The blind man talks. " told me how the pictures hurt 
her eyes, and that she would leave me at the cinema and 
when it was over she would come and fetch me. So I said it 
was all right. And the next night it was again. And I said it 
was all right. And the next night I told her I wouldn't go 
either. I said we would stop at home, at the hospital. And 



Victory 461 

then she didn't say anything for a long while. I could hear 
her breathing. Then she said it was all right. So after that we 
didn't go to the cinema. We would just sit, holding hands, 
and me feeling the scar now and then. We couldn't talk loud 
in the hospital, so we would whisper. But mostly we didn't 
talk. We just held hands. And that was for eight nights. I 
counted. Then it was the eighth night. We were sitting 
there, with the other hand in my hand, and me touching the 
scar now and then. Then on a sudden the hand jerked away. 
I could hear her standing up. 'Listen,' she says. 'This cant go 
on any longer. You will have to know sometime,' she says. 
And I says, 'I dont want to know but one thing. What is 
your name?' I says. She told me her name; one of the nurses. 
And she says " 

"What?" the fourth says. "What is this?" 

"He told you," the first said. "It was one of the nurses in 
the hospital. The girl had been buggering off with another 
fellow and left the nurse for him to hold her hand, thinking 
he was fooled." 

"But how did he know?" the fourth says. 

"Listen," the first says. 

" 'and you knew all the time/ she says, 'since the first 
time?' 'It was the scar,' I says. 'You've got it on the wrong 
wrist. You've got it on your right wrist,' I says. 'And two 
nights ago, I lifted up the edge of it a bit. What is it,' I says. 
'Courtplaster? ' " The blind man sits against the wall, his face 
lifted a little, his hands motionless beside him. "That's how 
I knew, by the scar. Thinking they could fool me, when it 
was me put the scar on her, you might say " 

The prone figure farthest from the fire lifts its head. 
"Hup," he says; "ere e comes." 

The others turn as one and look toward the entrance. 

"Here who comes?" the blind man says. "Is it the bob- 
bies?" 



462 The Wasteland 

They do not answer. They watch the man who enters: 
a tall man with a stick. They cease to talk, save the blind 
man, watching the tall man come among them. "Here who 
comes, mates?" the blind man says. "Mates!" 

The newcomer passes them, and the fire; he does not look 
at them. He goes on. "Watch, now," the second says. The 
blind man is now leaning a little forward; his hands fumble 
at the ground beside him as though he were preparing to 
rise. 

"Watch who?" he says. "What do you see?" 

They do not answer. They are watching the newcomer 
covertly, attentively, as he disrobes and then, a white 
shadow, a ghostly gleam in the darkness, goes down to the 
water and washes himself, slapping his body hard with icy 
and filthy handfuls of river water. He returns to the fire; 
they turn their faces quickly aside, save the blind man (he 
still sits forward, his arms propped beside him as though on 
the point of rising, his wan face turned toward the sound, 
the movement) and one other. "Yer stones is ot, sir," this 
one says. "I've ad them right in the blaze." 

"Thanks," the newcomer says. He still appears to be 
utterly oblivious of them, so they watch him again, quietly, 
as he spreads his sorry garments on one stone and takes a 
second stone from the fire and irons them. While he is 
dressing, the man who spoke to him goes down to the water 
and returns with the cake of soap which he had used. Still 
watching, they see the newcomer rub his fingers on the cake 
of soap and twist his moustaches into points. 

"A bit more on the left one, sir," the man holding the 
soap says. The newcomer soaps his fingers and twists his left 
moustache again, the other man watching him, his head bent 
and tilted a little back, in shape and attitude and dress like 
a caricatured scarecrow. 

"Right, now?" the newcomer says. 



Victory 463 

"Right, sir," the scarecrow says. He retreats into the dark- 
ness and returns without the cake of soap, and carrying in- 
stead the hat and the stick. The newcomer takes them. From 
his pocket he takes a coin and puts it into the scarecrow's 
hand. The scarecrow touches his cap; the newcomer is gone. 
They watch him, the tall shape, the erect back, the stick, 
until he disappears. 

"What do you see, mates?" the blind man says. "Tell a 
man what you see." 

VII 

AMONG THE DEMOBILIZED officers who emigrated from Eng- 
land after the Armistice was a subaltern named Walkley. He 
went out to Canada, where he raised wheat and prospered, 
both in pocket and in health. So much so that, had he been 
walking out of the Gare de Lyon in Paris instead of in Pic- 
cadilly Circus on this first evening (it is Christmas eve) of 
his first visit home, they would have said, "Here is not only 
a rich milord; it is a well one." 

He had been in London just long enough to outfit himself 
with the beginning of a wardrobe, and in his new clothes 
(bought of a tailor which in the old days he could not have 
afforded) he was enjoying himself too much to even go 
anywhere. So he just walked the streets, among the cheerful 
throngs, until suddenly he stopped dead still, staring at a face. 
The man had almost white hair, moustaches waxed to needle 
points. He wore a frayed scarf in which could be barely 
distinguished the colors and pattern of a regiment. His 
threadbare clothes were freshly ironed and he carried a stick. 
He was standing at the curb, and he appeared to be saying 
something to the people who passed, and Walkley moved 
suddenly forward, his hand extended. But the other man only 
stared at him with eyes that were perfectly dead. 



464 The Wasteland 

"Gray," Walkley said, "don't you remember me?" The 
Other stared at him with that dead intensity. "We were in 
hospital together. I went out to Canada. Don't you remem- 
ber?" 

"Yes," the other said. "I remember you. You are Walk- 
ley." Then he quit looking at Walkley. He moved a little 
aside, turning to the crowd again, his hand extended; it was 
only then that Walkley saw that the hand contained three or 
four boxes of the matches which may be bought from any 
tobacconist for a penny a box. "Matches? Matches, sir?" he 
said. "Matches? Matches?" 

Walkley moved also, getting again in front of the other. 
"Gray" he said. 

The other looked at Walkley again, this time with a kind 
of restrained yet raging impatience. "Let me alone, you son 
of a bitch!" he said, turning immediately toward the crowd 
again, his hand extended. "Matches! Matches, sir!" he 
chanted. 

Walkley moved on. He paused again, half turning, looking 
back at the gaunt face above the waxed moustaches. Again 
the other looked him full in the face, but the glance passed 
on, as though without recognition. Walkley went on. He 
walked swiftly. "My God," he said. "I think I am going 
to vomit." 



Crevasse 



THE PARTY GOES ON, skirting the edge of the barrage weaving 
down into shell craters old and new, crawling out again. 
Two men half drag, half carry between them a third, while 
two others carry the three rifles. The third man's head is 
bound in a bloody rag; he stumbles his aimless legs along, 
his head lolling, sweat channeling slowly down his mud- 
crusted face. 

The barrage stretches on and on across the plain, distant, 
impenetrable. Occasionally a small wind comes up from 
nowhere and thins the dun smoke momentarily upon clumps 
of bitten poplars. The party enters and crosses a field which 
a month ago was sown to wheat and where yet wheatspears 
thrust and cling stubbornly in the churned soil, among scraps 
of metal and seething hunks of cloth. 

It crosses the field and comes to a canal bordered with tree 
stumps sheared roughly at a symmetrical five-foot level. The 
men flop and drink of the contaminated water and fill their 
water bottles. The two bearers let the wounded man slip 
to earth; he hangs lax on the canal bank with both arms in 
the water and his head too, had not the others held him up. 
One of them raises water in his helmet, but the wounded 
man cannot swallow. So they set him upright and the other 
holds the helmet brim to his lips and refills the helmet and 
pours the water on the wounded man's head, sopping the 

465 



466 The Wasteland 

bandage. Then he takes a filthy rag from his pocket and 
dries the wounded man's face with clumsy gentleness. 

The captain, the subaltern and the sergeant, still standing, 
are poring over a soiled map. Beyond the canal the ground 
rises gradually; the canal cutting reveals the chalk formation 
of the land in pallid strata. The captain puts the map away 
and the sergeant speaks the men to their feet, not loud. The 
two bearers raise the wounded man and they follow the 
canal bank, coming after a while to a bridge formed by a 
water-logged barge hull lashed bow and stern to either bank, 
and so pass over. Here they halt again while once more the 
captain and the subaltern consult the map. 

Gunfire comes across the pale spring noon like a prolonged 
clashing of hail on an endless metal roof. As they go on the 
chalky soil rises gradually underfoot. The ground is dryly 
rough, shaling, and the going is harder still for the two who 
carry the wounded man. But when they would stop the 
wounded man struggles and wrenches free and staggers on 
alone, his hands at his head, and stumbles, falling. The bearers 
catch and raise him and hold him muttering between them 
and wrenching his arms. He is muttering ". . . bonnet . . ." 
and he frees his hands and tugs again at his bandage. The 
commotion passes forward. The captain looks back and 
stops; the party halts also, unbidden, and lowers rifles. 

"A's pickin at's bandage, sir-r," one of the bearers tells 
the captain. They let the man sit down between them; the 
captain kneels beside him. 

". . . bonnet . . . bonnet," the man mutters. The captain 
loosens the bandage. The sergeant extends a water bottle 
and the captain wets the bandage and lays his hand on the 
man's brow. The others stand about, looking on with a kind 
of sober, detached interest. The captain rises. The bearers 
raise the wounded man again. The sergeant speaks them into 
motion. 



Crevasse 467 

They gain the crest of the ridge. The ridge slopes west- 
ward into a plateau slightly rolling. Southward, beneath its 
dun pall, the barrage still rages; westward and northward 
about the shining empty plain smoke rises lazily here and 
there above clumps of trees. But this is the smoke of burn- 
ing things, burning wood and not powder, and the two 
officers gaze from beneath their hands, the men halting again 
without order and lowering arms. 

"Gad, sir," the subaltern says suddenly in a high, thin 
voice; "it's houses burning! They're retreating! Beasts! 
Beasts!" 

" 'Tis possible," the captain says, gazing beneath his hand. 
"We can get around that barrage now. Should be a road 
just yonder." He strides on again. 

"For-rard," the sergeant says, in that tone not loud. The 
men slope arms once more with unquestioning docility. 

The ridge is covered with a tough, gorselike grass. Insects 
buzz in it, zip from beneath their feet and fall to slatting 
again beneath the shimmering noon. The wounded man is 
babbling again. At intervals they pause and give him water 
and wet the bandage again, then two others exchange with 
the bearers and they hurry the man on and close up again. 

The head of the line stops; the men jolt prodding into one 
another like a train of freight cars stopping. At the captain's 
feet lies a broad shallow depression in which grows a sparse* 
dead-looking grass like clumps of bayonets thrust up out 
of the earth. It is too big to have been made by a small shell, 
and too shallow to have been made by a big one. It bears no 
traces of having been made by anything at all, and they look 
quietly down into it. "Queer," the subaltern says. "What 
do you fancy could have made it?" 

The captain does not answer. He turns. They circle the 
depression, looking down into it quietly as they pass it. But 
they have no more than passed it when they come upon 



468 The Wasteland 

another one, perhaps not quite so large. "I didn't know they 
had anything that could make that/' the subaltern says. 
Again the captain does not answer. They circle this one also 
and keep on along the crest of the ridge. On the other hand 
the ridge sheers sharply downward stratum by stratum of 
pallid eroded chalk. 

A shallow ravine gashes its crumbling yawn abruptly 
across their path. The captain changes direction again, par- 
alleling the ravine, until shortly afterward the ravine turns 
at right angles and goes on in the direction of their march. 
The floor of the ravine is in shadow; the captain leads the 
way down the shelving wall, into the shade. They lower the 
wounded man carefully and go on. 

After a time the ravine opens. They find that they have 
debouched into another of those shallow depressions. This 
one is not so clearly defined, though, and the opposite wall 
of it is nicked by what is apparently another depression, 
like two overlapping disks. They cross the first depression, 
while more of the dead-looking grass bayonets saber their 
legs dryly, and pass through the gap into the next depression. 

This one is like a miniature valley between miniature 
cliffs. Overhead they can see only the drowsy and empty 
bowl of the sky, with a few faint smoke smudges to the 
northwest. The sound of the barrage is now remote and far 
away: a vibration in earth felt rather than heard. There are 
no recent shell craters or marks here at all. It is as though 
they had strayed suddenly into a region, a world where the 
war had not reached, where nothing had reached, where no 
life is, and silence itself is dead. They give the wounded man 
water and go on. 

The valley, the depression, strays vaguely before them. 
They can see that it is a series of overlapping, vaguely cir- 
cular basins formed by no apparent or deducible agency. 
Pallid grass bayonets saber at their legs, and after a time they 



Crevass? 469 

are again among old healed scars of trees to which there 
cling sparse leaves neither green nor dead, as if they too had 
been overtaken and caught by a hiatus in time, gossiping 
dryly among themselves though there is no wind. The floor 
of the valley is not level. It in itself descends into vague 
depressions, rises again as vaguely between its shelving walls. 
In the center of these smaller depressions whitish knobs of 
chalk thrust up through the thin topsoil. The ground has a 
resilient quality, like walking on cork; feet make no sound. 
"Jolly walking," the subaltern says. Though his voice is not 
raised, it fills the small valley with the abruptness of a thun- 
derclap, filling the silence, the words seeming to hang about 
them as though silence here had been so long undisturbed 
that it had forgot its purpose; as one they look quietly and 
soberly about, at the shelving walls, the stubborn ghosts of 
trees, the bland, hushed sky. "Topping hole-up for embusque 
birds and such," the subaltern says. 

"Ay," the captain says. His word in turn hangs sluggishly 
and fades. The men at the rear close up, the movement pass- 
*ng forward, the men looking quietly and soberly about. 

"But no birds here," the subaltern says. "No insects even." 

"Ay," the captain says. The word fades, the silence comes 
down again, sunny, profoundly still. The subaltern pauses 
and stirs something with his foot. The men halt also, and 
the subaltern and the captain, without touching it, examine 
the half-buried and moldering rifle. The wounded man is 
babbling again. 

"What is it, sir?" the subaltern says. "Looks like one of 
those things the Canadians had. A Ross. Right?" 

"French," the captain says; "1914." 

"Oh," the subaltern says. He turns the rifle aside with his 
toe. The bayonet is still attached to the barrel, but the stock 
has long since rotted away. They go on, across the uneven 
ground, among the chalky knobs thrusting up through the 



470 The Wasteland 

soil. Light, the wan and drowsy sunlight, is laked in the 
valley, stagnant, bodiless, without heat. The saberlike grass 
thrusts sparsely and rigidly upward. They look about again 
at the shaling walls, then the ones at the head of the party 
watch the subaltern pause and prod with his stick at one of 
the chalky knobs and turn presently upward its earth-stained 
eyesockets and its unbottomed grin. 

"Forward," the captain says sharply. The party moves; 
the men look quietly and curiously at the skull as they pass. 
They go on, among the other whitish knobs like marbles 
studded at random in the shallow soil. 

"All in the same position, do you notice, sir?" the sub- 
altern says, his voice chattily cheerful; "all upright. Queer 
way to bury chaps: sitting down. Shallow, too." 

"Ay," the captain says. The wounded man babbles 
steadily. The two bearers stop with him, but the others 
crowd on after the officers, passing the two bearers and the 
wounded man. "Dinna stop to gi's sup water," one of the 
bearers says. "A'll drink walkin." They take up the wounded 
man again and hurry him on while one of them tries to hold 
the neck of a water bottle to the wounded man's mouth, 
clattering it against his teeth and spilling the water down the 
front of his tunic. The captain looks back. 

"What's this?" he says sharply. The men crowd up. Their 
eyes are wide, sober; he looks about at the quiet, intent faces. 
"What's the matter back there, Sergeant?" 

"Wind-up," the subaltern says. He looks about at the 
eroded walls, the whitish knobs thrusting quietly out of the 
earth. "Feel it myself," he says. He laughs, his laughter a 
little thin, ceasing. "Let's get out of here, sir," he says. "Let's 
get into the sun again." 

"You are in the sun here," the captain says. "Ease off there, 
men. Stop crowding. We'll be out soon. We'll find the road 
and get past the barrage and make -contact again." He turns 
and goes on. The party gets into motion again. 



Crevasse 47 1 

Then they all stop as one, in the attitudes of walking, in 
an utter suspension, and stare at one another. Again the 
earth moves under their feet. A man screams, high, like a 
woman or a horse; as the firm earth shifts for a third time 
beneath them the officers whirl and see beyond the down- 
plunging man a gaping hole with dry dust still crumbling 
about the edges before the orifice crumbles again beneath 
a second man. Then a crack springs like a sword slash be- 
neath them all; the earth breaks under their feet and tilts 
like jagged squares of pale fudge, framing a black yawn out 
of which, like a silent explosion, bursts the unmistakable 
smell of rotted flesh. While they scramble and leap (in 
silence now; there has been no sound since the first man 
screamed) from one cake to another, the cakes tilt and slide 
until the whole floor of the valley rushes slowly under them 
and plunges them downward into darkness. A grave rum- 
bling rises into the sunlight on a blast of decay and of faint 
dust which hangs and drifts in the faint air about the black 
orifice. 

The captain feels himself plunging down a sheer and 
shifting wall of moving earth, of sounds of terror and of 
struggling in the ink dark. Someone else screams. The 
scream ceases; he hears the voice of the wounded man com- 
ing thin and reiterant out of the plunging bowels of decay: 
"A'm no dead! A'm no dead!" and ceasing abruptly, as if a 
hand had been laid on his mouth. 

Then the moving cliff down which the captain plunges 
slopes gradually off and shoots him, uninjured, onto a hard 
floor, where he lies for a time on his back while across his 
face the lightward- and airward-seeking blast of death and 
dissolution rushes. He has fetched up against something; it 
tumbles down upon him lightly, with a muffled clatter as if 
it had come to pieces. 

Then he begins to see the light, the jagged shape of the 
cavern mouth high overhead, and then the sergeant is bend- 



472 The Wasteland 

ing over him with a pocket torch. "McKie?" the captain 
says. For reply the sergeant turns the flash upon his own 
face. "Where's Mr. McKie?" the captain says. 

"A's gone, sir-r," the sergeant says in a husky whisper. 
The captain sits up. 

"How many are left?" 

"Fourteen, sir-r," the sergeant whispers. 

"Fourteen. Twelve missing. We'll have to dig fast." He 
gets to his feet. The faint light from above falls coldly upon 
the heaped avalanche, upon the thirteen helmets and the 
white bandage of the wounded man huddled about the foot 
of the cliff. "Where are we?" 

For answer the sergeant moves the torch. It streaks later- 
ally into the darkness, along a wall, a tunnel, into yawning 
blackness, the walls faceted with pale glints of chalk. About 
the tunnel, sitting or leaning upright against the walls, are 
skeletons in dark tunics and bagging Zouave trousers, their 
moldering arms beside them; the captain recognizes them as 
Senegalese troops of the May fighting of 1915, surprised 
and killed by gas probably in the attitudes in which they 
had taken refuge in the chalk caverns. He takes the torch 
from the sergeant. 

"We'll see if there's anyone else," he says. "Have out the 
trenching tools." He flashes the light upon the precipice. It 
rises into gloom, darkness, then into the faint rumor of day- 
light overhead. With the sergeant behind him he climbs the 
shifting heap, the earth sighing beneath him and shaling 
downward. The injured man begins to wail again, "A'm no 
dead! A'm no dead! " until his voice goes into a high sustained 
screaming. Someone lays a hand over his mouth. His voice 
is muffled, then it becomes laughter on a rising note, becomes 
screaming again, is choked again. 

The captain and the sergeant mount as high as they dare, 
prodding at the earth while the earth shifts beneath them in 



Crevasse 473 

long hushed sighs. At the foot of the precipice the men 
huddle, their faces lifted faint, white, and patient into the 
light. The captain sweeps the torch up and down the cliff. 
There is nothing, no arm, no hand, in sight. The air is clear- 
ing slowly. "We'll get on/' the captain says. 

"Ay, sir-r," the sergeant says. 

In both directions the cavern fades into darkness, plumb- 
less and profound, filled with the quiet skeletons sitting and 
leaning against the walls, their arms beside them. 

"The cave-in threw us forward," the captain says. 

"Ay, sir-r," the sergeant whispers. 

"Speak out," the captain says. "It's but a bit of a cave. If 
men got into it, we can get out." 

"Ay, sir-r," the sergeant whispers. 

"If it threw us forward, the entrance will be yonder." 

"Ay, sir-r," the sergeant whispers. 

The captain flashes the torch ahead. The men rise and 
huddle quietly behind him, the wounded man among them. 
He whimpers. The cavern goes on, unrolling its glinted walls 
out of the darkness; the sitting shapes grin quietly into the 
light as they pass. The air grows heavier; soon they are 
trotting, gasping, then the air grows lighter and the torch 
sweeps up another slope of earth, closing the tunnel. The 
men halt and huddle. The captain mounts the slope. He snaps 
off the light and crawls slowly along the crest of the slide, 
where it joins the ceiling of the cavern, sniffing. The light 
flashes on again. "Two men with trenching tools," he says. 

Two men mount to him. He shows them the fissure 
through which air seeps in small, steady breaths. They begin 
to dig, furiously, hurling the dirt back. Presently they are 
relieved by two others; presently the fissure becomes a tunnel 
and four men can work at once. The air becomes fresher. 
They burrow furiously, with whimpering cries like dogs. 
The wounded man, hearing them perhaps, catching the 



474 The Wasteland 

excitement perhaps, begins to laugh again, meaningless and 
high. Then the man at the head of the tunnel bursts through. 
Light rushes in around him like water; he burrows madly; 
in silhouette they see his wallowing buttocks lunge from 
sight and a burst of daylight surges in. 

The others leave the wounded man and surge up the slope, 
fighting and snarling at the opening. The sergeant springs 
after them and beats them away from the opening with a 
trenching spade, cursing in his hoarse whisper. 

"Let them go, Sergeant," the captain says. The sergeant 
desists. He stands aside and watches the men scramble into 
the tunnel. Then he descends, and he and the captain help 
the wounded man up the slope. At the mouth of the tunnel 
the wounded man rebels. 

"A'm no dead! A'm no dead!" he wails, struggling. By 
cajolery and force they thrust him, still wailing and strug- 
gling, into the tunnel, where he becomes docile again and 
scuttles through. 

"Out with you, Sergeant," the captain says. 

"After you, sir-r," the sergeant whispers. 

"Out wi ye, man!" the captain says. The sergeant enters 
the tunnel. The captain follows. He emerges onto the outer 
slope of the avalanche which had closed the cave, at the foot 
of which the fourteen men are kneeling in a group. On his 
hands and knees like a beast, the captain breathes, his breath 
making a hoarse sound. "Soon it will be summer," he thinks, 
dragging the air into his lungs faster than he can empty them 
to respire again. "Soon it will be summer, and the long 
days." At the foot of the slope the fourteen men kneel. The 
one in the center has a Bible in his hand, from which he is 
intoning monotonously. Above his voice the wounded man's 
gibberish rises, meaningless and unemphatic and sustained. 



Turnabout 



THE AMERICAN the older one wore no pink Bedfords. 
His breeches were of plain whipcord, like the tunic. And the 
tunic had no long London-cut skirts, so that below the Sam 
Browne the tail of it stuck straight out like the tunic of a 
military policeman beneath his holster belt. And he wore 
simple puttees and the easy shoes of a man of middle age, 
instead of Savile Row boots, and the shoes and the puttees 
did not match in shade, and the ordnance belt did not match 
either of them, and the pilot's wings on his breast were just 
wings. But the ribbon beneath them was a good ribbon, and 
the insigne on his shoulders were the twin bars of a captain. 
He was not tall. His face was thin, a little aquiline; the eyes 
intelligent and a little tired. He was past twenty-five; looking 
at him, one thought, not Phi Beta Kappa exactly, but Skull 
and Bones perhaps, or possibly a Rhodes scholarship. 

One of the men who faced him probably could not see 
him at all. He was being held on his feet by an American 
military policeman. He was quite drunk, and in contrast 
with the heavy- jawed policeman who held him erect on his 
long, slim, boneless legs, he looked like a masquerading girl. 
He was possibly eighteen, tall, with a pink-and-white face 
and blue eyes, and a mouth like a girl's mouth. He wore a 
pea-coat, buttoned awry and stained with recent mud, and 
upon his blond head, at that unmistakable and rakish swagger 

475 



476 The Wasteland 

which no other people can ever approach or imitate, the cap 
of a Royal Naval Officer. 

"What's this, corporal?" the American captain said. 
"What's the trouble? He's an Englishman. You'd better let 
their M. P.'s take care of him." 

"I know he is," the policeman said. He spoke heavily, 
breathing heavily, in the voice of a man under physical 
strain; for all his girlish delicacy of limb, the English boy 
was heavier or more helpless than he looked. "Stand up!" 
the policeman said. "They're officers!" 

The English boy made an effort then. He pulled himself 
together, focusing his eyes. He swayed, throwing his arms 
about the policeman's neck, and with the other hand he 
saluted, his hand flicking, fingers curled a little, to his right 
ear, already swaying again and catching himself again. 
"Cheer-o, sir," he said. "Name's not Beatty, I hope." 

"No," the captain said. 

"Ah," the English boy said. "Hoped not. My mistake. No 
offense, what?" 

"No offense," the captain said quietly. But he was looking 
at the policeman. The second American spoke. He was a 
lieutenant, also a pilot. But he was not twenty-five and he 
wore the pink breeches, the London boots, and his tunic 
might have been a British tunic save for the collar. 

"It's one of those navy eggs," he said. "They pick them 
out of the gutters here all night long. You don't come to 
town often enough." 

"Oh," the captain said. "I've heard about them. I remem- 
ber now." He also remarked now that, though the street was 
a busy one it was just outside a popular cafe and there 
were many passers, soldier, civilian, women, yet none of 
them so much as paused, as though it were a familiar sight. 
He was looking at the policeman. "Can't you take him to his 
ship?" 



Turnabout 477 

"I thought of that before the captain did," the policeman 
said. "He says he can't go aboard his ship after dark because 
he puts the ship away at sundown." 

"Puts it away?" 

"Stand up, sailor!" the policeman said savagely, jerking 
at his lax burden. "Maybe the captain can make sense out 
of it. Damned if I can. He says they keep the boat under the 
wharf. Run it under the wharf at night, and that they can't 
get it out again until the tide goes out tomorrow." 

"Under the wharf? A boat? What is this?" He was now 
speaking to the lieutenant. "Do they operate some kind of 
aquatic motorcycles?" 

"Something like that," the lieutenant said. "You've seen 
them the boats. Launches, camouflaged and all. Dashing 
up and down the harbor. You've seen them. They do that 
all day and sleep in the gutters here all night." 

"Oh," the captain said. "I thought those boats were ship 
commanders' launches. You mean to tell me they use officers 
just to " 

"I don't know," the lieutenant said. "Maybe they use them 
to fetch hot water from one ship to another. Or buns. Or 
maybe to go back and forth fast when they forget napkins 
or something." 

"Nonsense," the captain said. He looked at the English 
boy again. 

"That's what they do," the lieutenant said. "Town's lousy 
with them all night long. Gutters full, and their M. P.'s 
carting them away in batches, like nursemaids in a park. 
Maybe the French give them the launches to get them out 
of the gutters during the day." 

"Oh," the captain said, "I see." But it was clear that he 
didn't see, wasn't listening, didn't believe what he did hear. 
He looked at the English boy. "Well, you can't leave him 
here in that shape," he said. 



478 The Wasteland 

Again the English boy tried to pull himself together, 
"Quite all right, 'sure you," he said glassily, his voice pleas- 
ant, cheerful almost, quite courteous. "Used to it. Con- 
founded rough pave, though. Should force French do some- 
thing about it. Visiting lads jolly well deserve decent field 
to play on, what?" 

"And he was jolly well using all of it too," the policeman 
said savagely. "He must think he's a one-man team, maybe." 

At that moment a fifth man came up. He was a British 
military policeman. "Nah then," he said. "What's this? 
What's this?" Then he saw the Americans' shoulder bars. 
He saluted. At the sound of his voice the English boy turned, 
swaying, peering. 

"Oh, hullo, Albert," he said. 

"Nah then, Mr. Hope," the British policeman said. He 
said to the American policeman, over his shoulder: "What 
is it this time?" 

"Likely nothing," the American said. "The way you guys 
run a war. But I'm a stranger here. Here. Take him." 

"What is this, corporal?" the captain said. "What was he 
doing?" 

"He won't call it nothing," the American policeman said, 
jerking his head at the British policeman. "He'll just call it a 
thrush or a robin or something. I turn into this street about 
three blocks back a while ago, and I find it blocked with a 
line of trucks going up from the docks, and the drivers all 
hollering ahead what the hell the trouble is. So I come on> 
and I find it is about three blocks of them, blocking the 
cross streets too; and I come on to the head of it where the 
trouble is, and I find about a dozen of the drivers out in 
front, holding a caucus or something in the middle of the 
street, and I come up and I say, What's going on here?* 
and they leave me through and I find this egg here laying " 



Turnabout 479 

"Yer talking about one of His Majesty's officers, my man," 
the British policeman said. 

"Watch yourself, corporal," the captain said. "And you 
found this officer " 

"He had done gone to bed in the middle of the street, with 
an empty basket for a pillow. Laying there with his hands 
under his head and his knees crossed, arguing with them about 
whether he ought to get up and move or not. He said that the 
trucks could turn back and go around by another street, but 
that he couldn't use any other street, because this street was 
his." 

"His street?" 

The English boy had listened, interested, pleasant. "Billet, 
you see," he said. "Must have order, even in war emergency. 
Billet by lot. This street mine; no poaching, eh? Next street 
Jamie Wutherspoon's. But trucks can go by that street be- 
cause Jamie not using it yet. Not in bed yet. Insomnia. 
Knew so. Told them. Trucks go that way. See now?" 

"Was that it, corporal?" the captain said. 

"He told you. He wouldn't get up. He just laid there, 
arguing with them. He was telling one of them to go some- 
where and bring back a copy of their articles of war " 

"King's Regulations; yes," the captain said. 

" and see if the book said whether he had the right of 
way, or the trucks. And then I got him up, and then the 
captain come along. And that's all. And with the captain's 
permission I'll now hand him over to His Majesty's wet 



nur " 



"That'll do, corporal," the captain said. "You can go. I'll 
see to this." The policeman saluted and went on. The British 
policeman was now supporting the English boy. "Can't you 
take him?" the captain said. "Where are their quarters?" 

"I don't rightly know, sir, if they have quarters or not. 



480 The Wasteland 

We I usually see them about the pubs until daylight. They 
don't seem to use quarters." 

"You mean, they really aren't off of ships?" 

"Well, sir, they might be ships, in a manner of speaking. 
But a man would have to be a bit sleepier than him to sleep 
in one of them." 

"I see," the captain said. He looked at the policeman. 
"What kind of boats are they?" 

This time the policeman's voice was immediate, final and 
completely inflectionless. It was like a closed door. "I don't 
rightly know, sir." 

"Oh," the captain said. "Quite. Well, he's in no shape to 
stay about pubs until daylight this time." 

"Perhaps I can find him a bit of a pub with a back table, 
where he can sleep," the policeman said. But the captain was 
not listening. He was looking across the street, where the 
lights of another cafe fell across the pavement. The English 
boy yawned terrifically, like a child does, his mouth pink 
and frankly gaped as a child's. 

The captain turned to the policeman: 

"Would you mind stepping across there and asking for 
Captain Bogard's driver? I'll take care of Mr. Hope." 

The policeman departed. The captain now supported the 
English boy, his hand beneath the other's arm. Again the 
boy yawned like a weary child. "Steady," the captain said. 
"The car will be here in a minute." 

"Right," the English boy said through the yawn. 

II 

ONCE IN THE CAR, he went to sleep immediately with the 
peaceful suddenness of babies, sitting between the two Amer- 
icans. But though the aerodrome was only thirty minutes 
away, he was awake when they arrived, apparently qu'te 



Turnabout 48 1 

fresh, and asking for whisky. When they entered the mess 
he appeared quite sober, only blinking a little in the lighted 
room, in his raked cap and his awry-buttoned pea-jacket and 
a soiled silk muffler, embroidered with a club insignia which 
Bogard recognized to have come from a famous preparatory 
school, twisted about his throat. 

"Ah," he said, his voice fresh, clear now, not blurred, 
quite cheerful, quite loud, so that the others in the room 
turned and looked at him. "Jolly. Whisky, what?" He went 
straight as a bird dog to the bar in the corner, the lieutenant 
following. Bogard had turned and gone on to the other end 
of the room, where five men sat about a card table. 

"What's he admiral of?" one said. 

"Of the whole Scotch navy, when I found him," Bogard 
said. 

Another looked up. "Oh, I thought I'd seen him in town." 
He looked at the guest. "Maybe it's because he was on his 
feet that I didn't recognize him when he came in. You 
usually see them lying down in the gutter." 

"Oh," the first said. He, too, looked around. "Is he one of 
those guys?" 

"Sure. You've seen them. Sitting on the curb, you know, 
with a couple of limey M. P.'s hauling at their arms." 

"Yes. I've seen them," the other said. They all looked at 
the English boy. He stood at the bar, talking, his voice loud, 
cheerful. "They all look like him too," the speaker said. 
"About seventeen or eighteen. They run those little boats 
that are always dashing in and out." 

"Is that what they do?" a third said. "You mean, there's 
a male marine auxiliary to the Waacs? Good Lord, I sure 
made a mistake when I enlisted. But this war never was 
advertised right." 

"I don't know," Bogard said. "I guess they do more than 
just ride around." 



482 The Wasteland 

But they were not listening to him. They were looking 
at the guest. "They run by clock," the first said. "You can 
see the condition of one of them after sunset and almost tell 
what time it is. But what I don't see is, how a man that's 
in that shape at one o'clock every morning can even see a 
battleship the next day." 

"Maybe when they have a message to send out to a ship," 
another said, "they just make duplicates and line the launches 
up and point them toward the ship and give each one a dupli- 
cate of the message and let them go. And the ones that miss 
the ship just cruise around the harbor until they hit a dock 
somewhere." 

"It must be more than that," Bogard said. 

He was about to say something else, but at that moment 
the guest turned from the bar and approached, carrying a 
glass. He walked steadily enough, but his color was high 
and his eyes were bright, and he was talking, loud, cheerful, 
as he came up. 

"I say. Won't you chaps join " He ceased. He seemed to 
remark something; he was looking at their breasts. "Oh, I say. 
You fly. All of you. Oh, good gad! Find it jolly, eh?" 

"Yes," somebody said. "Jolly." 

"But dangerous, what?" 

"A little faster than tennis," another said. The guest 
looked at him, bright, affable, intent. 

Another said quickly, "Bogard says you command a ves- 
sel." 

"Hardly a vessel. Thanks, though. And not command. 
Ronnie does that. Ranks me a bit. Age." 

"Ronnie?" 

"Yes. Nice. Good egg. Old, though. Stickler." 

"Stickler?" 

"Frightful. You'd not believe it. Whenever we sight 
smoke and I have the glass, he sheers away. Keeps the ship 



Turnabout 483 

hull down all the while. No beaver then. Had me two down 
a fortnight yesterday." 

The Americans glanced at one another. "No beaver?" 

"We play it. With basket masts, you see. See a basket 
mast. Beaver! One up. The Ergenstrasse doesn't count any 
more, though." 

The men about the table looked at one another. Bogard 
spoke. "I see. When you or Ronnie see a ship with basket 
masts, you get a beaver on the other. I see. What is the 
Ergenstrasse?" 

"She's German. Interned. Tramp steamer. Foremast rigged 
so it looks something like a basket mast. Booms, cables, I 
dare say. I didn't think it looked very much like a basket 
mast, myself. But Ronnie said yes. Called it one day. Then 
one day they shifted her across the basin and I called her on 
Ronnie. So we decided to not count her any more. See 
now, eh?" 

"Oh," the one who had made the tennis remark said, "I 
see. You and Ronnie run about in the launch, playing beaver. 
H'm'm. That's nice. Did you ever pi " 

"Jerry," Bogard said. The guest had not moved. He looked 
down at the speaker, still smiling, his eyes quite wide. 

The speaker still looked at the guest. "Has yours and 
Ronnie's boat got a yellow stern?" 

"A yellow stern?" the English boy said. He had quit smil- 
ing, but his face was still pleasant. 

"I thought that maybe when the boats had two captains, 
they might paint the sterns yellow or something." 

"Oh," the guest said. "Burt and Reeves aren't officers." 

"Burt and Reeves," the other said, in a musing tone. "So 
they go, too. Do they play beaver too?" 

"Jerry," Bogard said. The other looked at him. Bogard 
jerked his head a little. "Come over here." The other rose. 
They went aside. "Lay off of him," Bogard said. "I mean it, 



484 The Wasteland 

now. He's just a kid. When you were that age, how much 
sense did you have? Just about enough to get to chapel on 
time." 

"My country hadn't been at war going on four years, 
though," Jerry said. "Here we are, spending our money and 
getting shot at by the clock, and it's not even our fight, and 
these limeys that would have been goose-stepping twelve 
months now if it hadn't been " 

"Shut it," Bogard said. "You sound like a Liberty Loan." 

" taking it like it was a fair or something. 'Jolly.' " His 
voice was now falsetto, lilting. " 'But dangerous, what?' " 

"Sh-h-h-h," Bogard said. 

"I'd like to catch him and his Ronnie out in the harbor, 
just once. Any harbor. London's. I wouldn't want anything 
but a Jenny, either. Jenny? Hell, I'd take a bicycle and a 
pair of water wings! I'll show him some war." 

"Well, you lay off him now. He'll be gone soon." 

"What are you going to do with him?" 

"I'm going to take him along this morning. Let him have 
Harper's place out front. He says he can handle a Lewis. 
Says they have one on the boat. Something he was telling 
me about how he once shot out a channel-marker light at 
seven hundred yards." 

"Well, that's your business. Maybe he can beat you." 

"Beat me?" 

"Playing beaver. And then you can take on Ronnie." 

"I'll show him some war, anyway," Bogard said. He looked 
at the guest. "His people have been in it three years now, 
and he seems to take it like a sophomore in town for the big 
game." He looked at Jerry again. "But you lay off him now." 

As they approached the table, the guest's voice was loud 
and cheerful: ". . . if he got the glasses first, he would go in 
close and look, but when I got them first, he'd sheer off 
where I couldn't see anything but the smoke. Frightful 



Turnabout 485 

stickler. Frightful. But Ergenstrasse not counting any more. 
And if you make a mistake and call her, you lose two beaver 
from your score. If Ronnie were only to forget and call her 
we'd be even." 



Ill 

AT TWO O'CLOCK the English boy was still talking, his voice 
bright, innocent and cheerful. He was telling them how 
Switzerland had been spoiled by 1914, and instead of the 
vacation which his father had promised him for his sixteenth 
birthday, when that birthday came he and his tutor had 
had to do with Wales. But that he and the tutor had got 
pretty high and that he dared to say with all due respect 
to any present who might have had the advantage of Switzer- 
land, of course that one could see probably as far from 
Wales as from Switzerland. "Perspire as much and breathe 
as hard, anyway," he added. And about him the Americans 
sat, a little hard-bitten, a little sober, somewhat older, listen- 
ing to him with a kind of cold astonishment. They had been 
getting up for some time now and going out and returning 
in flying clothes, carrying helmets and goggles. An orderly 
entered with a tray of coffee cups, and the guest realized 
that for some time now he had been hearing engines in the 
darkness outside. 

At last Bogard rose. "Come along," he said. "We'll get 
your togs." When they emerged from the mess, the sound 
of the engines was quite loud an idling thunder. In align- 
ment along the invisible tarmac was a vague rank of short 
banks of flickering blue-green fire suspended apparently in 
mid-air. They crossed the aerodrome to Bogard's quarters, 
where the lieutenant, McGinnis, sat on a cot fastening his 
flying boots. Bogard reached down a Sidcott suit and threw 
it across the cot. "Put this on," he said. 



486 The Wasteland 

"Will I need all this?" the guest said. ''Shall we be gone 
that long?" 

"Probably," Bogard said. "Better use it. Cold upstairs." 

The guest picked up the suit. "I say," he said. "I say, 
Ronnie and I have a do ourselves, tomor today. Do you 
think Ronnie won't mind if I am a bit late? Might not wait 
for me." 

"We'll be back before teatime," McGinnis said. He seemed 
quite busy with his boot. "Promise you." The English boy 
looked at him. 

"What time should you be back?" Bogard said. 

"Oh, well," the English boy said, "I dare say it will be all 
right. They let Ronnie say when to go, anyway. He'll wait 
for me if I should be a bit late." 

"He'll wait," Bogard said. "Get your suit on." 

"Right," the other said. They helped him into the suit. 
"Never been up before," he said, chattily, pleasantly. "Dare 
say you can see farther than from mountains, eh?" 

"See more, anyway," McGinnis said. "You'll like it." 

"Oh, rather. If Ronnie only waits for me. Lark. But dan- 
gerous, isn't it?" 

"Go on," McGinnis said. "You're kidding me." 

"Shut your trap, Mac," Bogard said. "Come along. Want 
some more coffee?" He looked at the guest, but McGinnis 
answered: 

"No. Got something better than coffee. Coffee makes such 
a confounded stain on the wings." 

"On the wings?" the English boy said. "Why coffee on 
the wings." 

"Stow it, I said, Mac," Bogard said. "Come along." 

They recrossed the aerodrome, approaching the mutter- 
ing banks of flame. When they drew near, the guest began 
to discern the shape, the outlines, of the Handley-Page. It 
looked like a Pullman coach run upslanted aground into the 



Turnabout 487 

skeleton of the first floor of an incomplete skyscraper. The 
guest looked at it quietly. 

"It's larger than a cruiser," he said in his bright, interested 
voice. "I say, you know. This doesn't fly in one lump. You 
can't pull my leg. Seen them before. It comes in two parts: 
Captain Bogard and me in one; Mac and 'nother chap in 
other. What?" 

"No," McGinnis said. Bogard had vanished. "It all goes 
up in one lump. Big lark, eh? Buzzard, what?" 

"Buzzard?" the guest murmured. "Oh, I say. A cruiser. 
Flying. I say, now." 

"And listen," McGinnis said. His hand came forth; some- 
thing cold fumbled against the hand of the English boy 
a bottle. "When you feel yourself getting sick, see? Take 
a pull at it." 

"Oh, shall I get sick?" 

"Sure. We all do. Part of flying. This will stop it. But if 
it doesn't. See?" 

"What? Quite. What?" 

"Not overside. Don't spew it overside." 

"Not overside?" 

"It'll blow back in Bogy's and my face. Can't see. Bingo. 
Finished. See?" 

"Oh, quite. What shall I do with it?" Their voices were 
quiet, brief, grave as conspirators. 

"Just duck your head and let her go." 

"Oh, quite." 

Bogard returned. "Show him how to get into the front 
pit, will you?" he said. McGinnis led the way through the 
trap. Forward, rising to the slant of the fuselage, the passage 
narrowed; a man would need to crawl. 

"Crawl in there and keep going," McGinnis said. 

"It looks like a dog kennel," the guest said. 

"Doesn't it, though?" McGinnis agreed cheerfully. a Cut 



4 88 The Wasteland 

along with you." Stooping, he could hear the other scuttling 
forward. "You'll find a Lewis gun up there, like as not," he 
said into the tunnel. 

The voice of the guest came back: "Found it." 

"The gunnery sergeant will be along in a minute and show 
you if it is loaded." 

"It's loaded," the guest said; almost on the heels of his 
words the gun fired, a brief staccato burst. There were 
shouts, the loudest from the ground beneath the nose of the 
aeroplane. "It's quite all right," the English boy's voice said. 
"I pointed it west before I let it off. Nothing back there but 
Marine office and your brigade headquarters. Ronnie and 
I always do this before we go anywhere. Sorry if I was too 
soon. Oh, by the way," he added, "my name's Claude. Don't 
think I mentioned it." 

On the ground, Bogard and two other officers stood. They 
had come up running. "Fired it west," one said. "How in 
hell does he know which way is west? " 

"He's a sailor," the other said. "You forgot that." 

"He seems to be a machine gunner too," Bogard said. 

"Let's hope he doesn't forget that," the first said. 



IV 

NEVERTHELESS, Bogard kept an eye on the silhouetted head 
rising from the round gunpit in the nose ten feet ahead of 
him. "He did work that gun, though," he said to McGinnis 
beside him. "He even put the drum on himself, didn't he?" 

"Yes," McGinnis said. "If he just doesn't forget and think 
that that gun is him and his tutor looking around from a 
Welsh alp." 

"Maybe I should not have brought him," Bogard said. 
McGinnis didn't answer. Bogard jockeyed the wheel a little. 
Ahead, in the gunner's pit, the guest's head moved this way 



Turnabout 489 

and that continuously, looking. "We'll get there and unload 
and haul air for home," Bogard said. "Maybe in the dark 
Confound it, it would be a shame for his country to be in 
this mess for four years and him not even to see a gun pointed 
in his direction." 

"He'll see one tonight if he don't keep his head in," 
McGinnis said. 

But the boy did not do that. Not even when they had 
reached the objective and McGinnis had crawled down to 
the bomb toggles. And even when the searchlights found 
them and Bogard signaled to the other machines and dived, 
the two engines snarling full speed into and through the 
bursting shells, he could see the boy's face in the searchlight's 
glare, leaned far overside, coming sharply out as a spotlighted 
face on a stage, with an expression upon it of child-like in- 
terest and delight. "But he's firing that Lewis," Bogard 
thought. "Straight too"; nosing the machine farther down, 
watching the pinpoint swing into the sights, his right hand 
lifted, waiting to drop into McGinnis' sight. He dropped 
his hand; above the noise of the engines he seemed to hear 
the click and whistle of the released bombs as the machine, 
freed of the weight, shot zooming in a long upward bounce 
that carried it for an instant out of the light. Then he was 
pretty busy for a time, coming into and through the shells 
again, shooting athwart another beam that caught and held 
long enough for him to see the English boy leaning far over 
the side, looking back and down past the right wing, the 
undercarriage. "Maybe he's read about it somewhere," Bo- 
gard thought, turning, looking back to pick up the rest of 
the flight. 

Then it was all over, the darkness cool and empty and 
peaceful and almost quiet, with only the steady sound of the 
engines. McGinnis climbed back into the office, and standing 
UD in his seat, he fired the colored pistol this time and stood 



490 The Wasteland 

for a moment longer, looking backward toward where the 
searchlights still probed and sabered. He sat down again. 

"O.K.," he said. "I counted all four of them. Let's haul 
air." Then he looked forward. "What's become of the 
King's Own? You didn't hang him onto a bomb release, did 
you?" Bogard looked. The forward pit was empty. It was 
in dim silhouette again now, against the stars, but there was 
nothing there now save the gun. "No," McGinnis said: 
"there he is. See? Leaning overside. Dammit, I told him not 
to spew it! There he comes back." The guest's head came 
into view again. But again it sank out of sight. 

"He's coming back," Bogard said. "Stop him. Tell him 
we're going to have every squadron in the Hun Channel 
group on top of us in thirty minutes." 

McGinnis swung himself down and stooped at the en- 
trance to the passage. "Get back!" he shouted. The other 
was almost out; they squatted so, face to face like two dogs, 
shouting at one another above the noise of the still-unthrot- 
tied engines on either side of the fabric walls. The English 
boy's voice was thin and high. 

"Bomb! "he shrieked. 

"Yes," McGinnis shouted, "they were bombs! We gave 
them hell! Get back, I tell you! Have every Hun in France 
on us in ten minutes! Get back to your gun!" 

Again the boy's voice came, high, faint above the noise: 
"Bomb! All right?" 

"Yes! Yes! All right. Back to your gun, damn you!" 

McGinnis climbed back into the office. "He went back. 
Want me to take her awhile?" 

"All right," Bogard said. He passed McGinnis the wheel. 
"Ease her back some. I'd just as soon it was daylight when 
they come down on us." 

"Right," McGinnis said. He moved the wheel suddenly. 
"What's the matter with that right wing?" he said. "Watch 



Turnabout 491 

it See? I'm flying on the right aileron and a little rudder. 

Feel it." 

Bogard took the wheel a moment. "I didn't notice that. 
Wire somewhere, I guess. I didn't think any of those shells 
were that close. Watch her, though." 

"Right," McGinnis said. "And so you are going with him 
on his boat tomorrow today." 

"Yes. I promised him. Confound it, you can't hurt a kid > 
you know." 

"Why don't you take Collier along, with his mandolin? 
Then you could sail around and sing." 

"I promised him," Bogard said. "Get that wing up a little." 

"Right," McGinnis said. 

Thirty minutes later it was beginning to be dawn; the sky 
was gray. Presently McGinnis said: "Well, here they come* 
Look at them! They look like mosquitoes in September. I 
hope he don't get worked up now and think he's playing 
beaver. If he does he'll just be one down to Ronnie, provided 
the devil has a beard. . . . Want the wheel?" 



V 

AT EIGHT O'CLOCK the beach, the Channel, was beneath them* 
Throttled back, the machine drifted down as Bogard rud- 
dered it gently into the Channel wind. His face was strained^ 
a little tired. 

McGinnis looked tired, too, and he needed a shave. 

"What do you guess he is looking at now?" he said. For 
again the English boy was leaning over the right side of the 
cockpit, looking backward and downward past the right 
wing. 

"I don't know," Bogard said. "Maybe bullet holes." He 
blasted the port engine. "Must have the riggers " 

"He could see some closer than that," McGinnis said. "I'D 



492 The Wasteland 

swear I saw tracer going into his back at one time. Or maybe 
it's the ocean he's looking at. But he must have seen that 
when he came over from England." Then Bogard leveled 
off; the nose rose sharply, the sand, the curling tide edge 
fled alongside. Yet still the English boy hung far overside, 
looking backward and downward at something beneath the 
right wing, his face rapt, with utter and childlike interest. 
Until the machine was completely stopped he contittued to 
do so. Then he ducked down, and in the abrupt silence of 
the engines they could hear him crawling in the passage. He 
emerged just as the two pilots climbed stiffly down from the 
office, his face bright, eager; his voice high, excited. 

"Oh, I say! Oh, good gad! What a chap. What a judge 
of distance! If Ronnie could only have seen! Oh, good gad! 
Or maybe they aren't like ours don't load themselves as 
soon as the air strikes them." 

The Americans looked at him. "What don't what?" 
McGinnis said. "The bomb. It was magnificent; I say, I 
shan't forget it. Oh, I say, you know! It was splendid!" 

After a while McGinnis said, "The bomb?" in a fainting 
voice. Then the two pilots glared at each other; they said 
in unison: "That right wing!" Then as one they clawed 
down through the trap and, with the guest at their heels, 
they ran around the machine and looked beneath the right 
wing. The bomb, suspended by its tail, hung straight down 
like a plumb bob beside the right wheel, its tip just touching 
the sand. And parallel with the wheel track was the long 
delicate line in the sand where its ultimate tip had dragged. 
Behind them the English boy's voice was high, clear, child- 
like: 

"Frightened, myself. Tried to tell you. But realized you 
knew your business better than I. Skill. Marvelous. Oh, I 
.say, I shan't forget it." 



Turnabout 493 

VI 

A MARINE with a bayoneted rifle passed Bogard onto the 
wharf and directed him to the boat. The wharf was empty, 
and he didn't even see the boat until he approached the edge 
of the wharf and looked directly down into it and upon 
the backs of two stooping men in greasy dungarees, who 
rose and glanced briefly at him and stooped again. 

It was about thirty feet long and about three feet wide. 
It was painted with gray-green camouflage. It was quarter- 
decked forward, with two blunt, raked exhaust stacks. "Good 
Lord," Bogard thought, "if all that deck is engine " Just 
aft the deck was the control seat; he saw a big wheel, an 
instrument panel. Rising to a height of about a foot above 
the free-board, and running from the stern forward to where 
the deck began, and continuing on across the after edge of 
the deck and thence back down the other gunwale to the 
stern, was a solid screen, also camouflaged, which inclosed 
the boat save for the width of the stern, which was open. 
Facing the steersman's seat like an eye was a hole in the 
screen about eight inches in diameter. And looking down 
into the long, narrow, still, vicious shape, he saw a machine 
gun swiveled at the stern, and he looked at the low screen 
including which the whole vessel did not sit much more 
than a yard above water level with its single empty for- 
ward-staring eye, and he thought quietly: "It's steel. It's 
made of steel." And his face was quite sober, quite thought- 
ful, and he drew his trench coat about him and buttoned it, 
as though he were getting cold. 

He heard steps behind him and turned. But it was only an 
orderly from the aerodrome, accompanied by the marine 
with the rifle. The orderly was carrying a largish bundle 
trapped in paper. 



494 The Wasteland 

"From Lieutenant McGinnis to the captain," the orderly 
said. 

Bogard took the bundle. The orderly and the marine 
retreated. He opened the bundle. It contained some objects 
and a scrawled note. The objects were a new yellow silk sofa 
cushion and a Japanese parasol, obviously borrowed, and 
a comb and a roll of toilet paper. The note said: 

Couldn't find a camera anywhere and Collier wouldn't 
let me have his mandolin. But maybe Ronnie can play on 
the comb. 

MAC. 

Bogard looked at the objects. But his face was still quite 
thoughtful, quite grave. He rewrapped the things and car- 
ried the bundle on up the wharf and dropped it quietly into 
the water. 

As he returned toward the invisible boat he saw two men 
approaching. He recognized the boy at once tall, slender, 
already talking, voluble, his head bent a little toward his 
shorter companion, who plodded along beside him, hands 
in pockets, smoking a pipe. The boy still wore the pea-coat 
beneath a flapping oilskin, but in place of the rakish and 
casual cap he now wore an infantryman's soiled Balaclava 
helmet, with, floating behind him as though upon the sound 
of his voice, a curtainlike piece of cloth almost as long as 
a burnous. 

"Hullo, there!" he cried, still a hundred yards away. 

But it was the second man that Bogard was watching, 
thinking to himself that he had never in his life seen a more 
curious figure. There was something stolid about the very 
shape of his hunched shoulders, his slightly down-looking 
face. He was a head shorter than the other. His face was 
ruddy, too, but its mold was of a profound gravity that was 
almost dour. It was the face of a man of twenty who has been 



Turnabout 495 

for a year trying, even while asleep, to look twenty-one. He 
wore a high-necked sweater and dungaree slacks; above this 
a leather jacket; and above this a soiled naval officer's warmer 
that reached almost to his heels and which had one shoulder 
strap missing and not one remaining button at all. On his 
head was a plaid fore-and-aft deer stalker's cap, tied on by 
a narrow scarf brought across and down, hiding his ears, and 
then wrapped once about his throat and knotted with a hang- 
man's noose beneath his left ear. It was unbelievably soiled, 
and with his hands elbow-deep in his pockets and his 
hunched shoulders and his bent head, he looked like some- 
one's grandmother hung, say, for a witch. Clamped upside 
down between his teeth was a short brier pipe. 

"Here he is!" the boy cried. "This is Ronnie. Captain 
Bogard." 

"How are you?" Bogard said. He extended his hand. The 
other said no word, but his hand came forth, limp. It was 
quite cold, but it was hard, calloused. But he said no word; 
he just glanced briefly at Bogard and then away. But in that 
instant Bogard caught something in the look, something 
strange a flicker; a kind of covert and curious respect, 
something like a boy of fifteen looking at a circus trapezist. 

But he said no word. He ducked on; Bogard watched him 
drop from sight over the wharf edge as though he had 
jumped feet first into the sea. He remarked now that the 
engines in the invisible boat were running. 

"We might get aboard too," the boy said. He started 
toward the boat, then he stopped. He touched Bogard's arm. 
"Yonder!" he hissed. "See?" His voice was thin with excite- 
ment. 

"What?" Bogard also whispered; automatically he looked 
backward and upward, after old habit. The other was grip- 
ping his arm and pointing across the harbor. 

"There! Over there. The Ergenstrasse. They have shifted 



496 The Wasteland 

her again." Across the harbor lay an ancient, rusting, sway- 
backed hulk. It was small and nondescript, and, remember- 
ing, BogarJ saw that the foremast was a strange mess of 
cables and booms, resembling allowing for a great deal of 
license or looseness of imagery a basket mast. Beside him 
the boy was almost chortling. "Do you think that Ronnie 
noticed?" he hissed. "Do you?" 

"I don't know," Bogard said. 

"Oh, good gad! If he should glance up and call her before 
he notices, we'll be even. Oh, good gad! But come along." 
He went on; he was still chortling. "Careful," he said. 
"Frightful ladder." 

He descended first, the two men in the boat rising and 
saluting. Ronnie had disappeared, save for his backside, which 
now filled a small hatch leading forward beneath the deck. 
Bogard descended gingerly. 

"Good Lord," he said. "Do you have to climb up and 
down this every day?" 

"Frightful, isn't it?" the other said, in his happy voice. 
"But you know yourself. Try to run a war with makeshifts, 
then wonder why it takes so long." The narrow hull slid and 
surged, even with Bogard's added weight. "Sits right on top, 
you see," the boy said. "Would float on a lawn, in a heavy 
dew. Goes right over them like a bit of paper." 

"It does?" Bogard said. 

"Oh, absolutely. That's why, you see." Bogard didn't see, 
but he was too busy letting himself gingerly down to a sitting 
posture. There were no thwarts; no seats save a long, thick, 
cylindrical ridge which ran along the bottom of the boat 
from the driver's seat to the stern. Ronnie had backed into 
sight. He now sat behind the wheel, bent over the instrument 
panel. But when he glanced back over his shoulder he did 
not speak. His face was merely interrogatory. Across his face 
there was now a long smudge of grease. The boy's face was 
empty, too, now. 



Turnabout 497 

"Right," he said. He looked forward, where one of the 
seamen had gone. "Ready forward?" he said. 

"Aye, sir," the seaman said. 

The other seaman was at the stern line. "Ready aft?" 

"Aye, sir." 

"Cast off." The boat sheered away, purring, a boiling of 
water under the stern. The boy looked down at Bogard. 
"Silly business. Do it shipshape, though. Can't tell when silly 
fourstriper " His face changed again, immediate, solicitous. 
"I say. Will you be warm? I never thought to fetch " 

"I'll be all right," Bogard said. But the other was already 
taking off his oilskin. "No, no," Bogard said. "I won't take 
it." 

"You'll tell me if you get cold?" 

"Yes. Sure." He was looking down at the cylinder on 
which he sat. It was a half cylinder that is, like the hot- 
water tank to some Gargantuan stove, sliced down the middle 
and bolted, open side down, to the floor plates. It was twenty 
feet long and more than two feet thick. Its top rose as high 
as the gunwales and between it and the hull on either side was 
just room enough for a man to place his feet to walk. 

"That's Muriel," the boy said. 

"Muriel?" 

"Yes. The one before that was Agatha. After my aunt. 
The first one Ronnie and I had was Alice in Wonderland. 
Ronnie and I were the White Rabbit. Jolly, eh?" 

"Oh, you and Ronnie have had three, have you?" 

"Oh, yes," the boy said. He leaned down. "He didn't 
notice," he whispered. His face was again bright, gleeful. 
"When we come back," he said. "You watch." 

"Oh," Bogard said. "The Ergenstrasse." He looked astern, 
and then he thought: "Good Lord! We must be going 
traveling." He looked out now, broadside, and saw the har- 
bor line fleeing past, and he thought to himself that the boat 
was well-nigh moving at the speed at which the Handley- 



498 The Wasteland 

Page flew, left the ground. They were beginning to bound 
now, even in the sheltered water, from one wave crest to the 
next with a distinct shock. His hand still rested on the cylin- 
der on which he sat. He looked down at it again, following it 
from where it seemed to emerge beneath Ronnie's seat, to 
where it beveled into the stern. "It's the air in her, I suppose," 
he said. 

"The what?" the boy said. 

"The air. Stored up in her. That makes the boat ride 

high." 

"Oh, yes. I dare say. Very likely. I hadn't thought about 
it." He came forward, his burnous whipping in the wind, 
and sat down beside Bogard. Their heads were below the top 
of the screen. 

Astern the harbor fled, diminishing, sinking into the sea. 
The boat had begun to lift now, swooping forward and 
down, shocking almost stationary for a moment, then lift- 
ing and swooping again; a gout of spray came aboard over 
the bows like a flung shovelful of shot. "I wish you'd take 
this coat," the boy said. 

Bogard didn't answer. He looked around at the bright 
face. "We're outside, aren't we?" he said quietly. 

"Yes. . . . Do take it, won't you?" 

"Thanks, no. I'll be all right. We won't be long, anyway, 
I guess." 

"No. We'll turn soon. It won't be so bad then." 

"Yes. I'll be all right when we turn." Then they did turn. 
The motion became easier. That is, the boat didn't bang 
head-on, shuddering, into the swells. They came up beneath 
now, and the boat fled with increased speed, with a long, 
sickening, yawing motion, first to one side and then the 
other. But it fled on, and Bogard looked astern with that 
same soberness with which he had first looked down into 
the boat. "We're going east now," he said. 



Turnabout 499 

"With just a spot of north," the boy said. "Makes her ride 
a bit better, what?" 

"Yes," Bogard said. Astern there was nothing now save 
empty sea and the delicate needlelike cant of the machine 
gun against the boiling and slewing wake, and the two sea- 
men crouching quietly in the stern. "Yes. It's easier." Then 
he said: "How far do we go?" 

The boy leaned closer. He moved closer. His voice was 
happy, confidential, proud, though lowered a little: "It's 
Ronnie's show. He thought of it. Not that I wouldn't have, 
in time. Gratitude and all that. But he's the older, you see. 
Thinks fast. Courtesy, noblesse oblige all that. Thought of 
it soon as I told him this morning. I said, 'Oh, I say. I've 
been there. I've seen it'; and he said, 'Not flying'; and I said, 
'Strewth'; and he said 'How far? No lying now'; and I said, 
'Oh, far. Tremendous. Gone all night'; and he said, 'Flying 
all night. That must have been to Berlin'; and I said, 'I don't 
know. I dare say'; and he thought. I could see him thinking. 
Because he is the older, you see. More experience in courtesy, 
right thing. And he said, 'Berlin. No fun to that chap, dash- 
ing out and back with us.' And he thought and I waited, 
and I said, 'But we can't take him to Berlin. Too far. Don't 
know the way, either'; and he said fast, like a shot said, 
'But there's Kiel'; and I knew" 

"What?" Bogard said. Without moving, his whole body 
sprang. "Kiel? In this?" 

"Absolutely. Ronnie thought of it. Smart, even if he is a 
stickler. Said at once, 'Zeebrugge no show at all for that 
chap. Must do best we can for him. Berlin,' Ronnie said. 
'My Gad! Berlin.' " 

"Listen," Bogard said. He had turned now, facing the 
other, his face quite grave. "What is this boat for?" 

"For?" 

"What does it do?" Then, knowing beforehand the 



500 The Wasteland 

answer to his own question, he said, putting his hand on the 
cylinder: "What is this in here? A torpedo, isn't it?" 

"I thought you knew," the boy said. 

"No," Bogard said. "I didn't know." His voice seemed to 
reach him from a distance, dry, cricketlike: "How do you 
fire it?" 

"Fire it?" 

"How do you get it out of the boat? When that hatch 
was open a while ago I could see the engines. They were 
right in front of the end of this tube." 

"Oh," the boy said. "You pull a gadget there and the tor- 
pedo drops out astern. As soon as the screw touches the 
water it begins to turn, and then the torpedo is ready, loaded. 
Then all you have to do is turn the boat quickly and the 
torpedo goes on." 

"You mean " Bogard said. After a moment his voice 
obeyed him again. "You mean you aim the torpedo with 
the boat and release it and it starts moving, and you turn 
the boat out of the way and the torpedo passes through the 
same water that the boat just vacated?" 

"Knew you'd catch on," the boy said. "Told Ronnie so. 
Airman. Tamer than yours, though. But can't be helped. 
Best we can do, just on water. But knew you'd catch on." 

"Listen,' Bogard said. His voice sounded to him quite 
calm. The boat fled on, yawing over the swells. He sat quite 
motionless. It seemed to him that he could hear himself talk- 
ing to himself: "Go on. Ask him. Ask him what? Ask him 
how close to the ship do you have to be before you fire. . . . 
Listen," he said, in that calm voice. "Now, you tell Ronnie, 
you see. You just tell him just say " He could feel his 
voice ratting off on him again, so he stopped it. He sat quite 
motionless, waiting for it to come back; the boy leaning 
now, looking at his face. Again the boy's voice was solici- 
tous: 



Turnabout 501 

"I say. You're not feeling well. These confounded shallow 
boats." 

"It's not that," Bogard said. "I just Do your orders say 
Kiel?" 

"Oh, no. They let Ronnie say. Just so we bring the boat 
back. This is for you. Gratitude. Ronnie's idea. Tame, after 
flying. But if you'd rather, eh?" 

"Yes, some place closer. You see, I " 

"Quite. I see. No vacations in wartime. I'll tell Ronnie." 
He went forward. Bogard did not move. The boat fled in 
long, slewing swoops. Bogard looked quietly astern, at the 
scudding sea, the sky. 

"My God!" he thought. "Can you beat it? Can you beat 
it?" 

The boy came back; Bogard turned to him a face the color 
of dirty paper. "All right now," the boy said. "Not Kiel. 
Nearer place, hunting probably just as good. Ronnie says 
he knows you will understand." He was tugging at his 
pocket. He brought out a bottle. "Here. Haven't forgot last 
night. Do the same for you. Good for the stomach, eh?" 

Bogard drank, gulping a big one. He extended the bot- 
tle, but the boy refused. "Never touch it on duty," he said. 
"Not like you chaps. Tame here." 

The boat fled on. The sun was already down the west. 
But Bogard had lost all count of time, of distance. Ahead 
he could see white seas through the round eye opposite 
Ronnie's face, and Ronnie's hand on the wheel and the 
granitelike jut of his profiled jaw and the dead upside-down 
pipe. The boat fled on. 

Then the boy leaned and touched his shoulder. He half 
rose. The boy was pointing. The sun was reddish; against it, 
outside them and about two miles away, a vessel a trawler, 
it looked like at anchor swung a tall mast. 

"Lightship!" the boy shouted. "Theirs." Ahead Bogard 



502 The Wasteland 

could see a low, flat mole the entrance to a harbor. "Chan- 
nel! " the boy shouted. He swept his arm in both directions. 
"Mines!" His voice swept back on the wind. "Place filthy 
with them. All sides. Beneath us too. Lark, eh?" 



VII 

AGAINST THE MOLE a fair surf was beating. Running before 
the seas now, the boat seemed to leap from one roller to the 
next; in the intervals while the screw was in the air the 
engine seemed to be trying to tear itself out by the roots. 
But it did not slow; when it passed the end of the mole the 
boat seemed to be standing almost erect on its rudder, like 
a sailfish. The mole was a mile away. From the end of it little 
faint lights began to flicker like fireflies. The boy leaned. 
"Down," he said. "Machine guns. Might stop a stray." 
"What do I do?" Bogard shouted. "What can I do?" 
"Stout fellow! Give them hell, what? Knew you'd like it!" 
Crouching, Bogard looked up at the boy, his face wild. 
"I can handle the machine gun!" 

"No need," the boy shouted back. "Give them first 
innings. Sporting. Visitors, eh?" He was looking forward. 
"There she is. See?" They were in the harbor now, the 
basin opening before them. Anchored in the channel was a 
big freighter. Painted midships of the hull was a huge Argen- 
tine flag. "Must get back to stations!" the boy shouted down 
to him. Then at that moment Ronnie spoke for the first time. 
The boat was hurtling along now in smoother water. Its 
speed did not slacken and Ronnie did not turn his head when 
he spoke. He just swung his jutting jaw and the clamped 
cold pipe a little, and said from the side of his mouth a single 
word: 
"Beaver." 
The boy, stooped over what he had called his gadget, 



Turnabout 503 

jerked up, his expression astonished and outraged. Bogard 
also looked forward and saw Ronnie's arm pointing to star- 
board. It was a light cruiser at anchor a mile away. She had 
basket masts, and as he looked a gun flashed from her after 
turret. "Oh, damn!" the boy cried. "Oh, you putt! Oh, con- 
found you, Ronnie! Now I'm three down!" But he had al- 
ready stooped again over his gadget, his face bright and 
empty and alert again; not sober; just calm, waiting. Again 
Bogard looked forward and felt the boat pivot on its rudder 
and head directly for the freighter at terrific speed, Ronnie 
now with one hand on the wheel and the other lifted and 
extended at the height of his head. 

But it seemed to Bogard that the hand would never drop. 
He crouched, not sitting, watching with a kind of quiet 
horror the painted flag increase like a moving picture of a 
locomotive taken from between the rails. Again the gun 
crashed from the cruiser behind them, and the freighter 
fired point-blank at them from its poop. Bogard heard 
neither shot. 

"Man, man!" he shouted. "For God's sake!" 
Ronnie's hand dropped. Again the boat spun on its rudder. 
Bogard saw the bow rise, pivoting; he expected the hull to 
slam broadside on into the ship. But it didn't. It shot off on 
a long tangent. He was waiting for it to make a wide sweep, 
heading seaward, putting the freighter astern, and he thought 
of the cruiser again. "Get a broadside, this time, once we 
clear the freighter," he thought. Then he remembered the 
freighter, the torpedo, and he looked back toward the 
freighter to watch the torpedo strike, and saw to his horror 
that the boat was now bearing down on the freighter again, 
in a skidding turn. Like a man in a dream, he watched him- 
self rush down upon the ship and shoot past under her 
counter, still skidding, close enough to see the faces on her 
decks. "They missed and they are going to run down the 



504 The Wasteland 

torpedo and catch it and shoot it again," he thought idioti- 
cally. 

So the boy had to touch his shoulder before he knew he 
was behind him. The boy's voice was quite calm: "Under 
Ronnie's seat there. A bit of a crank handle. If you'll just 
hand it to me " 

He found the crank. He passed it back; he was thinking 
dreamily: "Mac would say they had a telephone on board." 
But he didn't look at once to see what the boy was doing 
with it, for in that still and peaceful horror he was watching 
Ronnie, the cold pipe rigid in his jaw, hurling the boat at 
top speed round and round the freighter, so near that he 
could see the rivets in the plates. Then he looked aft, his face 
wild, importunate, and he saw what the boy was doing with 
the crank. He had fitted it into what was obviously a small 
windlass low on one flank of the tube near the head. He 
glanced up and saw Bogard's face. "Didn't go that time!" 
he shouted cheerfully. 

"Go?" Bogard shouted. "It didn't The torpedo" 

The boy and one of the seamen were quite busy, stooping 
over the windlass and the tube. "No. Clumsy. Always hap- 
pening. Should think clever chaps like engineers Happens, 
though. Draw her in and try her again." 

"But the nose, the cap!" Bogard shouted. "It's still in the 
tube, isn't it? It's all right, isn't it?" 

"Absolutely. But it's working now. Loaded. Screw's 
started turning. Get it back and drop it clear. If we should 
stop or slow up it would 'overtake us. Drive back into the 
tube. Bingo! What?" 

Bogard was on his feet now, turned, braced to the terrific 
merry-go-round of the boat. High above them the freighter 
seemed to be spinning on her heel like a trick picture in the 
movies. "Let me have that winch!" he cried. 

"Steady!" the boy said. "Mustn't draw her back too fast. 



Turnabout 505 

Jam her into the head of the tube ourselves. Same bingo! 
Best let us. Every cobbler to his last, what?" 

"Oh, quite," Bogard said. "Oh, absolutely." It was like 
someone else was using his mouth. He leaned, braced, his 
hands on the cold tube, beside the others. He was hot inside, 
but his outside was cold. He could feel all his flesh jerking 
with cold as he watched the blunt, grained hand of the sea- 
man turning the windlass in short, easy, inch-long arcs, 
while at the head of the tube the boy bent, tapping the 
cylinder with a spanner, lightly, his head turned with listen- 
ing delicate and deliberate as a watchmaker. The boat 
rushed on in those furious, slewing turns. Bogard saw a long, 
drooping thread loop down from somebody's mouth, be- 
tween his hands, and he found that the thread came from 
his own mouth. 

He didn't hear the boy speak, nor notice when he stood 
up. He just felt the boat straighten out, flinging him to his 
knees beside the tube. The seaman had gone back to the 
stern and the boy stooped again over his gadget. Bogard 
knelt now, quite sick. He did not feel the boat when it 
swung again, nor hear the gun from the cruiser which had 
not dared to fire and the freighter which had not been able 
to fire, firing again. He did not feel anything at all when 
he saw the huge, painted flag directly ahead and increasing 
with locomotive speed, and Ronnie's lifted hand drop. But 
this time he knew that the torpedo was gone; in pivoting 
and spinning this time the whole boat seemed to leave the 
water; he saw the bow of the boat shoot skyward like the 
nose of a pursuit ship going into a wingover. Then his out- 
raged stomach denied him. He saw neither the geyser nor 
heard the detonation as he sprawled over the tube. He felt 
only a hand grasp him by the slack of his coat, and the voice 
of one of the seamen: "Steady all, sir. I've got you." 



506 The Wasteland 

VIII 

A VOICE ROUSED HIM, a hand. He was half sitting in the 
narrow starboard runway, half lying across the tube. He had 
been there for quite a while; quite a while ago he had felt 
someone spread a garment over him. But he had not raised 
his head. "I'm all right," he had said. "You keep it." 

"Don't need it," the boy said. "Going home now." 

"I'm sorry I " Bogard said. 

"Quite. Confounded shallow boats. Turn any stomach 
until you get used to them. Ronnie and I both, at first. Each 
time. You wouldn't believe it. Believe human stomach hold 
so much. Here." It was the bottle. "Good drink. Take 
enormous one. Good for stomach." 

Bogard drank. Soon he did feel better, warmer. When the 
hand touched him later, he found that he had been asleep. 

It was the boy again. The pea-coat was too small for him; 
shrunken, perhaps. Below the cuffs his long, slender, girl's 
wrists were blue with cold. Then Bogard realized what the 
garment was that had been laid over him. But before Bogard 
could speak, the boy leaned down, whispering; his face was 
gleeful: "He didn't notice!" 

"What?" 

"Ergenstrasse! He didn't notice that they had shifted her. 
Gad, I'd be just one down, then." He watched Bogard's face 
with bright, eager eyes. "Beaver, you know. I say. Feeling 
better, eh?" 

"Yes," Bogard said, "I am." 

"He didn't notice at all. Oh, gad! Oh, Jove!" 

Bogard rose and sat on the tube. The entrance to the 
harbor was just ahead; the boat had slowed a little. It was 
just dusk. He said quietly: "Does this often happen?" The 
boy looked at him. Bogard touched the tube. "This. Failing 
to go out." 



Turnabout 507 

"Oh, yes. Why they put the windlass on them. That was 
later. Made first boat; whole thing blew up one day. So put 
on windlass." 

"But it happens sometimes, even now? I mean, sometimes 
they blow up, even with the windlass?" 

"Well, can't say, of course. Boats go out. Not come back. 
Possible. Not ever know, of course. Not heard of one cap- 
tured yet, though. Possible. Not to us, though. Not yet." 

"Yes," Bogard said. "Yes." They entered the harbor, the 
boat moving still fast, but throttled now and smooth, across 
the dusk-filled basin. Again the boy leaned down, his voice 
gleeful. 

"Not a word, now!" he hissed. "Steady all!" He stood up; 
he raised his voice: "I say, Ronnie." Ronnie did not turn his 
head, but Bogard could tell that he was listening. "That 
Argentine ship was amusing, eh? In there. How do you sup- 
pose it got past us here? Might have stopped here as well. 
French would buy the wheat." He paused, diabolical 
Machiavelli with the face of a strayed angel. "I say. How 
long has it been since we had a strange ship in here? Been 
months, eh?" Again he leaned, hissing. "Watch, now!" But 
Bogard could not see Ronnie's head move at all. "He's look- 
ing, though!" the boy whispered, breathed. And Ronnie was 
looking, though his head had not moved at all. Then there 
came into view, in silhouette against the dusk-filled sky, the 
vague, basket-like shape of the interned vessel's foremast. 
At once Ronnie's arm rose, pointing; again he spoke without 
turning his head, out of the side of his mouth, past the cold, 
clamped pipe, a single word: 

"Beaver." 

The boy moved like a released spring, like a heeled dog 
freed. "Oh, damn you!" he cried. "Oh, you putt! It's the 
Ergenstrasse! Oh, confound you! I'm just one down now!" 
He had stepped in one stride completely over Bogard, and 



508 The Wasteland 

he now leaned down over Ronnie. "What?" The boat was 
slowing in toward the wharf, the engine idle. "Aren't I, 
Ronnie? Just one down now?" 

The boat drifted in; the seaman had again crawled for- 
ward onto the deck. Ronnie spoke for the third and last 
time. "Right," he said. 

IX 

"I WANT," Bogard said, "a case of Scotch. The best we've 
got. And fix it up good. It's to go to town. And I want a 
responsible man to deliver it." The responsible man came. 
"This is for a child," Bogard said, indicating the package. 
"You'll find him in the Street of the Twelve Hours, some- 
where near the Cafe Twelve Hours. He'll be in the gutter. 
You'll know him. A child about six feet long. Any English 
M. P. will show him to you. If he is asleep, don't wake him. 
Just sit there and wait until he wakes up. Then give him 
this. Tell him it is from Captain Bogard." 

X 

ABOUT A MONTH LATER a copy of the English Gazette which 
had strayed onto an American aerodrome carried the f ollow- 
ing item in the casualty lists: 

MISSING: Torpedo Boat XOOI. Midshipmen R. Boyce 
Smith and L. C. W. Hope, R. N. R., Boatswain's Mate Burt 
and Able Seaman Reeves. Channel Fleet, Light Torpedo 
Division. Failed to return from coast patrol duty. 

Shortly after that the American Air Service headquarters 
also issued a bulletin: 

For extraordinary valor over and beyond the routine of 



Turnabout 509 

duty, Captain H. S. Bogard, with his crew, composed of 
Second Lieutenant Darrel McGinnis and Aviation Gunners 
Watts and Harper, on a daylight raid and without scout pro- 
tection, destroyed with bombs an ammunition depot several 
miles behind the enemy's lines. From here, beset by enemy 
aircraft in superior numbers, these men proceeded with what 
bombs remained to the enemy's corps headquarters at Blank 
and partially demolished this chateau, and then returned 
safely without loss of a man. 

And regarding which exploit, it might have added, had it 
failed and had Captain Bogard come out of it alive, he would 
have been immediately and thoroughly court-martialed. 

Carrying his remaining two bombs, he had dived the 
Handley-Page at the chateau where the generals sat at 
lunch, until McGinnis, at the toggles below him, began to 
shout at him, before he ever signaled. He didn't signal until 
he could discern separately the slate tiles of the roof. Then 
his hand dropped and he zoomed, and he held the aeroplane 
so, in its wild snarl, his lips parted, his breath hissing, think- 
ing: "God! God! If they were all there all the generals, 
the admirals, the presidents and the kings theirs, ours all 
of them. J> 



All the Dead Pilots 



i 

IN THE PICTURES, the snapshots hurriedly made, a little faded, 
a little dog-eared with the thirteen years, they swagger a 
little. Lean, hard, in their brass-and-leather martial harness, 
posed standing beside or leaning upon the esoteric shapes of 
wire and wood and canvas in which they flew without para- 
chutes, they too have an esoteric look; a look not exactly 
human, like that of some dim and threatful apotheosis of the 
race seen for an instant in the glare of a thunderclap and then 
forever gone. 

Because they are dead, all the old pilots, dead on the elev- 
enth of November, 1918. When you see modern photo- 
graphs of them, the recent pictures made beside the recent 
shapes of steel and canvas with the new cowlings and engines 
and slotted wings, they look a little outlandish: the lean 
young men who once swaggered. They look lost, baffled. In 
this saxophone age of flying they look as out of place as, a 
little thick about the waist, in the sober business suits of thirty 
and thirty-five and perhaps more than that, they would look 
among the saxophones and miniature brass bowlers of a night 
club orchestra. Because they are dead too, who had learned to 
respect that whose respect in turn their hardness had com- 
manded before there were welded center sections and para- 
chutes and ships that would not spin. That's why they watch 

5" 



512 The Wasteland 

the saxophone girls and boys with slipstream-proof lipstick 
and aeronautical flasks piling up the saxophone crates in pri- 
vate driveways and on golf greens, with the quick sympathy 
and the bafflement too. "My gad," one of them ack emma, 
warrant officer pilot, captain and M.C. in turn said to me 
once; "if you can treat a crate that way, why do you want to 
fly at all?" 

But they are all dead now. They are thick men now, a little 
thick about the waist from sitting behind desks, and maybe 
not so good at it, with wives and children in suburban homes 
almost paid out, with gardens in which they putter in the 
long evenings after the 5: 15 is in, and perhaps not so good at 
that either: the hard, lean men who swaggered hard and 
drank hard because they had found that being dead was not 
as quiet as they had heard it would be. That's why this story 
is composite: a series of brief glares in which, instantaneous 
and without depth or perspective, there stood into sight the 
portent and the threat of what the race could bear and be- 
come, in an instant between dark and dark. 



II 

IN 1918 I was at Wing Headquarters, trying to get used to a 
mechanical leg, where, among other things, I had the censor- 
ing of mail from all squadrons in the Wing. The job itself 
wasn't bad, since it gave me spare time to experiment with a 
synchronized camera on which I was working. But the open- 
ing and reading of the letters, the scrawled, brief pages of 
transparent and honorable lies to mothers and sweethearts, in 
the script and spelling of schoolboys. But a war is such a big 
thing, and it takes so long. I suppose they who run them (I 
dont mean the staffs, but whoever or whatever it is that con- 
trols events) do get bored now and then. And it's when you 
get bored that you turn petty, play horse. 



All the Dead Pilots 5 1 3 

So now and then I would go up to a Camel squadron be- 
hind Amiens and talk with the gunnery sergeant about the 
synchronization of the machine guns. This was Spoomer's 
squadron. His uncle was the corps commander, the K.G., and 
so Spoomer, with his Guards' Captaincy, had also got in turn 
a Mons Star, a D.S.O., and now a pursuit squadron of single 
seaters, though the third barnacle on his tunic was still the 
single wing of an observer. 

In 1914 he was in Sandhurst: a big, ruddy-colored chap 
with china eyes, and I like to think of his uncle sending for 
him when the news got out, the good news. Probably at the 
uncle's club (the uncle was a brigadier then, just recalled 
hurriedly from Indian service) and the two of them opposite 
one another across the mahogany, with the newsboys crying 
in the street, and the general saying, "By gad, it will be the 
making of the Army. Pass the wine, sir." 

I daresay the general was put out, not to say outraged, 
when he finally realized that neither the Hun nor the Home 
Office intended running this war like the Army wanted it 
run. Anyway, Spoomer had already gone out to Mons and 
come back with his Star (though Ffollansbye said that the 
general sent Spoomer out to get the Star, since it was going 
to be one decoration you had to be on hand to get) before the 
uncle got him transferred to his staff, where Spoomer could 
get his D.S.O. Then perhaps the uncle sent him out again to 
tap the stream where it came to surface. Or maybe Spoomer 
went on his own this time. I like to think so. I like to think 
that he did it through pro patria, even though I know that 
no man deserves praise for courage or opprobrium for cow- 
ardice, since there are situations in which any man will show 
either of them. But he went out, and came back a year later 
with his observer's wing and a dog almost as large as a calf. 

That was ^1917, when he and Sartoris first came together, 
collided. Sartoris was an American, from a plantation at 



514 The Wasteland 

Mississippi, where they grew grain and Negroes, or the Ne- 
groes grew the grain something. Sartoris had a working 
vocabulary of perhaps two hundred words, and I daresay to 
tell where and how and why he lived was beyond him, save 
that he lived in the plantation with his great-aunt and his 
grandfather. He came through Canada in 1916, and he was at 
Pool. Ffollansbye told me about it. It seems that Sartoris had 
a girl in London, one of those three-day wives and three-year 
widows. That's the bad thing about war. They the Sartor- 
ises and such didn't die until 1918, some of them. But the 
girls, the women, they died on the fourth of August, 1914. 
So Sartoris had a girl. Ffollansbye said they called her 
Kitchener, "because she had such a mob of soldiers." He said 
they didn't know if Sartoris knew this or not, but that any- 
way for a while Kitchener Kit appeared to have ditched 
them all for Sartoris. They would be seen anywhere and any 
time together, then Ffollansbye told me how he found Sar- 
toris alone and quite drunk one evening in a restaurant. Ffol- 
lansbye told how he had already heard that Kit and Spoomer 
had gone off somewhere together about two days ago. He 
said that Sartoris was sitting there, drinking himself blind, 
waiting for Spoomer to come in. He said he finally got Sar- 
toris into a cab and sent him to the aerodrome. It was about 
dawn then, and Sartoris got a captain's tunic from someone's 
kit, and a woman's garter from someone else's kit, perhaps his 
own, and pinned the garter on the tunic like a barnacle rib- 
bon. Then he went and waked a corporal who was an ex-pro- 
fessional boxer and with whom Sartoris would put on the 
gloves now and then, and made the corporal put on the tunic 
over his underclothes. "Namesh Spoomer," Sartoris told the 
corporal. "Cap'm Spoomer"; swaying and prodding at the 
garter with his finger. "Dishtinguish Sheries Thighs," Sartoris 
said. Then he and the corporal in the borrowed tunic, with 



All the Dead Pilots 5 1 5 

his woolen underwear showing beneath, stood there in the 
dawn, swinging at one another with their naked fists. 

Ill 

YOU'D THINK that when a war had got you into it, it would 
let you be. That it wouldn't play horse with you. But maybe 
it wasn't that. Maybe it was because the three of them, 
Spoomer and Sartoris and the dog, were so humorless about 
it. Maybe a humorless person is an unflagging challenge to 
them above the thunder and the alarms. Anyway, one after- 
noon it was in the spring, just before Cambrai fell I went 
up to the Camel aerodrome to see the gunnery sergeant, and 
I saw Sartoris for the first time. They had given the squadron 
to Spoomer and the dog the year before, and the first thing 
they did was to send Sartoris out to it. 

The afternoon patrol was out, and the rest of the people 
were gone too, to Amiens I suppose, and the aerodrome was 
deserted. The sergeant and I were sitting on two empty petrol 
tins in the hangar door when I saw a man thrust his head out 
the door of the officers' mess and look both ways along the 
line, his air a little furtive and very alert. It was Sartoris, and 
he was looking for the dog. 

"The dog?" I said. Then the sergeant told me, this too 
composite, out of his own observation and the observation of 
the entire enlisted personnel exchanged and compared over 
the mess tables or over pipes at night: that terrible and om- 
niscient inquisition of those in an inferior station. 

When Spoomer left the aerodrome, he would lock the dog 
up somewhere. He would have to lock it up in a different 
place each time, because Sartoris would hunt until he found 
it, and let it out. It appeared to be a dog of intelligence, be- 
cause if Spoomer had only gone down to Wing or some- 
where on business, the dog would stay at home, spending the 



516 The Wasteland 

interval grubbing in the refuse bin behind the men's mess, to 
which it was addicted in preference to that of the officers. 
But if Spoomer had gone to Amiens, the dog would depart up 
the Amiens road immediately on being freed, to return later 
with Spoomer in the squadron car. 

"Why does Mr. Sartoris let it out?" I said. "Do you mean 
that Captain Spoomer objects to the dog eating kitchen 
refuse?" 

But the sergeant was not listening. His head was craned 
around the door, and we watched Sartoris. He had emerged 
from the mess and he now approached the hangar at the end 
of the line, his air still alert, still purposeful. He entered the 
hangar. "That seems a rather childish business for a grown 
man," I said. 

The sergeant looked at me. Then he quit looking at me. 
"He wants to know if Captain Spoomer went to Amiens or 
not." 

After a while I said, "Oh. A young lady. Is that it?" 
He didn't look at me. "You might call her a young lady. I 
suppose they have young ladies in this country." 

I thought about that for a while. Sartoris emerged from 
the first hangar and entered the second one. "I wonder if 
there are any young ladies any more anywhere," I said. 
"Perhaps you are right, sir. War is hard on women." 
"What about this one?" I said. "Who is she?" 
He told me. They ran an estaminet, a "bit of a pub" he 
called it an old harridan of a woman, and the girl. A little 
place on a back street, where officers did not go. Perhaps that 
was why Sartoris and Spoomer created such a furore in that 
circle. I gathered from the sergeant that the contest between 
the squadron commander and one of his greenest cubs was 
the object of general interest and the subject of the warmest 
conversation and even betting among the enlisted element of 
the whole sector of French and British troops. "Being officers 
and all," he said. 



All the Dead Pilots 517 

"They frightened the soldiers off, did they?" I said. "Is that 
it?" The sergeant did not look at me. "Were there many 
soldiers to frighten off? " 

"I suppose you know these young women," the sergeant 
said. "This war and all." 

And that's who the girl was. What the girl was. The ser- 
geant said that the girl and the old woman were not even 
related. He told me how Sartoris bought her things clothes, 
and jewelry; the sort of jewelry you might buy in Amiens, 
probably. Or maybe in a canteen, because Sartoris was not 
much more than twenty. I saw some of the letters which he 
wrote to his great-aunt back home, letters that a third-form 
lad in Harrow could have written, perhaps bettered. It 
seemed that Spoomer did not make the girl any presents. 
"Maybe because he is a captain," the sergeant said. "Or 
maybe because of them ribbons he dont have to." 

"Maybe so," I said. 

And that was the girl, the girl who, in the centime jewelry 
which Sartoris gave her, dispensed beer and wine to British 
and French privates in an Amiens back street, and because of 
whom Spoomer used his rank to betray Sartoris with her by 
keeping Sartoris at the aerodrome on special duties, locking 
up the dog to hide from Sartoris what he had done. And Sar- 
toris taking what revenge he could by letting out the dog in 
order that it might grub in the refuse of plebeian food. 

He entered the hangar in which the sergeant and I were: 
a tall lad with pale eyes in a face that could be either merry 
or surly, and quite humorless. He looked at me. "Hello," he 
said. 

"Hello," I said. The sergeant made to get up. 

"Carry on," Sartoris said. "I dont want anything." He 
went on to the rear of the hangar. It was cluttered with petrol 
drums and empty packing cases and such. He was utterly 
without self-consciousness, utterly without shame of his 
childish business. 



518 The Wasteland 

The dog was in one of the packing cases. It emerged, huge, 
of a napped, tawny color; Ffollansbye had told me that, save 
for Spoomer's wing and his Mons Star and his D.S.O., he 
and the dog looked alike. It quitted the hangar without haste, 
giving me a brief, sidelong glance. We watched it go on and 
disappear around the corner of the men's mess. Then Sartoris 
turned and went back to the officers' mess and also disap- 
peared. 

Shortly afterward, the afternoon patrol came in. While the 
machines were coming up to the line, the squadron car turned 
onto the aerodrome and stopped at the officers' mess and 
Spoomer got out. "Watch him," the sergeant said. "He'll try 
to do it like he wasn't watching himself, noticing himself." 

He came along the hangars, big, hulking, in green golf 
stockings. He did not see me until he was turning into the 
hangar. He paused; it was almost imperceptible, then he 
entered, giving me a brief, sidelong glance. "How do," he 
said in a high, fretful, level voice. The sergeant had risen. I 
had never seen Spoomer even glance toward the rear, toward 
the overturned packing case, yet he had stopped. "Sergeant," 
he said. 

"Sir," the sergeant said. 

"Sergeant," Spoomer said. "Have those timers come up 
yet?" 

"Yes, sir. They came up two weeks ago. They're all in 
use now, sir." 

"Quite so. Quite so." He turned; again he gave me a brief, 
sidelong glance, and went on down the hangar line, not fast. 
He disappeared. "Watch him, now," the sergeant said. "He 
wont go over there until he thinks we have quit watching 
him." 

We watched. Then he came into sight again, crossing 
toward the men's mess, walking briskly now. He disappeared 
beyond the corner. A moment later he emerged, dragging 



All the Dead Pilots 519 

the huge, inert beast by the scruff of its neck. "You mustn't 
eat that stuff," he said. "That's for soldiers." 



IV 

I DIDN'T KNOW at the time what happened next. Sartoris didn't 
tell me until later, afterward. Perhaps up to that time he had 
not anything more than instinct and circumstantial evidence 
to tell him that he was being betrayed: evidence such as being 
given by Spoomer some duty not in his province at all and 
which would keep him on the aerodrome for the afternoon, 
then finding and freeing the hidden dog and watching it van- 
ish up the Amiens road at its clumsy hand gallop. 

But something happened. All I could learn at the time was, 
that one afternoon Sartoris found the dog and watched it 
depart for Amiens. Then he violated his orders, borrowed a 
motor bike and went to Amiens too. Two hours later the dog 
returned and repaired to the kitchen door of the men's mess, 
and a short time after that, Sartoris himself returned on a 
lorry (they were already evacuating Amiens) laden with 
household effects and driven by a French soldier in a peasant's 
smock. The motor bike was on the lorry too, pretty well 
beyond repair. The soldier told how Sartoris had driven the 
bike full speed into a ditch, trying to run down the dog. 

But nobody knew just what had happened, at the time. 
But I had imagined the scene, before he told me. I imagined 
him there, in that bit of a room full of French soldiers, and 
the old woman (she could read pips, no doubt; ribbons, any- 
way) barring him from the door to the living quarters. I can 
imagine him, furious, baffled, inarticulate (he knew no 
French) standing head and shoulders above the French peo- 
ple whom he could not understand and that he believed were 
laughing at him. "That was it," he told me. "Laughing at me 
behind their faces, about a woman. Me knowing that he was 



520 The Wasteland 

up there, and them knowing I knew that if I busted in and 
dragged him out and bashed his head off, I'd not only be 
cashiered, I'd be clinked for life for having infringed the 
articles of alliance by invading foreign property without 
warrant or something." 

Then he returned to the aerodrome and met the dog on 
the road and tried to run it down. The dog came on home, 
and Spoomer returned, and he was just dragging it by the 
scruff of the neck from the refuse bin behind the men's mess, 
when the afternoon patrol came in. They had gone out six 
and come back five, and the leader jumped down from his 
machine before it had stopped rolling. He had a bloody rag 
about his right hand and he ran toward Spoomer stooped 
above the passive and stiff-legged dog. "By gad," he said, 
"they have got Cambrai!" 

Spoomer did not look up. "Who have?" 

"Jerry has, by gad!" 

"Well, by gad," Spoomer said. "Come along, now. I have 
told you about that muck." 

A man like that is invulnerable. When Sartoris and I talked 
for the first time, I started to tell him that. But then I learned 
that Sartoris was invincible too. We talked, that first time. "I 
tried to get him to let me teach him to fly a Camel," Sartoris 
said. "I will teach him for nothing. I will tear out the cock- 
pit and rig the duals myself, for nothing." 

"Why?" I said. "What for?" 

"Or anything. I will let him choose it. He can take an S.E. 
if he wants to, and I will take an Ak.W. or even a Fee and I 
will run him clean out of the sky in four minutes. I will run 
him so far into the ground he will have to stand on his head 
to swallow." 

We talked twice: that first time, and the last time. "Well, 
you did better than that," I said the last time we talked. 

He had hardly any teeth left then, and he couldn't talk 



All the Dead Pilots 521 

very well, who had never been able to talk much, who lived 
and died with maybe two hundred words. "Better than 
what? " he said. 

"You said before that you would run him clean out of the 
sky. You didn't do that; you did better: you have run him 
clean off the continent of Europe." 

V 

I THINK I said that he was invulnerable too. November n, 
1918, couldn't kill him, couldn't leave him growing a little 
thicker each year behind an office desk, with what had once 
been hard and lean and immediate grown a little dim, a little 
baffled, and betrayed, because by that day he had been dead 
almost six months. 

He was killed in July, but we talked that second time, that 
other time before that. This last time was a week after the 
patrol had come in and told that Cambrai had fallen, a week 
after we heard the shells falling in Amiens. He told me about 
it himself, through his missing teeth. The whole squadron 
went out together. He left his flight as soon as they reached 
the broken front, and flew back to Amiens with a bottle of 
brandy in his overall leg. Amiens was being evacuated, the 
roads full of lorries and carts of household goods, and am- 
bulances from the Base hospital, and the city and its im- 
mediate territory was now interdict. 

He landed in a short meadow. He said there was an old 
woman working in a field beyond the canal (he said she was 
still there when he returned an hour later, stooping stub- 
bornly among the green rows, beneath the moist spring air 
shaken at slow and monstrous intervals by the sound of shells 
falling in the city) and a light ambulance stopped halfway in 
the roadside ditch. 

He went to the ambulance. The engine was still running. 



522 The Wasteland 

The driver was a young man in spectacles. He looked like a 
student, and he was dead drunk, half sprawled out of the cab. 
Sartoris had a drink from his own bottle and tried to rouse 
the driver, in vain. Then he had another drink (I imagine that 
he was pretty well along himself by then; he told me how 
only that morning, when Spoomer had gone off in the car 
and he had found the dog and watched it take the Amiens 
road, how he had tried to get the operations officer to let him 
off patrol and how the operations officer had told him that 
La Fayette awaited him on the Santerre plateau) and tumbled 
the driver back into the ambulance and drove on to Amiens 
himself. 

He said the French corporal was drinking from a bottle 
in a doorway when he passed and stopped the ambulance 
before the estaminet. The door was locked. He finished his 
brandy bottle and he broke the estaminet door in by diving 
at it as they do in American football. Then he was inside. 
The place was empty, the benches and tables overturned and 
the shelves empty of bottles, and he said that at first he could 
not remember what it was he had come for, so he thought it 
must be a drink. He found a bottle of wine under the bar 
and broke the neck off against the edge of the bar, and he 
told how he stood there, looking at himself in the mirror be- 
hind the bar, trying to think what it was he had come to do. 
"I looked pretty wild," he said. 

Then the first shell fell. I can imagine it: he standing there 
in that quiet, peaceful, redolent, devastated room, with the 
bashed-in door and the musing and waiting city beyond it, 
and then that slow, unhurried, reverberant sound coming 
down upon the thick air of spring like a hand laid without 
haste on the damp silence; he told how dust or sand or plaster, 
something, sifted somewhere, whispering down in a faint hiss, 
and how a big, lean cat came up over the bar without a sound 



All the Dead Pilots 523 

and flowed down to the floor and vanished like dirty quick- 
silver. 

Then he saw the closed door behind the bar and he remem- 
bered what he had come for. He went around the bar. He 
expected this door to be locked too, and he grasped the knob 
and heaved back with all his might. It wasn't locked. He said 
it came back into the shelves with a sound like a pistol, jerk- 
ing him off his feet. "My head hit the bar," he said. "Maybe 
I was a little groggy after that." 

Anyway, he was holding himself up in the door, looking 
down at the old woman. She was sitting on the bottom stair, 
her apron over her head, rocking back and forth. He said that 
the apron was quite clean, moving back and forth like a pis- 
ton, and he standing in the door, drooling a little at the mouth, 
"Madame," he said. The old woman rocked back and forth. 
He propped himself carefully and leaned and touched her 
shoulder. " 'Toinette," he said. "Ou est-elle, 'Toinette?" That 
was probably all the French he knew; that, with vin added to 
his 196 English words, composed his vocabulary. 

Again the old woman did not answer. She rocked back and 
forth like a wound-up toy. He stepped carefully over her 
and mounted the stair. There was a second door at the head 
of the stair. He stopped before it, listening. His throat filled 
with a hot, salty liquid. He spat it, drooling; his throat filled 
again. This door was unlocked also. He entered the room 
quietly. It contained a table, on which lay a khaki cap with 
the bronze crest of the Flying Corps, and as he stood drooling 
in the door, the dog heaved up from the corner furthest from 
the window, and while he and the dog looked at one another 
above the cap, the sound of the second shell came dull and 
monstrous into the room, stirring the limp curtains before the 
window. 

As he circled the table the dog moved too, keeping the 
table between them, watching him. He was trying to move 



524 The Wasteland 

quietly, yet he struck the table in passing (perhaps while 
watching the dog) and he told how, when he reached the op- 
posite door and 'stood beside it, holding his breath, drooling, 
he could hear the silence in the next room. Then a voice 
said: 

"Maman?" 

He kicked the locked door, then he dived at it, again like 
the American football, and through it, door and all. The girl 
screamed. But he said he never saw her, never saw anyone. 
He just heard her scream as he went into the room on all- 
fours. It was a bedroom; one corner was filled by a huge 
wardrobe with double doors. The wardrobe was closed, and 
the room appeared to be empty. He didn't go to the ward- 
robe. He said he just stood there on his hands and knees, 
drooling, like a cow, listening to the dying reverberation of 
the third shell, watching the curtains on the window blow 
once into the room as though to a breath. 

He got up. "I was still groggy," he said. "And I guess that 
brandy and the wine had kind of got joggled up inside me." 
I daresay they had. There was a chair. Upon it lay a pair of 
slacks, neatly folded, a tunic with an observer's wing and 
two ribbons, an ordnance belt. While he stood looking down 
at the chair, the fourth shell came. 

He gathered up the garments. The chair toppled over and 
he kicked it aside and lurched along the wall to the broken 
door and entered the first room, taking the cap from the 
table as he passed. The dog was gone. 

He entered the passage. The old woman still sat on the 
bottom step, her apron over her head, rocking back and forth. 
He stood at the top of the stair, holding himself up, waiting 
to spit. Then beneath him a voice said: "Que faites-vous en 
haut?" 

He looked down upon the raised moustached face of the 
French corporal whom he had passed in the street drinking 



All the Dead Pilots 525 

from the bottle. For a time they looked at one another. Then 
the corporal said, "Descendez," making a peremptory gesture 
with his arm. Clasping the garments in one hand, Sartoris 
put the other hand on the stair rail and vaulted over it. 

The corporal jumped aside. Sartoris plunged past him and 
into the wall, banging his head hollowly again. As he got to 
his feet and turned, the corporal kicked at him, striking for 
his pelvis. The corporal kicked him again. Sartoris knocked 
the corporal down, where he lay on his back in his clumsy 
overcoat, tugging at his pocket and snapping his boot at Sar- 
toris' groin. Then the corporal freed his hand and shot point- 
blank at Sartoris with a short-barreled pistol. 

Sartoris sprang upon him before he could shoot again, 
trampling the pistol hand. He said he could feel the man's 
bones through his boot, and that the corporal began to scream 
like a woman behind his brigand's moustaches. That was what 
made it funny, Sartoris said: that noise coming out of a pair 
of moustaches like a Gilbert and Sullivan pirate. So he said 
he stopped it by holding the corporal up with one hand and 
hitting him on the chin with the other until the noise stopped. 
He said that the old woman had not ceased to rock back and 
forth under her starched apron. "Like she might have dressed 
up to get ready to be sacked and ravaged," he said. 

He gathered up the garments. In the bar he had another 
pull at the bottle, looking at himself in the mirror. Then he 
saw that he was bleeding at the mouth. He said he didn't 
know if he had bitten his tongue when he jumped over the 
stair rail or if he had cut his mouth with the broken bottle 
neck. He emptied the bottle and flung it to the floor. 

He said he didn't know then what he intended to do. He 
said he didn't realize it even when he had dragged the uncon- 
scious driver out of the ambulance and was dressing him in 
Captain Spoomer's slacks and cap and ribboned tunic, and 
tumbled him back into the ambulance. 



526 The Wasteland 

He remembered seeing a dusty inkstand behind the bar. 
He sought and found in his overalls a bit of paper, a bill ren- 
dered him eight months ago by a London tailor, and, leaning 
on the bar, drooling and spitting, he printed on the back of 
the bill Captain Spoomer's name and squadron number and 
aerodrome, and put the paper into the tunic pocket beneath 
the ribbons and the wing, and drove back to where he had 
left his aeroplane. 

There was an Anzac battalion resting in the ditch beside 
the road. He left the ambulance and the sleeping passenger 
with them, and four of them helped him to start his engine, 
and held the wings for his tight take-off. 

Then he was back at the front. He said he did not remem- 
ber getting there at all; he said the last thing he remembered 
was the old woman in the field beneath him, then suddenly he 
was in a barrage, low enough to feel the concussed air be- 
tween the ground and his wings, and to distinguish the faces 
of troops. He said he didn't know what troops they were, 
theirs or ours, but that he strafed them anyway. "Because I 
never heard of a man on the ground getting hurt by an aero- 
plane," he said. "Yes, I did; I'll take that back. There was a 
farmer back in Canada plowing in the middle of a thousand- 
acre field, and a cadet crashed on top of him." 

Then he returned home. They told at the aerodrome that 
he flew between two hangars in a slow roll, so that they could 
see the valve stems in both wheels, and that he ran his wheels 
across the aerodrome and took off again. The gunnery ser- 
geant told me that he climbed vertically until he stalled, and 
that he held the Camel mushing on its back. "He was watch- 
ing the dog," the sergeant said. "It had been home about an 
hour and it was behind the men's mess, grubbing in the refuse 
bin." He said that Sartoris dived at the dog and then looped, 
making two turns of an upward spin, coming off on one wing 
and still upside down. Then the sergeant said that he prob- 
ably did not set back the air valve, because at a hundred feet 



All the Dead Pilots 527 

the engine conked, and upside down Sartoris cut the tops out 
of the only two poplar trees they had left. 

The sergeant said they ran then, toward the gout of dust 
and the mess of wire and wood. Before they reached it, he 
said the dog came trotting out from behind the men's mess. 
He said the dog got there first and that they saw Sartoris on 
his hands and knees, vomiting, while jhe dog watched him. 
Then the dog approached and sniffed tentatively at the vomit 
and Sartoris got up and balanced himself and kicked it, 
weakly but with savage and earnest purpose. 

VI 

THE AMBULANCE DRIVER, in Spoomer's uniform, was sent 
back to the aerodrome by the Anzac major. They put him to 
bed, where he was still sleeping when the brigadier and the 
Wing Commander came up that afternoon. They were still 
there when an ox cart turned onto the aerodrome and 
stopped, with, sitting on a wire cage containing chickens, 
Spoomer in a woman's skirt and a knitted shawl. The next 
day Spoomer returned to England. We learned that he was 
to be a temporary colonel at ground school. 

"The dog will like that, anyway," I said. 

"The dog?" Sartoris said. 

"The food will be better there," I said. 

"Oh," Sartoris said. They had reduced him to second 
lieutenant, for dereliction of duty by entering a forbidden 
zone with government property and leaving it unguarded, 
and he had been transferred to another squadron, to the one 
which even the B.E. people called the Laundry. 

This was the day before he left. He had no front teeth at 
all now, and he apologized for the way he talked, who had 
never really talked with an intact mouth. "The joke is," he 
said, "it's another Camel squadron. I have to laugh." 

"Laugh?" I said. 



528 The Wasteland 

"Oh, I can ride them. I can sit there with the gun out and 
keep the wings level now and then. But I can't fly Camels. 
You have to land a Camel by setting the air valve and flying 
it into the ground. Then you count ten, and if you have not 
crashed, you level off. And if you can get up and walk away, 
you have made a good landing. And if they can use the crate 
again, you are an ace.^But that's not the joke." 

"What's not?" 

"The Camels. The joke is, this is a night-flying squadron. I 
suppose they are all in town and they dont get back until 
after dark to fly them. They're sending me to a night-flying 
squadron. That's why I have to laugh." 

"I would laugh," I said. "Isn't there something you can do 
about it?" 

"Sure. Just keep that air valve set right and not crash. Not 
wash out and have those wing flares explode. I've got that 
beat. I'll just stay up all night, pop the flares and sit down 
after sunrise. That's why I have to laugh, see. I cant fly 
Camels in the daytime, even. And they dont know it." 

"Well, anyway, you did better than you promised," I said. 
"You have run him off the continent of Europe." 

"Yes," he said. "I sure have to laugh. He's got to go back 
to England, where all the men are gone. All those women, 
and not a man between fourteen and eighty to help him. I 
have to laugh." 



VII 

WHEN JULY CAME, I was still in the Wing office, still trying 
to get used to my mechanical leg by sitting at a table equipped 
with a paper cutter, a pot of glue and one of red ink, and 
laden with the meager, thin, here soiled and here clean en- 
velopes that came down in periodical batches envelopes ad- 
dressed to cities and hamlets and sometimes less than hamlets, 



All the Dead Pilots 529 

about England when one day I came upon two addressed to 
the same person in America: a letter and a parcel. I took the 
letter first. It had neither location nor date: 

Dear Aunt Jenny 

Yes I got the socks Elnora knitted. They fit all right be- 
cause I gave them to my batman he said they fit all right. Yes 
I like it here better than 'where I was these are good guys here 
except these damn Camels. I am all right about going to 
church we dont always have church. Sometimes they have it 
for the ak emmas because 1 reckon a ak emma needs it but 
usually 1 am pretty busy Sunday but I go enough I reckon. 
Tell Elnora much oblige for the socks they fit all right but 
maybe you better not tell her I gave them away. Tell Isom 
and the other niggers hello and Grandfather tell him I got the 
money all right but war is expensive as hell. 

Johnny. 

But then, the Malbroucks dont make the wars, anyway. I 
suppose it takes too many words to make a war. Maybe that's 
why. 

The package was addressed like the letter, to Mrs Virginia 
Sartoris, Jefferson, Mississippi, U.S.A., and I thought, What 
in the world would it ever occur to him to send to her? I 
could not imagine him choosing a gift for a woman in a 
foreign country; choosing one of those trifles which some 
men can choose with a kind of infallible tact. His would be, 
if he thought to send anything at all, a section of crank shaft 
or maybe a handful of wrist pins salvaged from a Hun crash. 
So I opened the package. Then I sat there, looking at the 
contents. 

It contained an addressed envelope, a few dog-eared papers, 
a wrist watch whose strap was stiff with some dark dried 
liquid, a pair of goggles without any glass in one lens, a silver 
belt buckle with a monogram. That was all. 



530 The Wasteland 

So I didn't need to read the letter. I didn't have to look at 
the contents of the package, but I wanted to. I didn't want 
to read the letter, but I had to. 

Squadron, R.A.P\, France. 

$th July, 1918. 
Dear Madam, 

I have to tell you that your son was killed on yesterday 
morning. He was shot down while in pursuit of duty over the 
enemy lines. Not due to carelessness or lack of skill. He was 
a good man. The E.A. outnumbered your son and had more 
height and speed which is our misfortune but no fault of the 
Government which would give us better machines if they 
had them which is no satisfaction to you. Another of ours, 
Mr R. Kyerling woo feet below could not get up there since 
your son spent much time in the hangar and had a new en- 
gine in his machine last week. -Your son took fire in ten sec- 
onds Mr Kyerling said and jumped from your son's machine 
since he was side slipping safely until the E.A. shot away his 
stabiliser and controls and he began to spin. I am very sad to 
send you these sad tidings though it may be a comfort to you 
that he was buried by a minister. His other effects sent you 
later. 

I am, madam, and etc. 

C. Kaye Major 

He was buried in the cemetary just north of Saint Vaast 
since we hope it will not be shelled again since we hope it 
will be over soon by our padre since there were just two 
Camels and seven E.A. and so it was on our side by that time. 

C. K. Mjr. 

The other papers were letters, from his great-aunt, not 
many and not long. I dont know why he had kept them. But 
he had. Maybe he just forgot them, like he had the bill from 



All the Dead Pilots 531 

the London tailor he had found in his overalls in Amiens that 
day in the spring. 

. . . let those foreign women alone. I lived through a 'war 
mysetf and I know how women act in war, even with Yan- 
kees. And a good-for-nothing hellion like you . . . 

And this: 

. . . we think it's about time you came home. Your grand- 
father is getting old, and it don't look like they will ever get 
done fighting over there. So you come on home. The Yan- 
kees are in it now. Let them fight if they want to. It's their 
war. It's not ours. 

And that's all. That's it. The courage, the recklessness, call 
it what you will, is the flash, the instant of sublimation; then 
flick! the old darkness again. That's why. It's too strong for 
steady diet. And if it were a steady diet, it would not be a 
flash, a glare. And so, being momentary, it can be preserved 
and prolonged only on paper: a picture, a few written words 
that any match, a minute and harmless flame that any child 
can engender, can obliterate in an instant. A one-inch sliver 
of sulphur-tipped wood is longer than memory or grief; a 
flame no larger than a sixpence is fiercer than courage or 
despair. 



V * THE MIDDLE GROUND 



Wash 

Honor 

Dr. Martino 

Fox Hunt 

Pennsylvania Station 

Artist at Home 

The Brooch 

My Grandmother Millard 

Golden Land 

There Was a Queen 

Mountain Victory 



Wash 



SUTPEN STOOD ABOVE the pallet bed on which the mother and 
child lay. Between the shrunken planking of the wall the 
early sunlight fell in long pencil strokes, breaking upon his 
straddled legs and upon the riding whip in his hand, and 
lay across the still shape of the mother, who lay looking up 
at him from still, inscrutable, sullen eyes, the child at her 
side wrapped in a piece of dingy though clean cloth. Be- 
hind them an old Negro woman squatted beside the rough 
hearth where a meager fire smoldered. 

"Well, Milly," Sutpen said, "too bad you're not a mare. 
Then I could give you a decent stall in the stable." 

Still the girl on the pallet did not move. She merely con- 
tinued to look up at him without expression, with a young, 
sullen, inscrutable face still pale from recent travail. Sutpen 
moved, bringing into the splintered pencils of sunlight the 
face of a man of sixty. Pie said quietly to the squatting 
Negress, "Griselda foaled this morning." 

"Horse or mare?" the Negress said. 

"A horse. A damned fine colt. . . . What's this?" He indi- 
cated the pallet with the hand which held the whip. 

"That un's a mare, I reckon." 

"Hah," Sutpen said. "A damned fine colt. Going to be 
the spit and image of old Rob Roy when I rode him North 
in '6 1. Do you remember?" 

535 



536 The Middle Ground 

"Yes, Marster." 

"Hah." He glanced back towards the pallet. None could 
have said if the girl still watched him or not. Again his whip 
hand indicated the pallet. "Do whatever they need with 
whatever we've got to do it with." He went out, passing 
out the crazy doorway and stepping down into the rank 
weeds (there yet leaned rusting against the corner of the 
porch the scythe which Wash had borrowed from him three 
months ago to cut them with) where his horse waited, where 
Wash stood holding the reins. 

When Colonel Sutpen rode away to fight the Yankees, 
Wash did not go. "I'm looking after the Kernel's place and 
niggers," he would tell all who asked him and some who 
had not asked a gaunt, malaria-ridden man with pale, ques- 
tioning eyes, who looked about thirty-five, though it was 
known that he had not only a daughter but an eight-year- 
old granddaughter as well. This was a lie, as most of them 
the few remaining men between eighteen and fifty to 
whom he told it, knew, though there were some who be- 
lieved that he himself really believed it, though even these 
believed that he had better sense than to put it to the test 
with Mrs. Sutpen or the Sutpen slaves. Knew better or was 
just too lazy and shiftless to try it, they said, knowing that his 
sole connection with the Sutpen plantation lay in the fact 
that for years now Colonel Sutpen had allowed him to squat 
in a crazy shack on a slough in the river bottom on the Sut- 
pen place, which Sutpen had built for a fishing lodge in his 
bachelor days and which had since fallen in dilapidation 
from disuse, so that now it looked like an aged or sick wild 
beast crawled terrifically there to drink in the act of dying. 

The Sutpen slaves themselves heard of his statement. They 
laughed. It was not the first time they had laughed at him, 
calling him white trash behind his back. They began to ask 



Wash .' 537 

him themselves, in groups, meeting him in the faint road 
which led up from the slough and the old fish camp, "Why 
ain't you at de war, white man?" 

Pausing, he would look about the ring of black faces and 
white eyes and teeth behind which derision lurked. "Because 
I got a daughter and family to keep," he said. "Git out of 
my road, niggers." 

"Niggers?" they repeated; "niggers?" laughing now. 
"Who him, calling us niggers?" 

"Yes," he said. "I ain't got no niggers to look after my 
folks if I was gone." 

"Nor nothing else but dat shack down yon dat Gunnel 
wouldn't let none of us live in." 

Now he cursed them; sometimes he rushed at them, 
snatching up a stick from the ground while they scattered 
before him, yet seeming to surround him still with that black 
laughing, derisive, evasive, inescapable, leaving him panting 
and impotent and raging. Once it happened in the very back 
yard of the big house itself. This was after bitter news had 
come down from the Tennessee mountains and from Vicks- 
burg, and Sherman had passed through the plantation, and 
most of the Negroes had followed him. Almost everything 
else had gone with the Federal troops, and Mrs. Sutpen had 
sent word to Wash that he could have the scuppernongs 
ripening in the arbor in the back yard. This time it was a 
house servant, one of the few Negroes who remained; this 
time the Negress had to retreat up the kitchen steps, where 
she turned. "Stop right dar, white man. Stop right whar you 
is. You ain't never crossed dese steps whilst Gunnel here, 
and you ain't ghy' do hit now." 

This was true. But there was this of a kind of pride: he 
had never tried to enter the big house, even though he be- 
lieved that if he had, Sutpen would have received him, per- 
mitted him. "But I ain't going to give no black nigger the 



538 The Middle Ground 

chance to tell me I can't go nowhere," he said to himself. 
"I ain't even going to give Kernel the chance to have to 
cuss a nigger on my account." This, though he and Sutpen 
had spent more than one afternoon together on those rare 
Sundays when there would be no company in the house. 
Perhaps his mind knew that it was because Sutpen had noth- 
ing else to do, being a man who could not bear his own 
company. Yet the fact remained that the two of them would 
spend whole afternoons in the scuppernong arbor, Sutpen 
in the hammock and Wash squatting against a post, a pail of 
cistern water between them, taking drink for drink from 
the same demijohn. Meanwhile on weekdays he would see 
the fine figure of the man they were the same age almost 
to a day, though neither of them (perhaps because Wash 
had a grandchild while Sutpen's son was a youth in school) 
ever thought of himself as being so on the fine figure of 
the black stallion, galloping about the plantation. For that 
moment his heart would be quiet and proud. It would seem 
to him that that world in which Negroes, whom the Bible 
told him had been created and cursed by God to be brute 
and vassal to all men of white skin, were better found and 
housed and even clothed than he and his; that world in which 
he sensed always about him mocking echoes of black laugh- 
ter was but a dream and an illusion, and that the actual 
world was this one across which his own lonely apotheosis 
seemed to gallop on the black thoroughbred, thinking how 
the Book said also that all men were created in the image of 
God and hence all men made the same image in God's eyes 
at least; so that he could say, as though speaking of himself, 
"A fine proud man. If God Himself was to come down and 
ride the natural earth, that's what He would aim to look 
like." 

Sutpen returned in 1865, on th e black stallion. He seemed 
to have aged ten years. His son had been killed in action the 



Wash 539 

same winter in which his wife had died. He returned with 
his citation for gallantry from the hand of General Lee to a 
ruined plantation, where for a year now his daughter had 
subsisted partially on the meager bounty of the man to 
whom fifteen years ago he had granted permission to live 
in that tumbledown fishing camp whose very existence he 
had at the time forgotten. Wash was there to meet him, 
unchanged: still gaunt, still ageless, with his pale, question- 
ing gaze, his air diffident, a little servile, a little familiar. 
"Well, Kernel," Wash said, "they kilt us but they ain't 
whupped us yit, air they?" 

That was the tenor of their conversation for the next five 
years. It was inferior whisky which they drank now to- 
gether from a stoneware jug, and it was not in the scupper- 
nong arbor. It was in the rear of the little store which Sut- 
pen managed to set up on the highroad: a frame shelved 
room where, with Wash for clerk and porter, he dispensed 
kerosene and staple foodstuffs and stale gaudy candy and 
cheap beads and ribbons to Negroes or poor whites of 
Wash's own kind, who came afoot or on gaunt mules to 
haggle tediously for dimes and quarters with a man who at 
one time could gallop (the black stallion was still alive; the 
stable in which his jealous get lived was in better repair than 
the house where the master himself lived) for ten miles 
across his own fertile land and who had led troops gallantly 
in battle; until Sutpen in fury would empty the store, close 
and lock the doors from the inside. Then he and Wash 
would repair to the rear and the jug. But the talk would not 
be quiet now, as when Sutpen lay in the hammock, deliver- 
ing an arrogant monologue while Wash squatted guffawing 
against his post. They both sat now, though Sutpen had the 
single chair while Wash used whatever box or keg was 
handy, and even this for just a little while, because soon 
Sutpen would reach that stage of impotent and furious un- 



540 The Middle Ground 

defeat in which he would rise, swaying and plunging, and 
declare again that he would take his pistol and the black 
stallion and ride single-handed into Washington and kill 
Lincoln, dead now, and Sherman, now a private citizen. 
"Kill them!" he would shout. "Shoot them down like the 
dogs they are " 

"Sho, Kernel; sho, Kernel/' Wash would say, catching 
Sutpen as he fell. Then he would commandeer the first 
passing wagon or, lacking that, he would walk the mile to 
the nearest neighbor and borrow one and return and carry 
Sutpen home. He entered the house now. He had been 
doing so for a long time, taking Sutpen home in whatever 
borrowed wagon might be, talking him into locomotion 
with cajoling murmurs as though he were a horse, a stallion 
himself. The daughter would meet them and hold open the 
door without a word. He would carry his burden through 
the once white formal entrance, surmounted by a fanlight 
imported piece by piece from Europe and with a board now 
nailed over a missing pane, across a velvet carpet from which 
all nap was now gone, and up a formal stairs, now but a 
fading ghost of bare boards between two strips of fading 
paint, and into the bedroom. It would be dusk by now, and 
he would let his burden sprawl onto the bed and undress it 
and then he would sit quietly in a chair beside. After a time 
the daughter would come to the door. "We're all right 
now," he would tell her. "Don't you worry none, Miss 
Judith." 

Then it would become dark, and after a while he would 
lie down on the floor beside the bed, though not to sleep, 
because after a time sometimes before midnight the man 
on the bed would stir and groan and then speak. "Wash?" 

"Hyer I am, Kernel. You go back to sleep. We ain't 
whupped yit, air we? Me and you kin do hit." 

Even then he had already seen the ribbon about his grand^ 



Wash 541 

daughter's waist. She was now fifteen, already mature, after 
the early way of her kind. He knew where the ribbon came 
from; he had been seeing it. and its kind daily for three years, 
even if she had lied about where she got it, which she did 
not, at once bold, sullen, and fearful. "Sho now," he said. 
"Ef Kernel wants to give hit to you, I hope you minded to 
thank him." 

His heart was quiet, even when he saw the dress, watching 
her secret, defiant, frightened face when she told him that 
Miss Judith, the daughter, had helped her to make it. But 
he was quite grave when he approached Sutpen after they 
closed the store that afternoon, following the other to the 
rear. 

"Get the jug," Sutpen directed. 

"Wait," Wash said. "Not yit for a minute." 

Neither did Sutpen deny the dress. "What about it?" he 
said. 

But Wash met his arrogant stare; he spoke quietly. "I've 
knowed you for going on twenty years. I ain't never yit 
denied to do what you told me to do. And I'm a man nigh 
sixty. And she ain't nothing but a fifteen-year-old gal." 

"Meaning that I'd harm a girl? I, a man as old as you are?" 

"If you was ara other man, I'd say you was as old as me. 
And old or no old, I wouldn't let her keep that dress nor 
nothing else that come from your hand. But you are differ- 



ent." 



"How different?" But Wash merely looked at him with 
his pale, questioning, sober eyes. "So that's why you are 
afraid of me?" 

Now Wash's gaze no longer questioned. It was tranquil, 
serene. "I ain't afraid. Because you air brave. It ain't that 
you were a brave man at one minute or day of your life and 
got a paper to show hit from General Lee. But you air 
brave, the same as you air alive and breathing. That's where 



542 The Middle Ground 

hit's different. Hit don't need no ticket from nobody to tell 
me that. And I know that whatever you handle or tech, 
whether hit's a regiment of men or a ignorant gal or just a 
hound dog, that you will make hit right." 

Now it was Sutpen who looked away, turning suddenly, 
brusquely. "Get the jug," he said sharply. 

"Sho, Kernel," Wash said. 

So on that Sunday dawn two years later, having watched 
the Negro midwife, which he had walked three miles to 
fetch, enter the crazy door beyond which his granddaughter 
lay wailing, his heart was still quiet though concerned. He 
knew what they had been saying the Negroes in cabins 
about the land, the white men who loafed all day long about 
the store, watching quietly the three of them: Sutpen, him- 
self, his granddaughter with her air of brazen and shrinking 
defiance as her condition became daily more and more ob- 
vious, like three actors that came and went upon a stage. 
"I know what they say to one another," he thought. "I can 
almost hyear them: Wash Jones has fixed old Sutpen at last. 
Hit taken him twenty years, but he has done hit at last" 

It would be dawn after a while, though not yet. From the 
house, where the lamp shone dim beyond the warped door- 
frame, his granddaughter's voice came steadily as though 
run by a clock, while thinking went slowly and terrifically, 
fumbling, involved somehow with a sound of galloping 
hooves, until there broke suddenly free in mid-gallop the 
fine proud figure of the man on the fine proud stallion, 
galloping; and then that at which thinking fumbled, broke 
free too and quite clear, not in justification nor even expla- 
nation, but as the apotheosis, lonely, explicable, beyond all 
fouling by human touch: "He is bigger than all them 
Yankees that kilt his son and his wife and taken his niggers 
and ruined his land, bigger than this hyer durn country that 



Wash 543 

he fit for and that has denied him into keeping a little coun- 
try store; bigger than the denial which hit helt to his lips 
like the bitter cup in the Book. And how could I have lived 
this nigh to him for twenty years without being teched and 
changed by him? Maybe I ain't as big as him and maybe I 
ain't done none of the galloping. But at least I done been 
drug along. Me and him kin do hit, if so be he will show me 
what he aims for me to do." 

Then it was dawn. Suddenly he could see the house, and 
the old Negress in the door looking at him. Then he realized 
that his granddaughter's voice had ceased. "It's a girl," the 
Negress said. "You can go tell him if you want to." She re- 
entered the house. 

"A girl," he repeated; "a girl"; in astonishment, hearing 
the galloping hooves, seeing the proud galloping figure 
emerge again. He seemed to watch it pass, galloping through 
avatars which marked the accumulation of years, time, to 
the climax where it galloped beneath a brandished saber and 
a shot-torn flag rushing down a sky in color like thunderous 
sulphur, thinking for the first time in his life that perhaps 
Sutpen was an old man like himself. "Gittin a gal," he 
thought in that astonishment; then he thought with the 
pleased surprise of a child: "Yes, sir. Be dawg if I ain't lived 
to be a great-grandpaw after all." 

He entered the house. He moved clumsily, on tiptoe, as 
if he no longer lived there, as if the infant which had just 
drawn breath and cried in light had dispossessed him, be it 
of his own blood too though it might. But even above the 
pallet he could see little save the blur of his granddaughter's 
exhausted face. Then the Negress squatting at the hearth 
spoke, "You better gawn tell him if you going to. Hit's day- 
light now." 

But this was not necessary. He had no more than turned 
the corner of the porch where the scythe leaned which he 



544 The Middle Ground 

had borrowed three months ago to clear away the weeds 
through which he walked, when Sutpen himself rode up on 
the old stallion. He did not wonder how Sutpen had got the 
word. He took it for granted that this was what had brought 
the other out at this hour on Sunday morning, and he stood 
while the other dismounted, and he took the reins from Sut- 
pen's hand, an expression on his gaunt face almost imbecile 
with a kind of weary triumph, saying, "Hit's a gal, Kernel. 
I be dawg if you ain't as old as I am " until Sutpen passed 
him and entered the house. He stood there with the reins 
in his hand and heard Sutpen cross the floor to the pallet. 
He heard what Sutpen said, and something seemed to stop 
dead in him before going on. 

The sun was now up, the swift sun of Mississippi latitudes, 
and it seemed to him that he stood beneath a strange sky, 
in a strange scene, familiar only as things are familiar in 
dreams, like the dreams of falling to one who has never 
climbed. "I kain't have heard what I thought I heard," he 
thought quietly. "I know I kain't." Yet the voice, the familiar 
voice which had said the words was still speaking, talking 
now to the old Negress about a colt foaled that morning. 
"That's why he was up so early," he thought. "That was hit. 
Hit ain't me and mine. Hit ain't even hisn that got him outen 
bed." 

Sutpen emerged. He descended into the weeds, moving 
with that heavy deliberation which would have been haste 
when he was younger. He had not yet looked full at Wash. 
He said, "Dicey will stay and tend to her. You better " 
Then he seemed to see Wash facing him and paused. 
"What?" he said. 

"You said--" To his own ears Wash's voice sounded flat 
and ducklike, like a deaf man's. "You said if she was a mare, 
you could give her a good stall in the stable." 

"Well?" Sutpen said. His eyes widened and narrowed.. 



Wash 545 

almost like a man's fists flexing and shutting, as Wash began 
to advance towards him, stooping a little. Very astonish- 
ment kept Sutpen still for the moment, watching that man 
whom in twenty years he had no more known to make any 
motion save at command than he had the horse which he 
rode. Again his eyes narrowed and widened; without mov- 
ing he seemed to rear suddenly upright. "Stand back," he 
said suddenly and sharply. "Don't you touch me." 

"I'm going to tech you, Kernel," Wash said in that flat, 
quiet, almost soft voice, advancing. 

Sutpen raised the hand which held the riding whip; the 
old Negress peered around the crazy door with her black 
gargoyle face of a worn gnome. "Stand back, Wash," Sut- 
pen said. Then he struck. The old Negress leaped down into 
the weeds with the agility of a goat and fled. Sutpen slashed 
Wash again across the face with the whip, striking him to 
his knees. When Wash rose and advanced once more he 
held in his hands the scythe which he had borrowed from 
Sutpen three months ago and which Surpen would never 
need again. 

When he reentered the house his granddaughter stirred 
on the pallet bed and called his name fretfully. "What was 
that?" she said. 

"What was what, honey?" 

"That ere racket out there." 

" 'Twarn't nothing," he said gently. He knelt and touched 
her hot forehead clumsily. "Do you want ara thing?" 

"I want a sup of water," she said querulously. "I been 
laying here wanting a sup of water a long time, but don't 
nobody care enough to pay me no mind." 

"Sho now," he said soothingly. He rose stiffly and fetched 
the dipper of water and raised her head to drink and laid her 
back and watched her turn to the child with an absolutely 
stonelike face. But a moment later he saw that she was cry- 



546 The Middle Ground 

ing quietly. "Now, now," he said, "I wouldn't do that. Old 
Dicey says hit's a right fine gal. Hit's all right now. Hit's all 
over now. Hit ain't no need to cry now." 

But she continued to cry quietly, almost sullenly, and he 
rose again and stood uncomfortably above the pallet for a 
time, thinking as he had thought when his own wife lay so 
and then his daughter in turn: "Women. Hit's a mystry to 
me. They seem to want em, and yit when they git em they 
cry about hit. Hit's a mystry to me. To ara man." Then he 
moved away and drew a chair up to the window and sat 
down. 

Through all that long, bright, sunny forenoon he sat at 
the window, waiting. Now and then he rose and tiptoed to 
the pallet. But his granddaughter slept now, her face sullen 
and calm and weary, the child in the crook of her arm. Then 
he returned to the chair and sat again, waiting, wondering 
why it took them so long, until he remembered that it was 
Sunday. He was sitting there at mid-afternoon when a half- 
grown white boy came around the corner of the house upon 
the body and gave a choked cry and looked up and glared 
for a mesmerized instant at Wash in the window before he 
turned and fled. Then Wash rose and tiptoed again to the 
pallet. 

The granddaughter was awake now, wakened perhaps 
by the boy's cry without hearing it. "Milly," he said, "air 
you hungry?" She didn't answer, turning her face away. 
He built up the fire on the hearth and cooked the food which 
he had brought home the day before: fatback it was, and 
cold corn pone; he poured water into the stale coffee pot 
and heated it. But she would not eat when he carried the 
plate to her, so he ate himself, quietly, alone, and left the 
dishes as they were and returned to the window. 

Now he seemed to sense, feel, the men who would be 
gathering with horses and guns and dogs the curious, and 



Wash 547 

the vengeful: men of Sutpen's own kind, who had made 
the company about Sutpen's table in the time when Wash 
himself had yet to approach nearer to the house than the 
scuppernong arbor men who had also shown the lesser 
ones how to fight in battle, who maybe also had signed 
papers from the generals saying that they were among the 
first of the brave; who had also galloped in the old days 
arrogant and proud on the fine horses across the fine planta- 
tions symbols also of admiration and hope; instruments too 
of despair and grief. 

That was whom they would expect him to run from. It 
seemed to him that he had no more to run from than he had 
to run to. If he ran, he would merely be fleeing one set of 
bragging and evil shadows for another just like them, since 
they were all of a kind throughout all the earth which he 
knew, and he was old, too old to flee far even if he were to 
flee. He could never escape them, no matter how much or 
how far he ran: a man going on sixty could not run that 
far. Not far enough to escape beyond the boundaries of 
earth where such men lived, set the order and the rule of 
living. It seemed to him that he now saw for the first time, 
after five years, how it was that Yankees or any other living 
armies had managed to whip them: the gallant, the proud, 
the brave; the acknowledged and chosen best among them 
all to carry courage and honor and pride. Maybe if he had 
gone to the war with them he would have discovered them 
sooner. But if he had discovered them sooner, what would 
he have done with his life since? How could he have borne 
to remember for five years what his life had been before? 

Now it was getting toward sunset. The child had been 
crying; when he went to the pallet he saw his granddaughter 
nursing it, her face still bemused, sullen, inscrutable. "Air 
you hungry yit?" he said. 

"I don't want nothing." 



548 The Middle Ground 

"You ought to eat." 

This time she did not answer at all, looking down at the 
chi'd. He returned to his chair and found that the sun had 
set. "Hit kain't be much longer," he thought. He could feel 
them quite near now, the curious and the vengeful. He could 
even seem to hear what they were saying about him, the 
undercurrent of believing beyond the immediate fury: Old 
Wash Jones he come a tumble at last. He thought he had 
Sutpen, but Sutpen pooled him. He thought he had Kernel 
'where he would have to marry the gal or pay up. And 
Kernel refused. "But I never expected that, Kernel!" he 
cried aloud, catching himself at the sound of his own voice, 
glancing quickly back to find his granddaughter watching 
him. 

"Who you talking to now?" she said. 

"Hit ain't nothing. I was just thinking and talked out 
before I knowed hit." 

Her face was becoming indistinct again, again a sullen blur 
in the twilight. "I reckon so. I reckon you'll have to holler 
louder than that before he'll hear you, up yonder at that 
house. And I reckon you'll need to do more than holler 
before you get him down here too." 

"Sho now," he said. "Don't you worry none." But already 
thinking was going smoothly on: "You know I never. You 
know how I ain't never expected or asked nothing from ara 
living man but what I expected from you. And I never asked 
that. I didn't think hit would need. I said, / don't need to. 
What need has a fellow like Wash Jones to question or 
doubt the man that General Lee himsetf says in a handwrote 
ticket that he was brave? Brave," he thought. "Better if nara 
one of them had never rid back home in '65"; thinking 
Better if his kind and mine too had never drawn the breath 
of life on this earth. Better that all who remain of us be 
blasted from the face of earth than that another Wash Jones 



Wash 549 

should see his 'whole life shredded from him and shrivel 
away like a dried shuck thrown onto the fire. 

He ceased, became still. He heard the horses, suddenly 
and plainly; presently he saw the lantern and the movement 
of men, the glint of gun barrels, in its moving light. Yet 
he did not stir. It was quite dark now, and he listened to 
the voices and the sounds of underbrush as they surrounded 
the house. The lantern itself came on; its light fell upon the 
quiet body in the weeds and stopped, the horses tall and 
shadowy. A man descended and stooped in the lantern light, 
above the body. He held a pistol; he rose and faced the 
house. "Jones," he said. 

"I'm here," Wash said quietly from the window. "That 
you, Major?" 

"Come out." 

"Sho," he said quietly. "I just want to see to my grand- 
daughter." 

"We'll see to her. Come on out." 

"Sho, Major. Just a minute." 

"Show a light. Light your lamp." 

"Sho. In just a minute." They could hear his voice retreat 
into the house, though they could not see him as he went 
swiftly to the crack in the chimney where he kept the 
butcher knife: the one thing in his slovenly life and house 
in which he took pride, since it was razor sharp. He ap- 
proached the pallet, his granddaughter's voice: 

"Who is it? Light the lamp, grandpaw." 

"Hit won't need no light, honey. Hit won't take but a 
minute," he said, kneeling, fumbling toward her voice, 
whispering now. "Where air you?" 

"Right here," she said fretfully. "Where would I be? 
What is . . ." His hand touched her face. "What is ... 
Grandpaw! Grand. . . ." 

"Jones!" the sheriff said. "Come out of there!" 



550 The Middle Ground 

"In just a minute, Major," he said. Now he rose and 
moved swiftly. He knew where in the dark the can of kero- 
sene was, just as he knew that it was full, since it was not 
two days ago that he had filled it at the store and held it 
there until he got a ride home with it, since the five gallons 
were heavy. There were still coals on the hearth; besides, 
the crazy building itself was like tinder: the coals, the hearth, 
the walls exploding in a single blue glare. Against it the 
waiting men saw him in a wild instant springing toward 
them with the lifted scythe before the horses reared and 
whirled. They checked the horses and turned them back 
toward the glare, yet still in wild relief against it the gaunt 
figure ran toward them with the lifted scythe. 

"Jones!" the sheriff shouted; "stop! Stop, or I'll shoot. 
Jones! Jones!" Yet still the gaunt, furious figure came on 
against the glare and roar of the flames. With the scythe 
lifted, it bore down upon them, upon the wild glaring eyes 
of the horses and the swinging glints of gun barrels, without 
any cry, any sound. 



Honor 



I WALKED right through the anteroom without stopping. 
Miss West says, "He's in conference now," but I didn't stop. 
I didn't knock, either. They were talking and he quit and 
looked up across the desk at me. 

"How much notice do you want to write me off?" I said. 

"Write you off?" he said. 

"I'm quitting," I said. "Will one day be notice enough?" 

He looked at me, frog-eyed. "Isn't our car good enough 
for you to demonstrate?" he said. His hand lay on the desk, 
holding the cigar. Pie's got a ruby ring the size of a tail-light. 
"You've been with us three weeks," he says. "Not long 
enough to learn what that word on the door means." 

He don't know it, but three weeks is pretty good; it's 
within two days of the record. And if three weeks is a record 
with him, he could have shaken hands with the new champion 
without moving. 

The trouble is, I had never learned to do anything. You 
know how it was in those days, with even the college cam- 
puses full of British and French uniforms, and us all scared 
to death it would be over before we could get in and swank 
a pair of pilot's wings ourselves. And then to get in and find 
something that suited you right down to the ground, you 
see. 

So after the Armistice I stayed in for a couple of years as 



552 The Middle Ground 

a test pilot. That was when I took up wing-walking, to re- 
lieve the monotony. A fellow named Waldrip and I used to 
hide out at about three thousand on a Nine while I muscled 
around on top of it. Because Army life is pretty dull in peace- 
time: nothing to do but lay around and lie your head off all 
day and play poker all night. And isolation is bad for poker. 
You lose on tick, and on tick you always plunge. 

There was a fellow named White lost a thousand one 
night. He kept on losing and I wanted to quit but I was 
winner and he wanted to play on, plunging and losing every 
pot. He gave me a check and I told him it wasn't any rush, 
to forget it, because he had a wife out in California. Then the 
next night he wanted to play again. I tried to talk him out of 
it, but he got mad. Called me yellow. So he lost fifteen hun- 
dred more that night. 

Then I said I'd cut him, double or quit, one time. He cut 
a queen. So I said, "Well, that beats me. I won't even cut." 
And I flipped his cut over and riffled them and we saw a gob 
of face cards and three of the aces. But he insisted, and I said, 
"What's the use? The percentage would be against me, even 
with a full deck." But he insisted. I cut the case ace. I would 
have paid to lose. I offered again to tear up the checks, but 
he sat there and cursed me. I left him sitting at the table, in 
his shirt sleeves and his collar open, looking at the ace. 

The next day we had the job, the speed ship. I had done 
everything I could. I couldn't offer him the checks again. I 
will let a man who is worked up curse me once. But I won't 
let him twice. So we had the job, the speed ship. I wouldn't 
touch it. He took it up five thousand feet and dived the wings 
off at two thousand with a full gun. 

So I was out again after four years, a civ again. And while 
I was still drifting around that was when I first tried selling 
automobiles I met Jack, and he told me about a bird that 



Honor 553 

wanted a wing- walker for his barn-storming circus. And that 
was how I met her. 



II 

JACK he gave me a note to Rogers told me about what 
a good pilot Rogers was, and about her, how they said she 
was unhappy with him. 

"So is your old man," I said. 

"That's what they say," Jack said. So when I saw Rogers 
and handed him the note he was one of these lean, quiet- 
looking birds I said to myself he was just the kind that 
would marry one of these flighty, passionate, good-looking 
women they used to catch during the war with a set of 
wings, and have her run out on him the first chance. So I felt 
safe. I knew she'd not have had to wait any three years for 
one like me. 

So I expected to find one of these long, dark, snake-like 
women surrounded by ostrich plumes and Woolworth in- 
cense, smoking cigarettes on the divan while Rogers ran out 
to the corner delicatessen for sliced ham and potato salad on 
paper plates. But I was wrong. She came in with an apron on 
over one of these little pale squashy dresses, with flour or 
something on her arms, without apologizing or flurrying 
around or anything. She said Howard that was Rogers 
had told her about me and I said, "What did he tell you?" 
But she just said: 

"I expect you'll find this pretty dull for spending the 
evening, having to help cook your own dinner. I imagine 
you'd rather go out to dance with a couple of bottles of gin." 

"Why do you think that?" I said. "Don't I look like I 
could do anything else?" 

"Oh, don't you? "she said. 

We had washed the dishes then and we were sitting in the 



554 The Middle Ground 

firelight, with the lights off, with her on a cushion on the 
floor, her back against Rogers' knees, smoking and talking, 
and she said, "I know you had a dull time. Howard sug- 
gested that we go out for dinner and to dance somewhere. 
But I told him you'd just have to take us as we are, first as 
well as later. Are you sorry?" 

She could look about sixteen, especially in the apron. By 
that time she had bought one for me to wear, and the three 
of us would all go back to the kitchen and cook dinner. "We 
don't expect you to enjoy doing this any more than we do," 
she said. "It's because we are so poor. We're just an aviator." 

"Well, Howard can fly well enough for two people," I 
said. "So that's all right, too." 

"When he told me you were just a flyer too, I said, 'My 
Lord, a wing-walker? When you were choosing a family 
friend,' I said, 'why didn't you choose a man we could invite 
to dinner a week ahead and not only count on his being there, 
but on his taking us out and spending his money on us?' But 
he had to choose one that is as poor as we are." And once 
she said to Rogers: "We'll have to find Buck a girl, too. He's 
going to get tired of just us some day." You know how they 
say things like that: things that sound like they meant some- 
thing until you look at them and find their eyes perfectly 
blank, until you wonder if they were even thinking about 
you, let alone talking about you. 

Or maybe I'd have them out to dinner and a show. "Only 
I didn't mean that like it sounded," she said. "That wasn't a 
hint to take us out." 

"Did you mean that about getting me a girl too?" I said. 

Then she looked at me with that wide, blank, innocent 
look. That was when I would take them by my place for a 
cocktail Rogers didn't drink, himself and when I would 
come in that night I'd find traces of powder on my dresser 
or maybe her handkerchief or something, and I'd go to bed 



Honor 555 

with the room smelling like she was still there. She said: "Do 
you want us to find you one?" But nothing more was ever 
said about it, and after a while, when there was a high step 
or any of those little things which men do for women that 
means touching them, she'd turn to me like it was me was her 
husband and not him; and one night a storm caught us down- 
town and we went to my place and she and Rogers slept in 
my bed and I slept in a chair in the sitting-room. 

One evening I was dressing to go out there when the 
'phone rang. It was Rogers. "I am " he said, then something 
cut him off. It was like somebody had put a hand on his 
mouth, and I could hear them talking, murmuring: her, 
rather. "Well, what " Rogers says. Then I could hear her 
breathing into the mouth-piece, and she said my name. 

"Don't forget you're to come out to-night," she said. 

"I hadn't," I said. "Or did I get the date wrong? If this is 
not the night " 

"You come on out," she said. "Goodbye." 

When I got there he met me. His face looked like it always 
did, but I didn't go in. "Come on in," he said. 

"Maybe I got the date wrong," I said. "So if you'll just " 

He swung the door back. "Come on in," he said. 

She was lying on the divan, crying. I don't know what; 
something about money. "I just can't stick it," she said. "I've 
tried and I've tried, but I just can't stand it." 

"You know what my insurance rates are," he said. "If 
something happened, where would you be?" 

"Where am I, anyway? What tenement woman hasn't 
got more than I have?" She hadn't looked up, lying there on 
her face, with the apron twisted under her. "Why don't you 
quit and do something that you can get a decent insurance 
rate, like other men?" 

"I must be getting along," I said. I didn't belong there. I 
just got out. He came down to the door with me, and then 



556 The Middle Ground 

we were both looking back up the stairs toward the door 
where she was lying on her face on the couch. 

"I've got a little stake," I said. "I guess because I've eaten 
so much of your grub I haven't had time to spend it. So if 
it's anything urgent. . . ." We stood there, he holding the 
door open. "Of course, I wouldn't try to muscle in where 
I don't . . ." 

"I wouldn't, if I were you," he said. He opened the door. 
"See you at the field tomorrow." 

"Sure," I said. "See you at the field." 

I didn't see her for almost a week, didn't hear from her. 
I saw him every day, and at last I said, "How's Mildred these 
days?" 

"She's on a visit," he said. "At her mother's." 

For the next two weeks I was with him every day. When 
I was out on top I'd look back at his face behind the goggles. 
But we never mentioned her name, until one day he told me 
she was home again and that I was invited out to dinner that 
night. 

It was in the afternoon. He was busy all that day hopping 
passengers, so I was doing nothing, just killing time waiting 
for evening and thinking about her, wondering some, but 
mostly just thinking about her being home again, breathing 
the same smoke and soot I was breathing, when all of a sud- 
den I decided to go out there. It was plain as a voice saying, 
"Go out there. Now, at once." So I went. I didn't even wait 
to change. She was alone, reading before the fire. It was like 
gasoline from a broken line blazing up around you. 

Ill 

IT WAS FUNNY. When I'd be out on top I'd look back at his 
face behind the windscreen, wondering what he knew. He 
must have known almost at once. Why, say, she didn't have 



Honor 557 

any discretion at all. She'd say and do things, you know: 
insist on sitting close to me; touching me in that different 
way from when you hold an umbrella or a raincoat over 
them, and such that any man can tell at one look, when she 
thought he might not see: not when she knew he couldn't, 
but when she thought maybe he wouldn't. And when I'd 
unfasten my belt and crawl out I'd look back at his face and 
wonder what he was thinking, how much he knew or sus- 
pected. 

I'd go out there in the afternoon when he was busy. I'd 
stall around until I saw that he would be lined up for the rest 
of the day, then I'd give some excuse and beat it. One after- 
noon I was all ready to go, waiting for him to take off, when 
he cut the gun and leaned out and beckoned me. "Don't go 
off," he said. "I want to see you." 

So I knew he knew then, and I waited until he made the 
last hop and was taking off his monkey suit in the office. He 
looked at me and I looked at him. "Come out to dinner," 
he said. 

When I came in they were waiting. She had on one of 
those little squashy dresses and she came and put her arms 
around me and kissed me with him watching. 

"I'm going with you," she said. "We've talked it over and 
have both agreed that we couldn't love one another any more 
after this and that this is the only sensible thing to do. Then 
he can find a woman he can love, a woman that's not bad 
like I am." 

He was looking at me, and she running her hands over my 
face and making a little moaning sound against my neck, 
and me like a stone or something. Do you know what 1 was 
thinking? I wasn't thinking about her at all. I was thinking 
that he and I were upstairs and me out on top and I had just 
found that he had thrown the stick away and was flying her 
on the rudder alone and that he knew that I knew the stick 



558 The Middle Ground 

was gone and so it was all right now, whatever happened. 
So it was like a piece of wood with another piece of wood 
leaning against it, and she held back and looked at my face. 

"Don't you love me any more?" she said, watching my 
face. "If you love me, say so. I have told him everything." 

I wanted to be out of there. I wanted to run. I wasn't 
scared. It was because it was all kind of hot and dirty. I 
wanted to be away from her a little while, for Rogers and 
me to be out where it was cold and hard and quiet, to settle 
things. 

"What do you want to do?" I said. "Will you give her a 
divorce?" 

She was watching my face very closely. Then she let me 
go and she ran to the mantel and put her face into the bend 
of her arm, crying. 

"You were lying to me," she said. "You didn't mean what 
you said. Oh God, what have I done?" 

You know how it is. Like there is a right time for every- 
thing. Like nobody is anything in himself: like a woman, 
even when you love her, is a woman to you just a part of the 
time and the rest of the time she is just a person that don't 
look at things the same way a man has learned to. Don't 
have the same ideas about what is decent and what is not. 
So I went over and stood with my arms about her, thinking, 
"God damn it, if you'll just keep out of this for a little while! 
We're both trying our best to take care of you, so it won't 
hurt you." 

Because I loved her, you see. Nothing can marry two 
people closer than a mutual sin in the world's eyes. And he 
had had his chance. If it had been me that knew her first and 
married her and he had been me, I would have had my 
chance. But it was him that had had it, so when she said, 
"Then say what you tell me when we are alone. I tell you 
I have told him everything," I said. 



Honor 559 

"Everything? Have you told him everything?" He was 
watching us. "Has she told you everything?" I said. 

"It doesn't matter," he said. "Do you want her?" Then 
before I could speak, he said: "Do you love her? Will you 
be good to her?" 

His face was gray-looking, like when you see a man again 
after a long time and you say, "Good God, is that Rogers?" 
When I finally got away the divorce was all settled. 

IV 

So THE NEXT MORNING when I reached the field, Harris, the 
man who owned the flying circus, told me about the special 
job; I had forgotten it, I suppose. Anyway, he said he had 
told me about it. Finally I said I wouldn't fly with Rogers. 

"Why not? "Harris said. 

"Ask him," I said. 

"If he agrees to fly you, will you go up?" 

So I said yes. And then Rogers came out; he said that he 
would fly me. And so I believed that he had known about the 
job all the time and had laid for me, sucked me in. We 
waited until Harris went out. "So this is why you were so 
mealy-mouthed last night," I said. I cursed him. "You've got 
me now, haven't you?" 

"Take the stick yourself," he said. "I'll do your trick." 

"Have you ever done any work like this before?" 

"No. But I can, as long as you fly her properly." 

I cursed him. "You feel good," I said. "You've got me. 
Come on; grin on the outside of your face. Come on!" 

He turned and went to the crate and began to get into the 
front seat. I went and caught his shoulder and jerked him 
back. We looked at one another. 

"I won't hit you now," he said, "if that's what you want. 
Wait till we get down again." 



560 The Middle Ground 

"No," I said. "Because I want to hit back once/' 

We looked at one another; Harris was watching us from 
the office. 

"All right," Rogers said. "Let me have your shoes, will 
you? I haven't got any rubber soles out here." 

"Take your seat," I said. "What the hell does it matter? 
I guess I'd do the same thing in your place." 

The job was over an amusement park, a carnival. There 
must have been twenty-five thousand of them down there., 
like colored ants. I took chances that day that I had never 
taken, chances you can't see from the ground. But every 
time the ship was right under me, balancing me against side 
pressure and all, like he and I were using the same mind. I 
thought he was playing with me, you see. I'd look back at 
his face, yelling at him: "Come on; now you've got me. 
Where are your guts?" 

I was a little crazy, I guess. Anyway, when I think of the 
two of us up there, yelling back and forth at one another, 
and all the little bugs watching and waiting for the big show, 
the loop. He could hear me, but I couldn't hear him; I could 
just see his lips moving. "Come on," I'd yell; "shake the wing 
a little; I'll go off easy, see?" 

I was a little crazy. You know how it is, how you want to 
rush into something you know is going to happen, no matter 
what it is. I guess lovers and suicides both know that feeling. 
I'd yell back at him: "You want it to look all right, eh? And 
to lose me off the level ship wouldn't look so good, would it? 
All right," I yelled, "let's go." I went back to the center 
section and cast the rope loose where it loops around the 
forward jury struts and I got set against it and looked back at 
him and gave him the signal. I was a little crazy. I was still 
yelling at him; I don't know what I was yelling. I thought 
maybe I had already fallen off and was dead and didn't know 
it. The wires began to whine and I was looking straight down 



Honor 561 

at the ground and the little colored dots. Then the wires 
were whistling proper and he gunned her and the ground 
began to slide back under the nose. I waited until it was gone 
and the horizon had slid back under too and I couldn't see 
anything but sky. Then I let go one end of the rope and 
jerked it out and threw it back at his head and held my arms 
out as she zoomed into the loop. 

I wasn't trying to kill myself. I wasn't thinking about my- 
self. I was thinking about him. Trying to show him up like 
he had shown me up. Give him something he must fail at 
like he had given me something I failed at. I was trying to 
break him. 

We were over the loop before he lost me. The ground 
had come back, with the little colored dots, and then the 
pressure went off my soles and I was falling. I made a half 
somersault and was just going into the first turn of a flat spin, 
with my face to the sky, when something banged me in the 
back. It knocked the wind out of me, and for a second I must 
have been completely out. Then I opened my eyes and I was 
lying on my back on the top wing, with my head hanging 
over the back edge. 

I was too far down the slope of the camber to bend my 
knees over the leading edge, and I could feel the wing creep- 
ing under me. I didn't dare move. I knew that if I tried to sit 
up against the slip stream, I would go off backward. I could 
see by the tail and the horizon that we were upside now, in 
a shallow dive, and I could see Rogers standing up in his 
cockpit, unfastening his belt, and I could turn my head a 
little more and see that when I went off I would miss the 
fuselage altogether, or maybe hit it with my shoulder. 

So I lay there with the wing creeping under me, feeling 
my shoulders beginning to hang over space, counting my 
backbones as they crept over the edge, watching Rogers 
crawl forward along the fuselage toward the front seat. I 



562 The Middle Ground 

watched him for a long time, inching himself along against 
the pressure, his trouser-legs whipping. After a while I saw 
his legs slide into the front cockpit and then I felt his hands 
on me. 

There was a fellow in my squadron. I didn't like him and 
he hated my guts. All right. One day he got me out of a 
tight jam when I was caught ten miles over the lines with a 
blowing valve. When we were down he said, "Don't think 
I was just digging you out. I was getting a Hun, and I got 
him." He cursed me, with his goggles cocked up and his 
hands on his hips, cursing me like he was smiling. But that's 
all right. You're each on a Camel; if you go out, that's too 
bad; if he goes out, it's just too bad. Not like when you're 
on the center section and he's at the stick, and just by stall- 
ing her for a second or ruddering her a little at the top of 
the loop. 

But I was young, then. Good Lord, I used to be young! 
I remember Armistice night in '18, and me chasing all over 
Amiens with a lousy prisoner we had brought down that 
morning on an Albatross, trying to keep the frog M.P.'s 
from getting him. He was a good guy, and those damned 
infantrymen wanting to stick him in a pen full of S. O. S. 
and ginned-up cooks and such. I felt sorry for the bastard, 
being so far from home and licked and all. I was sure young. 

We were all young. I remember an Indian, a prince, an 
Oxford man, with his turban and his trick major's pips, that 
said we were all dead that fought in the war. "You will not 
know it," he said, "but you are all dead. With this difference: 
those out there" jerking his arm toward where the front 
was "do not care, and you do not know it." And something 
else he said, about breathing for a long time yet, some kind 
of walking funerals; catafalques and tombs and epitaphs of 
men that died on the fourth of August, 1914, without know- 
ing that they had died, he said. He was a card, queer. A good 
little guy, too. 



Honor 563 

But I wasn't quite dead while I was lying on the top wing 
of that Standard and counting my backbones as they crawled 
over the edge like a string of ants, until Rogers grabbed me. 
And when he came to the station that night to say goodbye, 
he brought me a letter from her, the first I ever had. The 
handwriting looked exactly like her; I could almost smell 
the scent she used and feel her hands touching me. I tore it 
in two without opening it and threw the pieces down. But 
he picked them up and gave them back to me. "Don't be a 
fool," he said. 

And that's all. They've got a kid now, a boy of six. Rogers 
wrote me; about six months afterward the letter caught up 
with me. I'm his godfather. Funny to have a godfather that's 
never seen you and that you'll never see, isn't it? 



So I SAID TO REINHARDT: "Will one day be enough notice?" 
"One minute will be enough," he said. He pressed the 
buzzer. Miss West came in. She is a good kid. Now and then, 
when I'd just have to blow off some steam, she and I would 
have lunch at the dairy place across the street, and I could 
tell her about them, about the women. They are the worst. 
You know; you get a call for a demonstration, and there'll be 
a whole car full of them waiting on the porch and we'd pile 
in and all go shopping. Me dodging around in the traffic, 
hunting a place to park, and her saying, "JM ln insisted that 
I try this car. But what I tell him, it's foolish to buy a car 
that is as difficult to find parking space for as this one appears 
to be." 

And them watching the back of my head with that bright, 
hard, suspicious way. God knows what they thought we 
had; maybe one that would fold up like a deck chair and lean 
against a fire plug. But hell, I couldn't sell hair straightener 
to the widow of a nigger railroad accident. 



564 The Middle Ground 

So Miss West comes in; she is a good kid, only somebody 
told her I had had three or four other jobs in a year without 
sticking, and that I used to be a war pilot, and she'd keep on 
after me about why I quit flying and why I didn't go back to 
it, now that crates were more general, since I wasn't much 
good at selling automobiles or at anything else, like women 
will. You know: urgent and sympathetic, and you can't shut 
them up like you could a man; she came in and Reinhardt 
says, "We are letting Mr. Monaghan go. Send him to the 
cashier." 

"Don't bother," I said. "Keep it to buy yourself a hoop 
with." 



Dr. Martino 



HUBERT JARROD met Louise King at a Christmas house party 
in Saint Louis. He had stopped there on his way home to 
Oklahoma to oblige, with his aura of oil wells and Yale, the 
sister of a classmate. Or so he told himself, or so he perhaps 
believed. He had planned to stop off at Saint Louis two days 
and he stayed out the full week, going on to Tulsa over- 
night to spend Christmas Day with his mother and then 
returning, "to play around a little more with my swamp 
angel," he told himself. He thought about her quite a lot 
on the return train a thin, tense, dark girl. "That to come 
out of Mississippi," he thought. "Because she's got it: a kid 
born and bred in a Mississippi swamp." He did not mean 
sex appeal. He could not have been fooled by that alone, 
who had been three years now at New Haven, belonging 
to the right clubs and all and with money to spend. And 
besides, Louise was a little on the epicene. What he meant 
was a quality of which he was not yet consciously aware: a 
beyond-looking, a passionate sense for and belief in imma- 
nent change to which the rhinoceroslike sufficiency of his 
Yale and oil-well veneer was a little impervious at first. All 
he remarked at first was the expectation, the seeking, which 
he immediately took to himself. 

Apparently he was not wrong. He saw her first across the 
dinner-table. They had not yet been introduced, yet ten 

565 



566 The Middle Ground 

minutes after they left the table she had spoken to him, and 
ten minutes after that they had slipped out of the house and 
were in a taxi, and she had supplied the address. 

He could not have told himself how it happened, for all 
his practice, his experience in surreptitiousness. Perhaps he 
was too busy looking at her; perhaps he was just beginning 
to be aware that the beyond-looking, the tense expectation, 
was also beyond him his youth, his looks, the oil wells and 
Yale. Because the address she had given was not toward any 
lights or music apparently, and she sitting beside him, furred 
and shapeless, her breath vaporizing faster than if she had 
been trying to bring to life a dead cigarette. He watched the 
dark houses, the dark, mean streets. "Where are we going?" 
he said. 

She didn't answer, didn't look at him, sitting a little for- 
ward on the seat. "Mamma didn't want to come," she said. 

"Your mother?" 

"She's with me. Back there at the party. You haven't met 
her yet." 

"Oh. So that's what you are slipping away from. I flattered 
myself. I thought I was the reason." She was sitting forward, 
small, tense, watching the dark houses: a district half dwell- 
ings and half small shops. "Your mother won't let him come 
to call on you?" 

She didn't answer, but leaned forward. Suddenly she 
tapped on the glass. "Here, driver!" she said. "Right here." 
The cab stopped. She turned to face Jarrod, who sat back in 
his corner, muffled, his face cold. "I'm sorry. I know it's a 
rotten trick. But I had to." 

"Not at all," Jarrod said. "Don't mention it." 

"I know it's rotten. But I just had to. If you just under- 
stood." 

"Sure," Jarrod said. "Do you want me to come back and 
get you? I'd better not go back to the party alone." 



Dr. Martino 567 

"You come in with me." 

"Come in?" 

"Yes. It'll be all right. I know you can't understand. But 
it'll be all right. You come in too." 

He looked at her face. "I believe you really mean it," he 
said. "I guess not. But I won't let you down. You set a time, 
and I'll come back." 

"Don't you trust me?" 

"Why should I? It's no business of mine. I never saw you 
before to-night. I'm glad to oblige you. Too bad I am leav- 
ing to-morrow. But I guess you can find somebody else to 
use. You go on in; I'll come back for you." 

He left her there and returned in two hours. She must 
have been waiting just inside the door, because the cab had 
hardly stopped before the door opened and she ran down 
the steps and sprang into the cab before he could dismount. 
"1 hank you," she said. "Thank you. You were kind. You 
were so kind." 

When the cab stopped beneath the porte-cochere of the 
house from which music now came, neither of them moved 
at once. Neither of them made the first move at all, yet a 
moment later they kissed. Her mouth was still, cold. "I like 
you," she said. "I do like you." 

Before the week was out Jarrod offered to serve her again 
so, but she refused, quietly. "Why?" he said. "Don't you 
want to see him again?" But she wouldn't say, and he had 
met Mrs. King by that time and he said to himself, "The old 
girl is after me, anyway." He saw that at once; he took that 
also as the meed due his oil wells and his Yale nimbus, since 
three years at New Haven, leading no classes and winning 
no football games, had done nothing to dispossess him of the 
belief that he was the natural prey of all mothers of daugh- 
ters. But he didn't flee, not even after he found, a few eve- 
nings later, Louise again unaccountably absent, and knew 



568 The Middle Ground 

that she had gone, using someone else for the stalking horse, 
to that quiet house in the dingy street. "Well, I'm done," he 
said to himself. "I'm through now." But still he didn't flee, 
perhaps because she had used someone else this time. "She 
cares that much, anyway," he said to himself. 

When he returned to New Haven he had Louise's prom- 
ise to come to the spring prom. He knew now that Mrs. 
King would come too. He didn't mind that; one day he 
suddenly realized that he was glad. Then he knew that it 
was because he too knew, believed, that Louise needed look- 
ing after; that he had already surrendered unconditionally to 
one woman of them, he who had never once mentioned love 
to himself, to any woman. He remembered that quality of 
beyond-looking and that dark, dingy house in Saint Louis, 
and he thought, "Well, we have her. We have the old 
woman." And one day he believed that he had found the 
reason if not the answer. It was in class, in psychology, and 
he found himself sitting bolt upright, looking at the instruc- 
tor. The instructor was talking about women, about young 
girls in particular, about that strange, mysterious phase in 
which they live for a while. "A blind spot, like that which 
racing aviators enter when making a fast turn. When what 
they see is neither good nor evil, and so what they do is 
likely to be either one. Probably more likely to be evil, since 
the very evilness of evil stems from its own fact, while good 
is an absence of fact. A time, an hour, in which they them- 
selves are victims of that by means of which they victimize." 

That night he sat before his fire for some time, not study- 
ing, not doing anything. "We've got to be married soon," 
he said. "Soon." 

Mrs. King and Louise arrived for the prom. Mrs. King 
was a gray woman, with a cold, severe face, not harsh, but 
watchful, alert. It was as though Jarrod saw Louise, too, for 
the first time. Until then he had not been aware that he was 



Dr. Martino 569 

conscious of the beyond-looking quality. It was only now 
that he saw it by realizing how it had become tenser, as 
though it were now both dread and desire; as though with 
the approach of summer she were approaching a climax, a 
crisis. So he thought that she was ill. 

"Maybe we ought to be married right away," he said to 
Mrs. King. "I don't want a degree, anyway." They were 
allies now, not yet antagonists, though he had not told her 
of the two Saint Louis expeditions, the one he knew of and 
the one he suspected. It was as though he did not need to tell 
her. It was as though he knew that she knew; that she knew 
he knew she knew. 

"Yes," she said. "At once." 

But that was as far as it got, though when Louise and 
Mrs. King left New Haven, Louise had his ring. But it was 
not on her hand, and on her face was that strained, secret, 
beyond-looking expression which he now knew was beyond 
him too, and the effigy and shape which the oil wells and 
Yale had made. "Till July, then," he said. 

"Yes," she said. "I'll write. I'll write you when to come." 

And that was all. He went back to his clubs, his classes; 
in psychology especially he listened. "It seems I'm going to 
need psychology," he thought, thinking of the dark, small 
house in Saint Louis, the blank, dark door through which, 
running, she had disappeared. That was it: a man he had 
never seen, never heard of, shut up in a little dingy house 
on a back street on Christmas eve. He thought, fretfully, 
"And me young, with money, a Yale man. And I don't even 
know his name." 

Once a week he wrote to Louise; perhaps twice a month 
he received replies brief, cold notes mailed always at a dif- 
ferent place resorts and hotels until mid- June, within a 
week of Commencement and his degree. Then he received 
a wire. It was from Mrs. King. It said Come at once and the 



570 The Middle Ground 

location was Cranston's Wells, Mississippi. It was a town 
he had never heard of. 

That was Friday; thirty minutes later his roommate came 
in and found him packing. "Going to town? " the roommate 
said. 

"Yes," Jarrod said. 

"I'll go with you. I need a little relaxation myself, before 
facing the cheering throngs at the Dean's altar." 

"No," Jarrod said. "This is business." 

"Sure," the roommate said. "I know a business woman in 
New York, myself. There's more than one in that town." 

"No," Jarrod said. "Not this time." 

"Beano," the roommate said. 

The place was a resort owned by a neat, small, gray 
spinster who had inherited it, and some of the guests as well, 
from her father thirty years ago a rambling frame hotel 
and a housed spring where old men with pouched eyes and 
parchment skin and old women dropsical with good living 
gathered from the neighboring Alabama and Mississippi 
towns to drink the iron-impregnated waters. This was the 
place where Louise had been spending her summers since 
she was born; and from the veranda of the hotel where the 
idle old women with their idle magazines and embroidery 
and their bright shawls had been watching each summer 
the comedy of which he was just learning, he could see 
the tips of the crepe myrtle copse hiding the bench on 
which the man whom he had come to fear, and whose face 
he had not even seen, had been sitting all day long for three 
months each summer for more than fifteen years. 

So he stood beside the neat, gray proprietress on the top 
step in the early sunlight, while the old women went to and 
fro between house and spring, watching him with covert, 
secret, bright, curious looks. "Watching Louise's young 



Dr. Martina 571 

man compete with a dead man and a horse," Jarrod thought. 

But his face did not show this. It showed nothing at all, 
not even a great deal of intelligence as, tall, erect, in flannels 
and a tweed jacket in the Mississippi June, where the other 
men wore linen when they wore coats at all, he talked with 
the proprietress about the man whose face he had not seen 
and whose name he had just learned. 

"It's his heart," the proprietress said to Jarrod. "He has to 
be careful. He had to give up his practice and everything. 
He hasn't any people and he has just enough money to come 
down here every summer and spend the summer sitting on 
his bench; we call it Doctor Martino's bench. Each summer 
I think it will be the last time; that we shan't see him again. 
But each May I get the message from him, the reservation. 
And do you know what I think? I think that it is Louise 
King that keeps him alive. And that Alvina King is a fool." 

"How a fool?" Jarrod said. 

The proprietress was watching him this was the morn- 
ing after his arrival; looking down at her he thought at 
first, "She is wondering how much I have heard, how much 
they have told me." Then he thought, "No. It's because she 
stays busy. Not like them, those others with their maga- 
zines. She has to stay too busy keeping them fed to have 
learned who I am, or to have been thinking all this time 
what the others have been thinking." 

She was watching him. "How long have you known 
Louise?" 

"Not long. I met her at a dance at school." 

"Oh. Well, I think that the Lord has taken pity on Doctor 
Martino and He is letting him use Louise's heart, somehow. 
That's what I think. And you can laugh if you want to." 

"I'm not laughing," Jarrod said. "Tell me about him." 

She told him, watching his face, her air bright, birdlike, 
telling him about how the man had appeared one June, in 



572 The Middle Ground 

his crumpled linen and panama hat, and about his eyes. 
("They looked like shoe-buttons. And when he moved it 
was as slow as if he had to keep on telling himself, even 
after he had started moving, 'Go on, now; keep on moving, 
now.' ") And about how he signed the book in script almost 
too small to read: Jules Martino, Saint Louis, Missouri. And 
how after that year he came back each June, to sit all day 
long on the bench in the crepe myrtle copse, where the 
old Negro porter would fetch him his mail: the two medical 
journals, the Saint Louis paper, and the two letters from 
Louise King the one in June saying that she would arrive 
next week, and the one in late August saying that she had 
reached home. But the proprietress didn't tell how she 
would walk a little way down the path three or four times 
a day to see if he were all right, and he not aware of it; 
and watching her while she talked, Jarrod thought, "What 
rivers has he made you swim, I wonder?" 

"He had been coming here for three years," the proprie- 
tress said, "without knowing anybody, without seeming to 
want to know anybody, before even I found out about his 
heart. But he kept on coming (I forgot to say that Alvina 
King was already spending the summer here, right after 
Louise was born) and then I noticed how he would always 
be sitting where he could watch Louise playing, and so I 
thought that maybe he had lost his child. That was before 
he told me that he had never married and he didn't have 
any family at all. I thought that was what attracted him to 
Louise. And so I would watch him while he watched Louise 
growing up. I would see them talking, and him watching 
her year after year, and so after a while I said to myself. 
'He wants to be married. He's waiting for Louise to grow 
up.' That's what I thought then." The proprietress was not 
looking at Jarrod now. She laughed a little. "My Lord, I've 
thought a lot of foolishness in my time." 



Dr. Martino 573 

"I don't know that that was so foolish," Jarrod said. 

"Maybe not. Louise would make anybody a wife to be 
proud of. And him being all alone, without anybody to look 
after him when he got old." The proprietress was beyond 
fifty herself. "I reckon I've passed the time when I believe 
it's important whether women get married or not. I reckon, 
running this place single-handed this way, I've come to 
believe it ain't very important what anybody does, as long 
as they are fed good and have a comfortable bed." She 
ceased. For a time she seemed to muse upon the shade- 
dappled park, the old women clotting within the marquee 
above the spring. 

"Did he make her do things, then?" Jarrod said. 

"You've been listening to Alvina King," the proprietress 
said. "He never made her do anything. How could he? He 
never left that bench. He never leaves it. He would just sit 
there and watch her playing, until she began to get too old 
to play in the dirt. Then they would talk, sitting on the 
bench there. How could he make her do things, even if he 
had wanted to?' 

"I think you are right," Jarrod said. "Tell me about when 
she swam the river." 

"Oh, yes. She was always afraid of water. But one sum- 
mer she learned to swim, learned by herself, in the pool. He 
wasn't even there. Nor at the river either. He didn't know 
about that until we knew it. He just told her not to be afraid, 
ever. And what's the harm in that, will you tell me?" 

"None," Jarrod said. 

"No," the proprietress said, as though she were not listen- 
ing, had not heard him. "So she came in and told me, and I 
said, 'With the snakes and all, weren't you afraid?' And she 
said: 

" Tes. I was afraid. That's why I did it.' 

" 'Why you did it?' I said. And she said: 



574 The Middle Ground 

" 'When you are afraid to do something you know that 
you are alive. But when you are afraid to do what you are 
afraid of you are dead.' 

" 'I know where you got that,' I said. I'll be bound he 
didn't swim the river too.' And she said: 

" 'He didn't have to. Every time he wakes up in the morn- 
ing he does what I had to swim the river to do. This is what 
I got for doing it: see?' And she took something on a string 
out of the front of her dress and showed it to me. It was a 
rabbit made out of metal or something, about an inch tall, 
like you buy in the ten-cent stores. He had given it to her. 

" 'What does that mean?' I said. 

" 'That's my being afraid,' she said. 'A rabbit: don't you 
see? But it's brass now; the shape of being afraid, in brass 
that nothing can hurt. As long as I keep it I am not even 
afraid of being afraid.' 

" 'And if you are afraid,' I said, 'then what?' 

" 'Then I'll give it back to him,' she said. And what's the 
harm in that, pray tell me? even though Alvina King always 
has been a fool. Because Louise came back in about an hour. 
She had been crying. She had the rabbit in her hand. 'Will 
you keep this for me?' she said. 'Don't let anybody have it 
except me. Not anybody. Will you promise?' 

"And I promised, and I put the rabbit away for her. She 
asked me for it just before they left. That was when Alvina 
said they were not coming back the next summer. 'This 
foolishness is going to end,' she said. 'He will get her killed; 
he is a menace.' 

"And, sure enough, next summer they didn't come. I 
heard that Louise was sick, and I knew why. I knew that 
Alvina had driven her into sickness, into bed. But Doctor 
Jules came in June. 'Louise has been right sick,' I told him. 

" 'Yes,' he said; 'I know.' So I thought he had heard, that 
she had written to him. But then I thought how she must 



Dr. Martina 575 

have been too sick to write, and that that fool mother of 
hers anyway . . ." The proprietress was watching Jarrod. 
"Because she wouldn't have to write him." 

"Wouldn't have to?" 

"He knew she was sick. He knew it. She didn't have to 
write him. Now you'll laugh." 

"I'm not laughing. How did he know?" 

"He knew. Because I knew he knew; and so when he 
didn't go on back to Saint Louis, I knew that she would 
come. And so in August they did come. Louise had grown 
a lot taller, thinner, and that afternoon I saw them standing 
together for the first time. She was almost as tall as he was. 
That was when I first saw that Louise was a woman. And 
now Alvina worrying about that horse that Louise says she's 
going to ride." 

"It's already killed one man," Jarrod said. 

"Automobiles have killed more than that. But you ride 
in an automobile, yourself. You came in one. It never hurt 
her when she swam that river, did it?" 

"But this is different. How do you know it won't hurt 
her?" 

"I just know." 

"How know?" 

"You go out there where you can see that bench. Don't 
bother him; just go and look at him. Then you'll know too." 

"Well, I'd want a little more assurance than that," Jarrod 
said. 

He had returned to Mrs. King. With Louise he had had 
one interview, brief, violent, bitter. That was the night 
before; to-day she had disappeared. "Yet he is still sitting 
there on that bench," Jarrod thought. "She's not even with 
him. They don't even seem to have to be together: he can 
tell all the way from Mississippi to Saint Louis when she is 
sick. Well, I know who's in the blind spot now/' 



576 The Middle Ground 

Mrs. King was in her room. "It seems that my worst com- 
petitor is that horse," Jarrod said. 

"Can't you see he is making her ride it for the same reason 
he made her swim that snake-filled river? To show that he 
can, to humiliate me?" 

"What can I do?" Jarrod said. "I tried to talk to her last 
night. But you saw where I got." 

"If I were a man, I shouldn't have to ask what to do. If 
I saw the girl I was engaged to being ruined, ruined by a 
man, any man, and a man I never saw before and don't even 
know who he is old or not old; heart or no heart ..." 

'Til talk to her again." 

"Talk?" Mrs. King said. "Talk? Do you think I sent you 
that message to hurry down here just to talk to her?" 

"You wait, now," Jarrod said. "It'll be all right. I'll 
attend to this." 

He had to do a good bit of waiting, himself. It was nearly 
noon when Louise entered the empty lobby where he sat. 
He rose. "Well?" 

They looked at each other. "Well?" 

"Are you still going to ride that horse this afternoon?" 
Jarrod asked. 

"I thought we settled this last night. But you're still 
meddling. I didn't send for you to come down here." 

"But I'm here. I never thought, though, that I was being 
sent for to compete with a horse." She watched him, her 
eyes hard. "With worse than a horse. With a damned dead 
man. A man that's been dead for twenty years; he says so 
himself, they tell me. And he ought to know, being a doctor, 
a heart specialist. I suppose you keep him alive by scaring 
him like strychnine, Florence Nightingale." She watched 
him, her face quite still, quite cold. "I'm not jealous," he 
went on. "Not of that bird. But when I see him making you 
ride that horse that has already killed ..." He looked down 



Dr. Martino 577 

at her cold face. "Don't you want to marry me, Louise?" 

She ceased to look at him. "It's because we are young yet. 
We have so much time, all the rest of time. And maybe next 
year, even, this very day next year, with everything pretty 
and warm and green, and he will be ... You don't under- 
stand. I didn't at first, when he first told me how it was to 
live day after day with a match box full of dynamite caps 
in your breast pocket. Then he told me one day, when I was 
big enough to understand, how there is nothing in the world 
but living, being alive, knowing you are alive. And to be 
afraid is to know you are alive, but to do what you are 
afraid of, then you live. He says it's better even to be afraid 
than to be dead. He told me all that while he was still afraid, 
before he gave up the being afraid and he knew he was alive 
without living. And now he has even given that up, and now 
he is just afraid. So what can I do?" 

"Yes. And I can wait, because I haven't got a match box 
of dynamite caps in my shirt. Or a box of conjuring powder, 
either." 

"I don't expect you to see. I didn't send for you. I didn't 
want to get you mixed up in it." 

"You never thought of that when you took my ring. 
Besides, you had already got me mixed up in it, the first 
night I ever saw you. You never minded then. So now I 
know a lot I didn't know before. And what does he think 
about that ring, by the way?" She didn't answer. She was 
not looking at him; neither was her face averted. After a 
time he said, "I see. He doesn't know about the ring. You 
never showed it to him." Still she didn't answer, looking 
neither at him nor away. "All right," he said "I'll give you 
one more chance." 

She looked at him. "One more chance for what?" Then 
she said, "Oh. The ring. You want it back." He watched 
her, erect, expressionless, while she drew from inside her 



578 The Middle Ground 

dress a slender cord on which was suspended the ring and 
a second object which he recognized in the flicking move- 
ment which broke the cord, to be the tiny metal rabbit of 
which the proprietress had told him. Then it was gone, and 
her hand flicked again, and something struck him a hard, 
stinging blow on the cheek. She was already running toward 
the stairs. After a time he stooped and picked up the ring 
from the floor. He looked about the lobby. "They're all 
down at the spring," he thought, holding the ring on his 
palm. "That's what people come here for: to drink water." 

They were there, clotting in the marquee above the well, 
with their bright shawls and magazines. As he approached, 
Mrs. King came quickly out of the group, carrying one of 
the stained tumblers in her hand. "Yes?" she said. "Yes?" 
Jarrod extended his hand on which the ring lay. Mrs. King 
looked down at the ring, her face cold, quiet, outraged. 
"Sometimes I wonder if she can be my daughter. What will 
you do now?" 

Jarrod, too, looked down at the ring, his face also cold, 
still. "At first I thought I just had to compete with a horse," 
he said. "But it seems there is more going on here than I 
knew of, than I was told of." 

"Fiddlesticks," Mrs. King said. "Have you been listening 
to that fool Lily Cranston, to these other old fools here?" 

"Not to learn any more than everybody else seems to have 
known all the time. But then, I'm only the man she was 
engaged to marry." He looked down at the ring. "What do 
you think I had better do now?" 

"If you're a man that has to stop to ask advice from a 
woman in a case like this, then you'd better take the advice 
and take your ring and go on back to Nebraska or Kansas 
or wherever it is." 

"Oklahoma," Jarrod said sullenly. He closed his hand on 
the ring. "He'll be on that bench," he said. 



Dr. Martino 579 

"Why shouldn't he?" Mrs. King said. "He has no one 
to fear here." 

But Jarrod was already moving away. "You go on to 
Louise," he said. "I'll attend to this." 

Mrs. King watched him go on down the path. Then she 
turned herself and flung the stained tumbler into an oleander 
bush and went to the hotel, walking fast, and mounted the 
stairs. Louise was in her room, dressing. "So you gave Hubert 
back his ring," Mrs. King said. "That man will be pleased 
now. You will have no secret from him now, if the ring 
ever was a secret. Since you don't seem to have any private 
affairs where he is concerned; don't appear to desire any " 

"Stop," Louise said. "You can't talk to me like that." 

"Ah. He would be proud of that, too, to have h^ard that 
from his pupil." 

"He wouldn't let me down. But you let me down. He 
wouldn't let me down." She stood thin and taut, her hands 
clenched at her sides. Suddenly she began to cry, her face 
lifted, the tears rolling down her cheeks. "I worry and I 
worry and I don't know what to do. And now you let me 
down, my own mother." 

Mrs. King sat on the bed. Louise stood in her underthings, 
the garments she had removed scattered here and there, 
on the bed and on the chairs. On the table beside the bed lay 
the little metal rabbit; Mrs. King looked at it for a moment. 
"Don't you want to marry Hubert?" she said. 

"Didn't I promise him, you and him both? Didn't I take 
his ring? But you won't let me alone. He won't give me 
time, a chance. And now you let me down, too. Everybody 
lets me down except Doctor Jules." 

Mrs. King watched her, cold, immobile. "I believe that 
fool Lily Cranston is right. I believe that man has some 
criminal power over you. I just thank God he has not 



580 The Middle Ground 

it for anything except to try to make you kill yourself, make 
a fool of yourself. Not yet, that is " 

"Stop," Louise said; "stop!" She continued to say "Stop. 
Stop/' even when Mrs. King walked up and touched her. 
"But you let me down! And now Hubert has let me down. 
He told you about that horse after he had promised me he 
wouldn't." 

"I knew that already. That's why I sent for him. I could 
do nothing with you. Besides, it's anybody's business to keep 
you from riding it." 

"You can't keep me. You may keep me locked up in this 
room to-day, but you can't always. Because you are older 
than I am. You'll have to die first, even if it takes a hundred 
years. And I'll come back and ride that horse if it takes a 
thousand years." 

"Maybe I won't be here then," Mrs. King said. "But 
neither will he. I can outlive him. And I can keep you locked 
up in this room for one day, anyway." 

Fifteen minutes later the ancient porter knocked at the 
locked door. Mrs. King went and opened it. "Mr. Jarrod 
wants to see you downstairs," the porter said. 

She locked the door behind her. Jarrod was in the lobby. 
It was empty. "Yes?" Mrs. King said. "Yes?" 

"He said that if Louise would tell him herself she wants 
to marry me. Send him a sign." 

"A sign?" They both spoke quietly, a little tensely, though 
quite calm, quite grave. 

"Yes. I showed him the ring, and him sitting there on 
that bench, in that suit looking like he had been sleeping 
in it all summer, and his eyes watching me like he didn't 
believe she had ever seen the ring. Then he said, 'Ah. You 
have the ring. Your proof seems to be in the hands of the 
wrong party. If you and Louise are engaged, she should 
have the ring. Or am I just old fashioned?' And me standing 



Dr. Martino 581 

there like a fool and him looking at the ring like it might 
have come from Woolworth's. He never even offered to 
touch it." 

"You showed him the ring? The ring? You fool. What " 
"Yes. I don't know. It was just the way he sat there, the 
way he makes her do things, I guess. It was like he was 
laughing at me, like he knew all the time there was nothing 
I could do, nothing I could think of doing about it he had 
not already thought about; that he knew he could always 
get between us before in time. . . ." 

"Then what? What kind of a sign did he say?" 
"He didn't say. He just said a sign, from her hand to his. 
That he could believe, since my having the ring had exploded 
my proof. And then I caught my hand just before it hit 
him and him sitting there. He didn't move; he just sat 
there with his eyes closed and the sweat popping out on his 
face. And then he opened his eyes and said, 'Now, strike 



me.' " 



"Wait," Mrs. King said. Jarrod had not moved. Mrs. King 
gazed across the empty lobby, tapping her teeth with her 
fingernail. "Proof," she said. "A sign." She moved. "You 
wait here." She went back up the stairs; a heavy woman, 
moving with that indomitable, locomotivelike celerity. She 
was not gone long. "Louise is asleep," she said, for no reason 
that Jarrod could have discerned, even if he had been listen- 
ing. She held her closed hand out. "Can you have your car 
ready in twenty minutes?" 

"Yes. But what ?" 

"And your bags packed. I'll see to everything else." 

"And Louise You mean " 

"You can be married in Meridian; you will be there in 
an hour." 

"Married? Has Louise?" 

"I have a sign from her that he will believe. You get your 



582 The Middle Ground 

things all ready and don't you tell anyone where you are 
going, do you hear?" 

"Yes. Yes. And Louise has?" 

"Not a soul. Here" she put something into his hand. 
"Get your things ready, then take this and give it to him. 
He may insist on seeing her. But I'll attend to that. You just 
be ready. Maybe he'll just write a note, anyway. You do 
what I told you." She turned back toward the stairs, fast, 
with that controlled swiftness, and disappeared. Then Jarrod 
opened his hand and looked at the object which she had 
given him. It was the metal rabbit. It had been gilded once, 
but that was years ago, and it now lay on his palm in mute 
and tarnished oxidation. When he left the room he was not 
exactly running either. But he was going fast. 

But when he re-entered the lobby fifteen minutes later, 
he was running. Mrs. King was waiting for him. 

"He wrote the note," Jarrod said. "One to Louise, and 
one to leave here for Miss Cranston. He told me I could read 
the one to Louise." But Mrs. King had already taken it from 
his hand and opened it. "He said I could read it," Jarrod 
said. He was breathing hard, fast. "He watched me do it, 
sitting there on that bench; he hadn't moved even his hands 
since I was there before, and then he said, 'Young Mr. Jar- 
rod, you have been conquered by a woman, as I have been. 
But with this difference: it will be a long time yet before 
you will realize that you have been slain.' And I said, 'If 
Louise is to do the slaying, I intend to die every day for the 
rest of my life or hers.' And he said, 'Ah; Louise. Were you 
speaking of Louise?' And I said, 'Dead.' I said, 'Dead.' I said, 
'Dead.' " 

But Mrs. King was not there. She was already half way up 
the stairs. She entered the room. Louise turned on the bed, 
her face swollen, with tears or with sleep. Mrs. King handed 
her the note. "There, honey. What did I tell you? He was 



Dr. Martina 583 

just making a fool of you. Just using you to pass the time 
with." 

The car was going fast when it turned into the highroad. 
"Hurry," Louise said. The car increased speed; she looked 
back once toward the hotel, the park massed with oleander 
and crepe myrtle, then she crouched still lower in the seat 
beside Jarrod. "Faster," she said. 

"I say faster, too," Jarrod said. He glanced down at her; 
then he looked down at her again. She was crying. "Are 
you that glad?" he said. 

"I've lost something," she said, crying quietly. "Something 
I've had a long time, given to me when I was a child. And 
now I've lost it. I had it just this morning, and now I can't 
find it." 

"Lost it?" he said. "Given to you . . ." His foot lifted; 
the car began to slow. "Why, you sent . . ." 

"No, no!" Louise said. "Don't stop! Don't turn back! 
Go on!" 

The car was coasting now, slowing, the brakes not yet on. 
"Why, you . . . She said you were asleep." He put his foot 
on the brakes. 

"No, no!" Louise cried. She had been sitting forward; 
she did not seem to have heard him at all. "Don't turn back! 
Go on! Go on!" 

"And he knew," Jarrod thought. "Sitting there on the 
bench, he knew. When he said what he said that I would 
not know that I had been slain." 

The car was almost stopped. "Go on!" Louise cried. "Go 
on!" He was looking down at her. Her eyes looked as if 
they were blind; her face was pale, white, her mouth open, 
shaped to an agony of despair and a surrender in particular 
which, had he been older, he would have realized that he 
would never see again on any face. Then he watched his 
hand set the lever back into gear, and his foot come down 



584 The Middle Ground 

again on the throttle. "He said it himself," Jarrod thought: 
"to be afraid, and yet to do. He said it himself: there's 
nothing in the world but being alive, knowing you are alive." 

"Faster!" Louise cried. "Faster!" The car rushed on; the 
house, the broad veranda where the bright shawls were now 
sibilant, fell behind. 

In that gathering of wide summer dresses, of sucked old 
breaths and gabbling females staccato, the proprietress stood 
on the veranda with the second note in her hand. "Married?" 
she said. "Married?" As if she were someone else, she 
watched herself open the note and read it again. It did not 
take long: 

Lily: 

Don't ^orry about me for a while longer. Vll sit here until 
supper time. Don't worry about me. 

j. M. 

"Don't worry about me," she said. "About me." She went 
into the lobby, where the old Negro was pottering with a 
broom. "And Mr. Jarrod gave you this?" 

"Yessum. Give it to me runnin' and tole me to git his 
bags into de cyar, and next I know, here Miss Louise and 
him whoosh! outen de drive and up de big road like a 
patter-roller." 

"And they went toward Meridian?" 

"Yessum. Right past de bench whar Doctor Jules settin'." 
"Married," the proprietress said. "Married." Still carrying 
the note, she left the house and followed the path until she 
came in sight of the bench on which sat a motionless figure 
in white. She stopped again and re-read the note; again she 
looked up the path toward the bench which faced the road. 
Then she returned to the house. The women had now dis- 
persed into chairs, though their voices still filled the veranda, 
sibilant, inextricable one from another; they ceased suddenly 



Dr. Martino 585 

as the proprietress approached and entered the house again. 
She entered the house, walking fast. That was about an hour 
to sundown. 

Dusk was beginning to fall when she entered the kitchen. 
The porter was now sitting on a chair beside the stove, talk- 
ing to the cook. The proprietress stopped in the door. 
"Uncle Charley," she said, "Go and tell Doctor Jules supper 
will be ready soon." 

The porter rose and left the kitchen by the side door. 
When he passed the veranda, the proprietress stood on the 
top step. She watched him go on and disappear up the path 
toward the bench. A woman passed and spoke to her, but 
she made no reply; it was as though she had not heard, 
watching the shubbery beyond which the Negro had dis- 
appeared. And when he reappeared, the guests on the ve- 
randa saw her already in motion, descending the steps before 
they were even aware that the Negro was running, and they 
sat suddenly hushed and forward and watched her pass the 
Negro without stopping, her skirts lifted from her trim, 
school-mistress ankles and feet, and disappear up the path 
herself, running too. They were still sitting forward, hushed, 
when she too reappeared; they watched her come through 
the dusk and mount the porch, with on her face also a look 
of having seen something which she knew to be true but 
which she was not quite yet ready to believe. Perhaps that 
was why her voice was quite quiet when she addressed one 
of the guests by name, calling her "honey": 

"Doctor Martino has just died. Will you telephone to 
town for me?" 



FOJC Hunt 



AN HOUR before daylight three Negro stable-boys ap- 
proached the stable, carrying a lantern. While one of them 
unlocked and slid back the door, the bearer of the lantern 
lifted it and turned the beam into the darkness where a clump 
of pines shouldered into the paddock fence. Out of this dark- 
ness three sets of big, spaced eyes glared mildly for a moment, 
then vanished. "Heyo," the Negro called. "Yawl cole?" No 
reply, no sound came from the darkness; the mule-eyes did 
not show again. The Negroes entered the barn, murmuring 
among themselves; a burst of laughter floated back out of 
the stable, mellow and meaningless and idiotic. 

"How many of um you see?" the second Negro said. 

"Just three mules," the lantern-bearer said. "It's more than 
that, though. Unc Mose he come in about two o'clock, 
where he been up with that Jup'ter horse; he say it was 
already two of um waiting there then. Clay-eaters. Hoo." 

Inside the stalls horses began to whinny and stamp; over 
the white-washed doors the high, long muzzles moved with 
tossing, eager shadows; the atmosphere was rich, warm, am- 
moniac, and clean. The Negroes began to put feed into the 
patent troughs, moving from stall to stall with the clever 
agility of monkeys, with short, mellow, meaningless cries, 
"Hoo. Stand over dar. Ghy ketch dat fox to-day/' 

In the darkness where the clump of pines shouldered the 
paddock fence, eleven men squatted, surrounded by eleven 

587 



588 The Middle Ground 

tethered mules. It was November, and the morning was chill, 
and the men squatted shapeless and motionless, not talking. 
From the stable came the sound of the eating horses; just 
before day broke a twelfth man came up on a mule and dis- 
mounted and squatted among the others without a word. 
When day came and the first saddled horse was led out of 
the stable, the grass was rimed with frost, and the roof of 
the stable looked like silver in the silver light. 

It could be seen then that the squatting men were all 
white men and all in overalls, and that all of the mules save 
two were saddleless. They had gathered from one-room, 
clay-floored cabins about the pine land, and they squatted, 
decorous, grave, and patient among their gaunt and mud- 
caked and burr-starred mules, watching the saddled horses, 
the fine horses with pedigrees longer than Harrison Blair's, 
who owned them, being led one by one from a steam-heated 
stable and up the gravel path to the house, before which a 
pack of hounds already moiled and yapped, and on the 
veranda of which men and women in boots and red coats 
were beginning to gather. 

Sloven, unhurried, outwardly scarcely attentive, the men 
in overalls watched Harrison Blair, who owned the house 
and the dogs and some of the guests too, perhaps, mount a 
big, vicious-looking black horse, and they watched another 
man lift Harrison Blair's wife onto a chestnut mare and then 
mount a bay horse in his turn. 

One of the men in overalls was chewing tobacco slowly. 
Beside him stood a youth, in overalls too, gangling, with a 
soft stubble of beard. They spoke without moving their 
heads, hardly moving their lips. 

"That the one?" the youth said. 

The older man spat deliberately, without moving. "The 
one what?" 

"His wife's one." 



Fox Hunt 589 

"Whose wife's one?" 

"Blair's wife's one." 

The other contemplated the group before the house. He 
appeared to, that is. His gaze was inscrutable, blank, without 
haste; none could have said if he were watching the man and 
woman or not. "Don't believe anything you hear, and not 
more than half you see," he said. 

"What do you think about it?" the youth said. 

The other spat deliberately and carefully. "Nothing," he 
said. "It ain't none of my wife." Then he said, without rais- 
ing his voice and without any change in inflection, though 
he was now speaking to the head groom who had come up 
beside him. "That fellow don't own no horse." 

"Which fellow don't?" the groom said. The white man 
indicated the man who was holding the bay horse against the 
chestnut mare's flank. "Oh," the groom said. "Mr. Gawtrey. 
Pity the horse, if he did." 

"Pity the horse that he owns, too," the white man said. 
"Pity anything he owns." 

"You mean Mr. Harrison?" the groom said. "Does these 
here horses look like they needs your pity?" 

"Sho," the white man said. "That's right. I reckon that 
black horse does like to be rode like he rides it." 

"Don't you be pitying no Blair horses," the groom said. 

"Sho," the white man said. He appeared to contemplate 
the blooded horses that lived in a steam-heated house, the 
people in boots and pink coats, and Blair himself sitting the 
plunging black. "He's been trying to catch that vixen for 
three years now," he said. "Whyn't he let one of you boys 
shoot it or pizenit?" 

"Shoot it or pizen it?" the groom said. "Don't you know 
that ain't no way to catch a fox?" 

"Why ain't it?" 

"It ain't spo'tin," the groom said. "You ought to been 



590 The Middle Ground 

hanging around urn long enough by now to know how 
gempmuns hunts." 

"Sho," the white man said. He was not looking at the 
groom. "Wonder how a man rich as folks says he is" again 
he spat, in the action something meager but without intended 
insult, as if he might have been indicating Blair with a jerked 
finger "is got time to hate one little old fox bitch like that. 
Don't even want the dogs to catch it. Trying to outride the 
dogs so he can kill it with a stick like it was a snake. Coming 
all the way down here every year, bringing all them folks and 
boarding and sleeping them, to run one little old mangy fox 
that I could catch in one night with a axe and a possum dog." 

"That's something else about gempmuns you won't never 
know," the groom said. 

"Sho," the white man said. 

The ridge was a long shoal of pine and sand, broken along 
one flank into gaps through which could be seen a fallow rice 
field almost a mile wide which ended against a brier-choked 
dyke. The two men in overalls, the older man and the youth, 
sat their mules in one of these gaps, looking down into the 
field. Farther on down the ridge, about a half mile away, the 
dogs were at fault; the yapping cries came back up the ridge, 
baffled, ringing, profoundly urgent. 

"You'd think he would learn in three years that he ain't 
going to catch ere Cal-lina fox with them Yankee city dogs," 
the youth said. 

"He knows it," the other said. "He don't want them dogs 
to catch it. He can't even bear for a blooded dog to go in 
front of him." 

"They're in front of him now though." 

"You think so?" 

"Where is he, then?" 

"I don't know. But I know that he ain't no closer to them 



Fox Hunt 591 

fool dogs right now than that fox is. Wherever that fox is 
squatting right now, laughing at them dogs, that's where he 
is heading for." 

"You mean to tell me that ere a man in the world can smell 
out a fox where even a city dog can't untangle it? " 

"Them dogs yonder can't smell out a straight track be- 
cause they don't hate that fox. A good fox- or coon- or 
possum-dog is a good dog because he hates a fox or a coon 
or a possum, not because he's got a extra good nose. It ain't 
his nose that leads him; it's his hating. And that's why when 
I see which-a-way that fellow's riding, I'll tell you which- 
a-way that fox has run." 

The youth made a sound in his throat and nostrils. "A 
growed-up man. Hating a durn little old mangy fox. I be 
durn if it don't take a lot of trouble to be rich. I be durn if it 
don't." 

They looked down into the field. From farther on down 
the ridge the eager, baffled yapping of the dogs came. The 
last rider in boots and pink had ridden up and passed them 
and gone on, and the two men sat their mules in the pro- 
found and winy and sunny silence, listening, with expressions 
identical and bleak and sardonic on their gaunt, yellow faces. 
Then the youth turned on his mule and looked back up the 
ridge in the direction from which the race had come. At that 
moment the older man turned also and, motionless, making 
no sound, they watched two more riders come up and pass. 
They were the woman on the chestnut mare and the man on 
the bay horse. They passed like one beast, like a double or 
hermaphroditic centaur with two heads and eight legs. The 
woman carried her hat in her hand; in the slanting sun the 
fine, soft cloud of her unbobbed hair gleamed like the chest- 
nut's flank, like soft fire, the mass of it appearing to be too 
heavy for her slender neck. She was sitting the mare with a 
kind of delicate awkwardness, leaning forward as though she 



592 The Aiiddle Ground 

were trying to outpace it, with a quality about her of flight 
within flight, separate and distinct from the speed of the 
mare. 

The man was holding the bay horse against the mare's 
flank at full gallop. His hand lay on the woman's hand which 
held the reins, and he was slowly but steadily drawing both 
horses back, slowing them. He was leaning toward the 
woman; the two men on the mules could see his profile stoop 
past with a cold and ruthless quality like that of a stooping 
hawk; they could see that he was talking to the woman. They 
passed so, with that semblance of a thrush and a hawk in 
terrific immobility in mid-air, with an apparitionlike sudden- 
ness: a soft rush of hooves in the sere needles, and were gone, 
the man stooping, the woman leaning forward like a tableau 
of flight and pursuit on a lightning bolt. 

Then they were gone. After a while the youth said, "That 
one don't seem to need no dogs neither." His head was still 
turned after the vanished riders. The other man said nothing. 
"Yes, sir," the youth said. "Just like a fox. I be durn if I see 
how that skinny neck of hern . . . Like you look at a fox and 
you wonder how a durn little critter like it can tote all that 
brush. And once I heard him say" he in turn indicated, 
with less means than even spitting, that it was the rider of 
the black horse and not the bay, of whom he spoke "some- 
thing to her that a man don't say to a woman in comp'ny, 
and her eyes turned red like a fox's and then brown again like 
a fox." The other did not answer. The youth looked at him. 

The older man was leaning a little forward on his mule, 
looking down into the field. "What's that down there?" he 
said. The youth looked also. From the edge of the woods 
beneath them came a mold-muffled rush of hooves and then 
a crash of undergrowth; then they saw, emerging from the 
woods at full gallop, Blair on the black horse. He entered the 
rice field at a dead run and began to cross it with the unfal- 



Fox Hunt 593 

tering and undeviating speed of a crow's flight, following a 
course as straight as a surveyor's line toward the dyke which 
bounded the field at its other side. "What did I tell you?" 
the older man said. "That fox is hid yonder on that ditch- 
bank. Well, it ain't the first time they ever seen one another 
eye to eye. lie got close enough tc it once two years ago to 
throw that ere leather riding-switch at it.' 7 

"Sho," the youth said. "These folks don't need no dogs." 

In the faint, sandy road which followed the crest of the 
ridge, and opposite another gap in the trees through which 
could be seen a pie-shaped segment of the rice field, and 
some distance in the rear of the hunt, stood a Ford car with 
a light truck body. Beneath the wheel sat a uniformed chauf- 
feur; beside him, hunched into a black overcoat, was a man 
in a derby hat. He had a smooth, flaccid, indoors face and he 
was smoking a cigarette: a face sardonic and composed, yet 
at the moment a little wearily savage, like that of an indoors- 
bred and -inclined man subject to and helpless before some 
natural inclemency like cold or wet. He was talking. 

"Sure. This all belongs to her, house and all. His old man 
owned it before they moved to New York and got rich, and 
Blair was born here. He bought it back and gave it to her for 
a wedding present. All he kept was this what-ever-it-is he's 
trying to catch." 

"And he can't catch that," the chauffeur said. 

"Sure. Coming down here every year and staying two 
months, without nothing to see and nowheres to go except 
these clay-eaters and Nigras. If he wants to live in a herd of 
nigras for two months every year, why don't he go and spend 
a while on Lenox Avenue? You don't have to drink the gin. 
But he's got to buy this place and give it to her for a present 
because she is one of these Southerns and she might get home- 
sick or something. Well, that's all right, I guess. But Four- 



594 The Middle Ground 

teenth Street is far enough south for me. But still, if it ain't 
this, it might be Europe or somewheres. I don't know which 
is worse." 

"Why did he marry her, anyways?" the chauffeur said. 

"You want to know why he married her? It wasn't the 
jack, even if they did have a pot full of it, of this Oklahoma 
Indian oil. . . ." 

"Indian oil?" 

"Sure. The government give this Oklahoma to the Indians 
because nobody else would have it, and when the first Indian 
got there and seen it and dropped dead and they tried to bury 
him, when they stuck the shovel into the ground the oil 
blowed the shovel out of the fellow's hand, and so the white 
folks come. They would come up with a new Ford with a 
man from the garage driving it and they would go to an 
Indian and say, 'Well, John, how much rotten-water you 
catchum your front yard?' and the Indian would say three 
wells or thirteen wells or whatever it is and the white man 
would say, 'That's too bad. The way the White Father put 
the bee on you boys, it's too bad. Well, never mind. You see 
this fine new car here? Well, I'm going to give it to you so 
you can load up your folks and go on to where the water 
don't come out of the ground rotten and where the White 
Father can't put the bee on you no more.' So the Indian 
would load his family into the car, and the garage man would 
head the car west, I guess, and show the Indian where the 
gasoline lever was and hop off and snag the first car back to 
town. See?" 

"Oh," the chauffeur said. 

"Sure. So here we was in England one time, minding our 
own business, when here this old dame and her red-headed 
gal come piling over from Europe or somewheres where the 
gal was going to the high school, and here it ain't a week 
before Blair says, 'Well, Ernie, we're going to get married. 



Fox Hunt 595 

What the hell do you think of that?' And him a fellow that 
hadn't done nothing all his life but dodge skirts so he could 
drink all night and try to ride a horse to death all day, getting 
married in less than a week. But soon as I see this old dame, 
I know which one of her and her husband it was that had 
took them oil wells off the Indians." 

"She must have been good, to put it on Blair at all, let 
alone that quick," the chauffeur said. "Tough on her, though. 
I'd hate for my daughter to belong to him. Not saying noth- 
ing against him, of course." 

"I'd hate for my dog to belong to him. I see him kill a dog 
once because it wouldn't mind him. Killed it with a walking 
stick, with one lick. He says, 'Here. Send Andrews here to 
haul this away.' " 

"I don't see how you put up with him," the chauffeur said. 
"Driving his cars, that's one thing. But you, in the house 
with him day and night. . . ." 

"We settled that. He used to ride me when he was drink- 
ing. One day he put his hand on me and I told him I would 
kill him. 'When?' he says. When you get back from the 
hospital?' 'Maybe before I go there,' I says. I had my hand 
in my pocket. 1 believe you would,' he says. So we get along 
now. I put the rod away and he don't ride me any more and 
we get along." 

"Why didn't you quit?" 

"I don't know. It's a good job, even if we do stay all over 
the place all the time. Jees! half the time I don't know if the 
next train goes to Ty Juana or Italy; I don't know half the 
time where I'm at or if I can read the newspaper next morn- 
ing even. And I like him and he likes me." 

"Maybe he quit riding you because he had something else 
to ride," the chauffeur said. 

"Maybe so. Anyways, when they married, she hadn't 
never been on a horse before in all her life until he bought 



596 The Middle Ground 

this chestnut horse for her to match her hair. We went all 
the way to Kentucky for it, and he come back in the same 
car with it. I wouldn't do it; I says I would do anything in 
reason for him but I wasn't going to ride in no horse Pullman 
with it empty, let alone with a horse already in it. So I come 
back in a lower. 

"He didn't tell her about the horse until it was in the 
stable. 'But I don't want to ride,' she says. 

" 'My wife will be expected to ride,' he says. 'You are 
not in Oklahoma now.' 

" 'But I can't ride,' she says. 

" 'You can at least sit on top of the horse so they will think 
you can ride on it,' he says. 

"So she goes to Callaghan, riding them practice plugs of 
his with the children and the chorines that have took up horse 
riding to get ready to get drafted from the bushes out in 
Brooklyn or New Jersey to the Drive or Central Park. And 
her hating a horse like it was a snake ever since one day when 
she was a kid and gets sick on a merry-go-round." 

"How did you know all this?" the chauffeur said. 

"I was there. We used to stop there now and then in the 
afternoon to see how she was coming on the horse. Some- 
times she wouldn't even know we was there, or maybe she 
did. Anyways, here she would go, round and round among 
the children and one or two head of Zigfield's prize stock, 
passing us and not looking at us, and Blair standing there 
with that black face of his like a subway tunnel, like he knew 
all the time she couldn't ride no horse even on a merry-go- 
round and like he didn't care if she learned or not, just so he 
could watch her trying and not doing it. So at last even 
Callaghan come to him and told him it wasn't no use. 'Very 
well/ Blair says. 'Callaghan says you may be able to sit on 
the top of a painted horse, so I will buy you a horse out of a 



Fox Hunt 597 

dump cart and nail him to the front porch, and you can at 
least be sitting on top of it when we come up.' 

" Til go back to momma's,' she says. 

" 1 wish you would,' Blair says. 'My old man tried all his 
life to make a banker out of me, but your old woman done 
it in two months.' " 

"I thought you said they had jack of their own," the 
chauffeur said. "Why didn't she spend some of that?" 

"I don't know. Maybe there wasn't no exchange for In- 
dian money in New York. Anyways, you would have 
thought she was a conductor on a Broadway surface car. 
Sometimes she wouldn't even wait until I could get Blair 
under a shower and a jolt into him before breakfast, to make 
the touch. So the gal goes to the old dame (she lives on Park 
Avenue) and the gal . . ." 

"Was you there too?" the chauffeur said. 

"Cried . . . What? Oh. This was a maid, a little Irish kid 
named Burke; me and her used to go out now and then. She 
was the one told me about this fellow, this Yale college boy, 
this Indian sweetheart." 

"Indian sweetheart?" 

"They went to the same ward school out at Oklahoma or 
something. Swapped Masonic rings or something before the 
gal's old man found three oil wells in the henhouse and 
dropped dead and the old dame took the gal off to Europe 
to go to the school there. So this boy goes to Yale College 
and last year what does he do but marry a gal out of a tank 
show that happened to be in town. Well, when she finds 
that Callaghan has give her up, she goes to her old woman in 
Park Avenue. She cries. 'I begin to think that maybe I won't 
look funny to his friends, and then he comes there and 
watches me. He don't say nothing,' she says, 'he just stands 
there and watches me.' 

" 'After all I've done for you,' the old dame says. 'Got you 



598 The Middle Ground 

a husband that any gal in New York would have snapped up. 
When all he asks is that you learn to sit on top of a horse and 
not shame him before his swell friends. After all I done for 
you/ the old dame says. 

" 'I didn't,' she says. 'I didn't want to marry him.' 

" 'Who did you want to marry?' the old dame says. 

" 1 didn't want to marry nobody,' the gal says. 

"So now the old dame digs up about this boy, this Allen 
boy that the gal ..." 

"I thought you said his name was Yale," the chauffeur said. 

"No. Allen. Yale is where he went to this college." 

"You mean Columbia." 

"No. Yale. It's another college." 

"I thought the other one was named Cornell or some- 
thing," the chauffeur said. 

"No. It's another one. Where these college boys all come 
from when these hotchachacha deadfalls get raided and they 
give them all a ride downtown in the wagon. Don't you 
read no papers? " 

"Not often," the chauffeur said. "I don't care nothing 
about politics." 

"All right. So this Yale boy's poppa had found a oil well 
too and he was lousy with it too, and besides the old dame 
was mad because Blair wouldn't leave her live in the house 
with them and wouldn't take her nowheres when we went. 
So the old dame give them all three her and Blair and this 
college boy the devil until the gal jumps up and says she 
will ride on a horse or bust, and Blair told her to go on and 
bust if she aimed to ride on this chestnut horse we brought 
all the way back from Kentucky. 1 don't aim for you to ruin 
this good horse,' Blair says. 'You'll ride on the horse I tell 
you to ride on.' 

"So then she would slip out the back way and go off and 
try to ride this horse, this good one, this Kentucky plug, to 



Fox Hunt 599 

learn how first and then surprise him. The first time didn't 
hurt her, but the second time it broke her collar bone, and 
she was scared how Blair would find it out until she found 
out how he had knew it all the time that she was riding on 
it. So when we come down here for the first time that year 
and Blair started chasing this lyron or whatever it " 

"Fox," the chauffeur said. 

"All right. That's what I said. So when " 

"You said lyron," the chauffeur said. 

"All right. Leave it be a lyron. Anyways, she would ride 
on this chestnut horse, trying to keep up, and Blair already 
outrun the dogs and all, like this time two years ago when 
he run off from the dogs and got close enough to this lyron 
to hit it with his riding whip " 

"You mean fox," the chauffeur said. "A fox, not a lyron. 
Say . . ." The other man, the valet, secretary, whatever he 
might have been, was lighting another cigarette, crouched 
into his upturned collar, the derby slanted down upon his 
face. 

"Say what? "he said. 

"I was wondering," the chauffeur said. 

"Wondering what?" 

"If it's as hard for him to ride off and leave her as he 
thinks it is. To not see her ruining this good Kentucky 
horse. If he has to ride as fast to do it as he thinks he does." 

"What about that?" 

"Maybe he don't have to ride as fast this year as he did last 
year, to run off from her. What do you think about it?" 

"Think about what?" 

"I was wondering." 

"What wondering?" 

"If he knowed he don't have to ride as fast this year or 
not." 

"Oh. You mean Gawtrey." 



6oo The Middle Ground 

"That his name? Gawtrey?" 

"That's it. Steve Gawtrey." 

"What about him?" 

"He's all right. He'll eat your grub and drink your liquor 
and fool your women and let you say when." 

"Well, what about that?" 

"Nothing. I said he was all right. He's fine by me." 

"How by you?" 

"Just fine, see? I done him a little favor once, and he done 
me a little favor, see?" 

"Oh," the chauffeur said. He did not look at the other. 
"How long has she known him?" 

"Six months and maybe a week. We was up in Connecticut 
and he was there. He hates a horse about as much as she 
does, but me and Callaghan are all right too; I done Callaghan 
a little favor once too, so about a week after we come back 
from Connecticut, I have Callaghan come in and tell Blair 
about this other swell dog, without telling Blair who owned 
it. So that night I says to Blair, 'I hear Mr. Van Dyming 
wants to buy this horse from Mr. Gawtrey too.' 'Buy what 
horse?' Blair says. 'I don't know,' I says. 'One horse looks 
just like another to me as long as it stays out doors where it 
belongs,' I says. 'So do they to Gawtrey,' Blair says. 'What 
horse are you talking about?' 'This horse Callaghan was tell- 
ing you about,' I says. Then he begun to curse Callaghan. 
'He told me he would get that horse for me,' he says. 'It don't 
belong to Callaghan,' I says, 'it's Mr. Gawtrey's horse.' So 
here it's two nights later when he brings Gawtrey home to 
dinner with him. That night I says, 'I guess you bought that 
horse.' He had been drinking and he cursed Gawtrey and 
Callaghan too. 'He won't sell it,' he says. 'You want to keep 
after him,' I says. 'A man will sell anything.' 'How keep after 
him, when he won't listen to a price?' he says. 'Leave your 



Fox Hunt 60 1 

wife do the talking,' I says. 'He'll listen to her.' That was 
when he hit me. . . ." 

"I thought you said he just put his hand on you," the 
chauffeur said. 

"I mean he just kind of flung out his hand when he was 
talking, and I happened to kind of turn my face toward him 
at the same time. He never aimed to hit me because he 
knowed I would have took him. I told him so. I had the rod 
in my hand, inside my coat, all the while. 

"So after that Gawtrey would come back maybe once a 
week because I told him I had a good job and I didn't aim to 
have to shoot myself out of it for no man except myself 
maybe. He come once a week. The first time she wouldn't 
leave him in. Then one day I am reading the paper (you 
ought to read a paper now and then. You ought to keep up 
with the day of the week, at least) and I read where this 
Yale Allen boy has run off with a show gal and they had 
fired him off the college for losing his amateur's standing, 
I guess. I guess that made him mad, after he had done jumped 
the college anyways. So I cut it out, and this Burke kid (me 
and her was all right, too) she puts it on the breakfast tray 
that A.M. And that afternoon, when Gawtrey happens to 
come back, she leaves him in, and this Burke kid happens to 
walk into the room sudden with something I don't know 
what it was and here is Gawtrey and her like a fade-out in 
the pitchers." 

"So Blair got his horse," the chauffeur said. 

"What horse?" 

"The horse Gawtrey wouldn't sell him." 

"How could he, when Gawtrey never owned no horse no 
more than I do, unless it's maybe some dog still finishing last 
year's Selling Plate at Pimlico? Besides, Gawtrey don't owe 
Blair no horse yet." 

"Not yet?" 



602 The Middle Ground 

"She don't like him, see. The first time he come to the 
house alone she wouldn't leave him into the front door. And 
the next time, too, if this Burke kid hadn't happened to left 
that piece out of the papers about this college boy on the 
breakfast tray. And the time after that when he come, she 
wouldn't leave him in again; it was like he might have been 
a horse maybe, or even a dog, because she hated a dog worse 
than she did a horse even, even if she didn't have to try to ride 
on no dog. If it had have been a dog, Blair wouldn't have 
never got her to even try to ride on it. So I'd have to go out 
and steam Callaghan up again until it got to where I wasn't 
no more than one of these Russian droshkies or something." 

" A Russian what?" 

"One of these fellows that can't call their own soul. Every 
time I would leave the house I would have to meet Gawtrey 
in a dump somewheres and then go to see Callaghan and 
soap him down, because he is one of these boys with ideas, 
see?" 

"What kind of ideas?" 

"Just ideas. Out of the Sunday school paper. About how 
this wasn't right because he liked her and felt sorry for her 
and so he wanted to tell Blair he had been lying and that 
Gawtrey hadn't never owned no horse. Because a fellow 
that won't take a nickel when it's throwed right in his face, 
he ain't never as big a fool to nobody as he is to the man that 
can have some sense about religion and keep all these golden 
rules in the Sunday school paper where they come from. 
If the Lord didn't want a man to cut his own grass, why did 
He put Sunday on Sunday like he did? Tell me that." 

"I guess you're right," the chauffeur said. 

"Sure I'm right. Jees! I told Callaghan Blair would cut his 
throat and mine both for a Rockefeller quarter, same as any 
sensible man, and I ast him if he thought gals had done all 
give out with Blair's wife; if she was going to be the last one 
they made." 



Fox Hunt 603 

"So he don't . . ." the chauffeur said. He ceased; then he 
said, "Look there." 

The other man looked. Through the gap in the trees, in 
the center of the segment of visible rice field, they could 
see a tiny pink-and-black dot. It was almost a mile away; it 
did not appear to be moving fast. 

"What's that?" the other said. "The fox?" 

"It's Blair," the chauffeur said. "He's going fast. I wonder 
where the others are." They watched the pink-and-black dot 
go on and disappear. 

"They've went back home if they had any sense," the 
other said. "So we might as well go back too." 

"I guess so," the chauffeur said. "So Gawtrey don't owe 
Blair no horse yet." 

"Not yet. She don't like him. She wouldn't leave him in 
the house again after that day, and this Burke kid says she 
come back from a party one night because Gawtrey was 
there. And if it hadn't been for me, Gawtrey wouldn't a got 
invited down here, because she told Blair that if he come, she 
wouldn't come. So I'd have to work on Callaghan again so 
he would come in once a day and steam Blair up again about 
the horse to get Gawtrey invited, because Blair was going to 
make her come." The chauffeur got out of the car and went 
around to the crank. The other man lighted a cigarette. "But 
Blair ain't got his horse yet. You take a woman with long 
hair like she's got, long as she keeps her hair up, it's all right. 
But once you catch her with her hair down, it's just been 
too bad." 

The chauffeur engaged the crank. Then he paused, 
stooped, his head turned. "Listen," he said. 

"What?" 

"That horn." The silver sound came again, faint, distant, 
prolonged. 

"What's that?" the other said. "Do they have to keep 
soldiers here?" 



604 The Middle Ground 

"It's the horn they blow," the chauffeur said. "It means 
they have caught that fox." 

"Jees!" the other said. "Maybe we will go back to town 
to-morrow." 

The two men on the mules recrossed the rice field and 
mounted the ridge into the pines. 

"Well," the youth said, "I reckon he's satisfied now." 

"You reckon he is?" the other said. He rode a little in 
front of the youth. He did not turn his head when he spoke. 

"He's run that fox three years," the youth said. "And now 
he's killed it. How come he ain't satisfied?" 

The older man did not look back. He slouched on his 
gaunt, shabby mule, his overalled legs dangling. He spoke 
in a tone of lazy and ironical contempt. "I reckon that's 
something about gentle-men you won't never know." 

"Fox is fox, to me," the youth said. "Can't eat it. Might 
as well pizen it and save them horses." 

"Sho," the other said. "That's something else about them 
you won't never know." 

"About who?" 

"Gentle-men." They mounted the ridge and turned into 
the faint, sandy road. "Well," the older man said, "gentle- 
man or not, I reckon that's the only fox in Cal-lina that ever 
got itself killed that-a-way. Maybe that's the way they kills 
a fox up north." 

"Then I be durn if I ain't glad I don't live up there," the 
youth said. 

"I reckon so," the other said. "I done got along pretty well 
here for some time, myself." 

"I'd like to see it once though," the youth said. 

"I don't reckon I would," the other said, "if living there 
makes a man go to all this trouble to kill a fox." 

They were riding up the ridge, among the pines, the holly 



Fox Hunt 605 

bushes, the huckleberries and briers. Suddenly the older man 
checked his mule, extending his hand backward. 

"What?" the youth said. "What is it?" 

The pause was hardly a pause; again the older man rode 
on, though he began to whistle, the tone carrying and clear 
though not loud, the tune lugubrious and hymnlike; from 
beyond the bushes which bordered the path just ahead of 
them there came the snort of a horse. "Who is it?" the youth 
said. The other said nothing. The two mules went on in 
single file. Then the youth said quietly, "She's got her hair 
down. It looks like the sun on a spring branch." The mules 
paced on in the light, whispering soil, their ears bobbing, the 
two men sitting loose, with dangling, stirrupless feet. 

The woman sat the mare, her hair a bright cloud, a copper 
cascade in the sun, about her shoulders, her arms lifted and 
her hands busy in it. The man sat the bay horse a short dis- 
tance away. He was lighting a cigarette. The two mules 
came up, tireless, shambling, with drooping heads and nod- 
ding ears. The youth looked at the woman with a stare at 
once bold and covert; the older man did not cease his mellow, 
slow, tuneless whistling; he did not appear to look at them at 
all. He appeared to be about to ride past without a sign 
when the man on the bay spoke to him. 

"They caught it, did they?" he said. "We heard the horn." 

"Yaas," the man in overalls said, in a dry, drawling tone. 
"Yaas. It got caught. 'Twarn't nothing else it could do but 
get caught." 

The youth watched the woman looking at the older man, 
her hands arrested for an instant in her hair. 

"What do you mean?" the man on the bay said. 

"He rode it down on that black horse," the man in over- 
alls said. 

"You mean, there were no dogs there?" 

"I reckon not," the other said. "Them dogs never had no 



606 The Middle Ground 

black horses to ride." The two mules had halted; the older 
man faced the man on the bay a little, his face hidden be- 
neath his shapeless hat. "It crossed the old field and dropped 
over that ditch-bank and hid, allowing for him to jump the 
ditch, and then it aimed to double back, I reckon. I reckon 
it wasn't scared of the dogs. I reckon it had fooled them so 
much it wasn't worried about them. I reckon he was what 
worried it. 1 reckon him and it knowed one another after 
these three years same as you maybe knowed your maw or 
your wife maybe, only you ain't never been married none 
to speak of. Anyway it was on the ditch-bank, and he 
knowed it was there and he cut straight across the field with- 
out giving it no spell to breathe in. I reckon maybe yawl 
seen him, riding straight across that field like he could see 
like a hawk and smell like a dog. And the fox was there, 
where it had done fooled the dogs. But it never had no spell 
to breathe in, and when it had to run again and dropped over 
the ditch-bank, it dropped into the briers, I reckon, and it 
was too tired to get out and run. And he come up and jumped 
that ditch, just like that fox aimed for him to. Only the fox 
was still in the briers, and while he was going through the air 
he looked down and seen the fox and he dumb off the horse 
while it was jumping and dropped feet first into the briers 
like the fox done. Maybe it dodged some then; I don't 
know. He says it just swirled and jumped at his face and he 
knocked it down with his fist and trompled it dead with his 
boot-heels. The dogs hadn't got there then. But it so hap- 
pened he never needed them." He ceased talking and sat for 
a moment longer, sloven and inert upon the shabby, patient 
mule, his face shadowed beneath his hat. "Well," he said, "I 
reckon I'll get on. I ain't had ne'er a bite of breakfast yet. 
I'll bid yawl good morning." He put his mule into motion, 
the second mule following. He did not look back. 

But the youth did. He looked back at the man on the bay 



Fox Hunt 607 

horse, the cigarette burning in his hand, the plume of smoke 
faint and windless in the sunny silence, and at the woman 
on the chestnut, her arms lifted and her hands busy in her 
bright, cloudy hair; projecting, trying to project, himself, 
after the way of the young, toward that remote and inac- 
cessible she, trying to encompass the vain and inarticulate 
instant of division and despair which, being young, was very 
like rage: rage at the lost woman, despair of the man in 
whose shape there walked the tragic and inescapable earth 
her ruin. "She was crying," he said, then he began to curse, 
savagely, without point or subject. 

"Come on," the older man said. He did not look back. "I 
reckon them hunt breakfast hoe-cakes will be about ready 
time we get home." 



Pennsylvania Station 



THEY SEEMED to bring with them the smell of the snow 
falling in Seventh Avenue. Or perhaps the other people who 
had entered before them had done it, bringing it with them 
in their lungs and exhaling it, filling the arcade with a stale 
chill like that which might lie unwinded and spent upon the 
cold plains of infinity itself. In it the bright and serried shop- 
windows had a fixed and insomniac glare like the eyes of 
people drugged with coffee, sitting up with a strange corpse. 

In the rotunda, where the people appeared as small and 
intent as ants, the smell and sense of snow still lingered, 
though high now among the steel girders, spent and vitiated 
too and filled here with a weary and ceaseless murmuring, 
like the voices of pilgrims upon the infinite plain, like the 
voices of all the travelers who had ever passed through it 
quiring and ceaseless as lost children. 

They went on toward the smoking room. It was the old 
man who looked in the door. "All right," he said. He looked 
sixty, though he was probably some age like forty-eight or 
fifty-two or fifty-eight. He wore a long overcoat with a col- 
lar which had once been fur, and a cap with earflaps like the 
caricature of an up-State farmer. His shoes were not mates. 
"There ain't many here yet. It will be some time now." 
While they stood there three other men came and looked 
into the smoking room with that same air not quite diffident 

609 



610 The Middle Ground 

and not quite furtive, with faces and garments that seemed 
to give off that same effluvium of soup kitchens and Salvation 
Army homes. They entered; the old man led the way toward 
the rear of the room, among the heavy, solid benches on 
which still more men of all ages sat in attitudes of thought 
or repose and looking as transient as scarecrows blown by a 
departed wind upon a series of rock ledges. The old man 
chose a bench and sat down, making room for the young 
man beside him. "I used to think that if you sat somewhere 
about the middle, he might skip you. But I found out that 
it don't make much difference where you sit." 

"Nor where you lie, either," the young man said. He wore 
an army overcoat, new, and a pair of yellow army brogans 
of the sort that can be bought from so-called army stores 
for a dollar or so. He had not shaved in some time. "And it 
don't make a hell of a lot of difference whether you are 
breathing or not while you are lying there. I wish I had a 
cigarette. I have got used to not eating but be damned if 
I don't hate to get used to not smoking." 

"Sure now," the old man said. "I wish I had a cigarette 
to give you. I ain't used tobacco myself since I went to 
Florida. That was funny: I hadn't smoked in ten years, yet 
as soon as I got back to New York, that was the first thing 
I thought about. Isn't that funny?" 

"Yes," the young man said. "Especially if you never had 
any tobacco when you thought about wanting it again." 

"Wanting it and not having it couldn't have worried me 
then," the old man said. "I was all right then. Until I " He 
settled himself. Into his face came that rapt expression of 
the talkative old, without heat or bewilderment or rancor. 
"What confused me was I thought all the time that the bury- 
ing money was all right. As soon as I found out about 
Danny's trouble I come right back to New York " 



Pennsy Ivania Station 6 1 1 

II 



is this Danny, anyway?" the young man said. 

"Didn't I tell you? He's Sister's boy. There wasn't any 
of us left but Sister and Danny and me. Yet I was the weakly 
one. The one they all thought wouldn't live. I was give up 
to die twice before I was fifteen, yet I outlived them all. 
Outlived all eight of them when Sister died three years ago. 
That was why I went to Florida to live. Because I thought 
I couldn't stand the winters here. Yet I have stood three of 
them now since Sister died. But sometimes it looks like a man 
can stand just about anything if he don't believe he can 
stand it. Don't you think so?" 

"I don't know," the young man said. "Which trouble 
was this?" 

"Which?" 

"Which trouble was Danny in now?" 

"Don't get me wrong about Danny. He wasn't bad; just 
wild, like any young fellow. But not bad." 

"All right," the young man said. "It wasn't any trouble 
then." 

"No. He's a good boy. He's in Chicago now. Got a good 
job now. The lawyer in Jacksonville got it for him right 
after I come back to New York. I didn't know he had it 
until I tried to wire him that Sister was dead. Then I found 
that he was in Chicago, with a good job. He sent Sister a 
wreath of flowers that must have cost two hundred dollars. 
Sent it by air; that cost something, too. He couldn't come 
himself because he had just got the job and his boss was out 
of town and he couldn't get away. He was a good boy. That 
was why when that trouble come up about that woman on 
the floor below that accused him of stealing the clothes off 
her clothes-line, that I told Sister I would send him the rail- 
road fare to Jacksonville, where I could look after him. Get 



6 1 2 The Middle Ground 

him clean away from them low-life boys around the saloons 
and such. I come all the way from Florida to see about him. 
That was how I happened to go with Sister to see Mr. Pinck- 
ski, before she ever begun to pay on the coffin. She wanted 
me to go with her. Because you know how an old woman 
is. Only she wasn't old, even if her and me had outlived all 
the other seven. But you know how an old woman seems 
to get comfort out of knowing she will be buried right in 
case there isn't any of her kin there to 'tend to it. I guess 
maybe that keeps a lot of them going." 

"And especially with Danny already too busy to see if 
she was buried at all, himself." 

The old man, his mouth already shaped for further speech, 
paused and looked at the young man. "What?" 

"I say, if getting into the ground at last don't keep some 
of them going, I don't know what it is that does." 

"Oh. Maybe so. That ain't never worried me. I guess 
because I was already give up to die twice before I was 
fifteen. Like now every time a winter gets through, I just 
say to myself, 'Well, I'll declare. Here I am again.' That was 
why I went to Florida: because of the winters here. I hadn't 
been back until I got Sister's letter about Danny, and I didn't 
stay long then. And if I hadn't got the letter about Danny, 
maybe I wouldn't ever have come back. But I come back, 
and that was when she took me with her to see Mr. Pinckski 
before she begun to pay on the coffin, for me to see if it was 
all right like Mr. Pinckski said. He told her how the insur- 
ance companies would charge her interest all the time. He 
showed us with the pencil and paper how if she paid her 
money to the insurance companies it would be the same as 
if she worked six minutes longer every night and give the 
money for the extra six minutes to the insurance company. 
But Sister said she wouldn't mind that, just six minutes, 



Pennsy Ivania Station 6 1 3 

because at three or four o'clock in the morning six minutes 
wouldn't " 

"Three or four o'clock in the morning?" 

"She scrubbed in them tall buildings down about Wall 
Street somewhere. Her and some other ladies. They would 
help one another night about, so they could get done at the 
same time and come home on the subway together. So Mr. 
Pinckski showed us with the pencil and paper how if she 
lived fifteen years longer say for instance Mr. Pinckski said, 
it would be the same as if she worked three years and eighty- 
five days without getting any pay for it. Like for three years 
and eighty-five days she would be working for the insurance 
companies for nothing. Like instead of living fifteen years, 
she would actually live only eleven years and two hundred 
and eight days. Sister stood there for a while, holding her 
purse under her shawl. Then she said, 'If I was paying the 
insurance companies to bury me instead of you, I would 
have to live three years and eighty-five days more before I 
could afford to die?' 

" Well,' Mr. Pinckski said, like he didn't know what to 
say. 'Why, yes. Put it that way, then. You would work for 
the insurance companies three years and eighty-five days 
and not get any pay for it.' 

" It ain't the work I mind,' Sister said. 'It ain't the work- 
ing.' Then she took the first half a dollar out of her purse 
and put it down on Mr. Pinckski's desk." 



Ill 

Now AND THEN, with a long and fading reverberation, a 
subway train passed under their feet. Perhaps they thought 
momentarily of two green eyes tunneling violently through 
the earth without apparent propulsion or guidance, as 
though of their own unparalleled violence creating, like 



6 14 The Middle Ground 

spaced beads on a string, lighted niches in whose wan and 
fleeting glare human figures like corpses set momentarily on 
end in a violated grave yard leaned in one streaming and 
rigid direction and flicked away. 

"Because I was a weak child. They give me up to die 
twice before I was fifteen. There was an insurance agent 
sold me a policy once, worried at me until I said all right, 
I would take it. Then they examined me and the only policy 
they would give me was a thousand dollars at the rate of 
fifty years old. And me just twenty-seven then. I was the 
third one of eight, yet when Sister died three years ago I 
had outlived them all. So when we got that trouble of 
Danny's about the woman that said he stole the clothes 
fixed up, Sister could " 

"How did you get it fixed up?" 

"We paid the money to the man that his job was to look 
after the boys that Danny run with. The alderman knew 
Danny and the other boys. It was all right then. So Sister 
could go on paying the fifty cents to Mr. Pinckski every 
week. Because we fixed it up for me to send the railroad 
fare for Danny as soon as I could, so he could be in Florida 
where I could look out for him. And I went back to Jackson- 
ville and Sister could pay Mr. Pinckski the fifty cents with- 
out worrying. Each Sunday morning when her and the 
other ladies got through, they would go home by Mr, 
Pinckski's and wake him up and Sister would give him the 
fifty cents. 

"He never minded what time it was because Sister was a 
good customer. He told her it would be all right, whatever 
time she got there, to wake him up and pay him. So some- 
times it would be as late as four o'clock, especially if they 
had had a parade or something and the buildings messed up 
with confetti and maybe flags. Maybe four times a year the 
lady that lived next door to Sister would write me a letter 



Pennsy Ivania Station 6 1 5 

telling me how much Sister had paid to Mr. Pinckski and 
that Danny was getting along fine, behaving and not run- 
ning around with them tough boys any more. So when I 
could I sent Danny the railroad fare to Florida. I never 
expected to hear about the money. 

"That was what confused me. Sister could read some. 
She could read the church weekly fine that the priest gave 
her, but she never was much for writing. She said if she 
could just happen to find a pencil the size of a broom handle 
that she could use both hands on, that she could write fine. 
But regular pencils were too small for her. She said she 
couldn't feel like she had anything in her hand. So I never 
expected to hear about the money. I just sent it and then I 
fixed up with the landlady where I was living for a place 
for Danny, just thinking that some day soon Danny would 
just come walking in with his suit-case. The landlady kept 
the room a week for me, and then a man come in to rent it, 
so there wasn't anything she could do but give me the re- 
fusal of it. 

"That wasn't no more than fair, after she had already 
kept it open a week for me. So I begun to pay for the room 
and when Danny didn't come I thought maybe something 
had come up, with the hard winter and all, and Sister needed 
the money worse than to send Danny to Florida on it, or 
maybe she thought he was too young yet. So after three 
months I let the room go. Every three or four months I 
would get the letter from the lady next door to Sister, about 
how every Sunday morning Sister and the other ladies 
would go to Mr. Pinckski and pay him the fifty cents. After 
fifty-two weeks, Mr. Pinckski set the coffin aside, with her 
name cut on a steel plate and nailed onto the coffin, her full 
name: Mrs. Margaret Noonan Gihon. 

"It was a cheap coffin at first, just a wooden box, but 
after she had paid the second fifty-two half a dollars he took 



616 The Middle Ground 

the name plate off of it and nailed it onto a better coffin, 
letting her pick it out herself in case she died that year. And 
after the third fifty-two half a dollars he let her pick out a 
still finer one, and the next year one with gold handles on it. 
He would let her come in and look at it whenever she 
wanted and bring whoever she wanted with her, to see the 
coffin and her name cut in the steel plate and nailed onto it. 
Even at four o'clock in the morning he would come down 
in his night-shirt and unlock the door and turn the light on 
for Sister and the other ladies to go back and look at the 
coffin. 

"Each year it got to be a better coffin, with Mr. Pinckski 
showing the other ladies with the pencil and paper how 
Sister would have the coffin paid out soon and then she 
would just be paying on the gold handles and the lining. 
He let her pick out the lining too that she wanted and when 
the lady next door wrote me the next letter, Sister sent me 
a sample of the lining and a picture of the handles. Sister 
drew the picture, but she never could use a pencil because 
she always said the handle was too small for her to hold, 
though she could read the church weekly the priest gave 
her, because she said the Lord illuminated it for her." 

"Is that so?" the young man said. "Jesus, I wish I either 
had a smoke or I would quit thinking about it." 

"Yes. And a sample of the lining. But I couldn't tell much 
about it except that it suited Sister and that she liked it how 
Mr. Pinckski would let her bring in the other ladies to look 
at the trimmings and help her make up her mind. Because 
Mr. Pinckski said he would trust her because he didn't 
believe she would go and die on him to hurt his business like 
some did, and him not charging her a cent of interest like the 
insurance companies would charge. All she had to do was 
just to stop there every Sunday morning and pay him the 
half a dollar." 



Pennsylvania Station 6 1 7 

"Is that so?" the young man said, "He must be in the 
poor-house now." 

"What?" The old man looked at the young man, his ex- 
pression fixed. "Who in the poor-house now?" 

IV 

"WHERE WAS Danny all this time? Still doing his settle- 
ment work?" 

"Yes. He worked whenever he could get a job. But a high- 
spirited young fellow, without nobody but a widow woman 
mother, without no father to learn him how you have to 
give and take in this world. That was why I wanted him 
down in Florida with me." 

Now his arrested expression faded; he went easily into 
narration again with a kind of physical and unlistening joy, 
like a checked and long-broken horse slacked off again. 

"That was what got me confused. I had already sent the 
money for him to come to Jacksonville on and when I never 
heard about it I just thought maybe Sister needed it with 
the hard winter and all or maybe she thought Danny was 
too young, like women will. And then about eight months 
after I let the room go I had a funny letter from the lady 
that lived next door to Sister. It said how Mr. Pinckski had 
moved the plate onto the next coffin and it said how glad 
Sister was that Danny was doing so well and she knew I 
would take good care of him because he was a good boy, 
besides being all Sister had. Like Danny was already in 
Florida, all the time. 

"But I never knew he was there until I got the wire from 
him. It come from Augustine, not any piece away; I never 
found out until Sister died how Mrs. Zilich, that's the lady 
next door to her, that wrote the letters for Sister, had writ- 
ten me that Danny was coming to Florida the day he left, 



618 The Middle Ground 

the day after the money come. Mrs. Zilich told how she had 
written the letter for Sister and give it to Danny himself to 
mail the night before he left. I never got it. I reckon Danny 
never mailed it. I reckon, being a young, high-spirited boy, 
he decided he wanted to strike out himself and show us 
what he could do without any help from us, like I did when 
I come to Florida. 

"Mrs. Zilich said she thought of course Danny was with 
me and that she thought at the time it was funny that when 
I would write to Sister I never mentioned Danny. So when 
she would read the letters to Sister she would put in some- 
thing about Danny was all right and doing fine. So when I 
got the wire from Danny in Augustine I telephoned Mrs. 
Zilich in New York. It cost eleven dollars. I told her that 
Danny was in a little trouble, not serious, and for her to not 
tell Sister it was serious trouble, to just tell her that we 
would need some money. Because I had sent money for 
Danny to come to Florida on and I had paid the three 
months for the room and I had just paid the premium on my 
insurance, and so the lawyer looked at Danny and Danny 
sitting there on the cot in the cell without no collar on and 
Danny said, 'Where would I get any money/ only it was 
jack he called it. 

"And the lawyer said, 'Where would you get it?' and 
Danny said, 'Just set me down back home for ten minutes. 
I'll show you.' 'Seventy-five bucks,' he says, telling me that 
was all of it. Then the lawyer says that was neither here nor 
there and so I telephoned to Mrs. Zilich and told her to tell 
Sister to go to Mr. Pinckski and ask him to let her take back 
some of the coffin money; he could put the name plate back 
on the coffin she had last year or maybe the year before, and 
as soon as I could get some money on my insurance policy 
I would pay Mr. Pinckski back and some interest too. I 
telephoned from the jail, but I didn't say where I was tele- 



Pennsylvania Station 6 1 9 

phoning from; I just said we would need some money 
quick." 

"What was he in for this time?" the young man said. 

"He wasn't in jail the other time, about them clothes off 
that line. That woman was lying about him. After we paid 
the money, she admitted she was probably mistaken." 

"All right," the young man said. "What was he in for?" 

"They called it grand larceny and killing a policeman. 
They framed him, them others did that didn't like him. He 
was just wild. That was all. He was a good boy. When 
Sister died he couldn't come to the funeral. But he sent a 
wreath that must have cost $200 if it cost a cent. By air 
mail, with the high postage in the . . ." 

His voice died away; he looked at the young man with a 
kind of pleased astonishment. "I'll declare I made a joke. 
But I didn't mean " 

"Sure. I know you didn't mean to make a joke. What 
about the jail?" 

"The lawyer was already there when I got there. Some 
friends had sent the lawyer to help him. And he swore to 
me on his mother's name that he wasn't even there when the 
cop got shot. He was in Orlando at the time. He showed me 
a ticket from Orlando to Waycross that he had bought and 
missed the train; that was how he happened to have it with 
him. It had the date punched in it, the same night the police- 
man got killed, showing that Danny wasn't even there and 
that them other boys had framed him. He was mad. The 
lawyer said how he would see the friends that had sent him 
to help Danny and get them to help. 'By God, they better,' 
Danny said. If they think I'm going to take this laying 
down they better ' 

"Then the lawyer got him quiet again, like he did when 
Danny was talking about that money the man he worked for 
or something had held out on him back in New York. And 



620 The Middle Ground 

so I telephoned Mrs. Zilich, so as not to worry Sister, and 
told her to go to Mr. Pinckski. Two days later I got the 
telegram from Mrs. Zilich. I guess Mrs. Zilich hadn't never 
sent a telegram before and so she didn't know she had ten 
words without counting the address because it just said 
You and Danny come home quick Mrs. Sophie Zilich New 
York. 

"I couldn't make nothing out of it and we talked it over 
and the lawyer said I better go and see, that he would take 
care of Danny till I got back. So we fixed up a letter from 
Danny to Sister, for Mrs. Zilich to read to her, about how 
Danny was all right and getting along fine " 

V 

AT THAT moment there entered the room a man in the uni- 
form of the railway company. As he entered, from about 
him somewhere behind, above a voice came. Though it 
spoke human speech it did not sound like a human voice, 
since it was too big to have emerged from known man 
and it had a quality at once booming, cold, and forlorn, as 
though it were not interested in nor listening to what it said. 

"There," the old man said. 

He and the young man turned and looked back across 
the benches, as most of the other heads had done, as though 
they were all dummies moved by a single wire. The man in 
uniform advanced slowly into the room, moving along the 
first bench. As he did so the men on that bench and on the 
others began to rise and depart, passing the man in uniform 
as though he were not there; he too moving on into the 
room as if it were empty. "I guess we'll have to move." 

"Hell," the young man said. "Let him come in and ask 
for them. They pay him to do it." 

"He caught me the other night. The second time, too." 



Pennsylvania Station 62 1 

"What about that? This time won't make but three. What 
did you do then?" 

"Oh, yes," the old man said. "I knew that was the only 
thing to do, after that telegram. Mrs. Zilich wouldn't have 
spent the money to telegraph without good reason. I didn't 
know what she had told Sister. I just knew that Mrs. Zilich 
thought there wasn't time to write a letter and that she was 
trying to save money on the telegram, not knowing she had 
ten words and the man at the telegraph office not telling her 
better. So I didn't know what was wrong. I never suspi- 
cioned it at all. That was what confused me, you see." 

He turned and looked back again toward the man in uni- 
form moving from bench to bench while just before him 
the men in mismated garments, with that identical neatness 
of indigence, with that identical air of patient and indomi- 
table forlornness, rose and moved toward the exit in a mon- 
strous and outrageous analogy to flying fish before the ad- 
vancing prow of a ship. 

"What confused you?" the young man said. 

"Mrs. Zilich told me. I left Danny in the jail. (Them 
friends that sent him the lawyer got him out the next day. 
When I heard from him again, he was already in Chicago, 
with a good job; he sent that wreath. I didn't know he was 
even gone from the jail until I tried to get word to him 
about Sister), and I come on to New York. I had just 
enough money for that, and Mrs. Zilich met me at the sta- 
tion and told me. At this station right here. It was snowing 
that night, too. She was waiting at the top of the steps. 

" 'Where's Sister?' I said. 'She didn't come with you?' 

" What is it now?' Mrs. Zilich said. 'You don't need to 
tell me he is just sick.' 

"'Did you tell Sister he ain't just sick?' I said. 'I didn't 
have to,' Mrs. Zilich said. 'I didn't have time to, even if I 
would have.' She told about how it was cold that night and 



622 The Middle Ground 

so she waited up for Sister, keeping the fire going and a pot 
of coffee ready, and how she waited till Sister had took off 
her coat and shawl and was beginning to get warm, setting 
there with a cup of coffee; then Mrs. Zilich said, 'Your 
brother telephoned from Florida.' That's all she had time to 
say. She never even had to tell Sister how I said for her to 
go to Mr. Pinckski, because Sister said right off, 'He will 
want that money.' Just what I had said, you see. 

"Mrs. Zilich noticed it too. 'Maybe it's because you are 
kin, both kin to that ' Then she stopped and said, 'Oh, I 
ain't going to say anything about him. Don't worry. The 
time to do that is past now.' Then she told me how she said 
to Sister, 'You can stop there on the way down this after- 
noon and see Mr. Pinckski.' But Sister was already putting 
on her coat and shawl again and her not an hour home from 
work and it snowing. She wouldn't wait." 

"She had to take back the coffin money, did she?" the 
young man said. 

"Yes. Mrs. Zilich said that her and Sister went to Mr. 
Pinckski and woke him up. And he told them that Sister had 
already taken the money back." 

"What?" the young man said. "Already?" 

"Yes. He said how Danny had come to him about a year 
back, with a note from Sister saying to give Danny the 
money that she had paid in to Mr. Pinckski and that Mr. 
Pinckski did it. And Sister standing there with her hands 
inside her shawl, not looking at anything until Mrs. Zilich 
said, 'A note? Mrs. Gihon never sent you a note because she 
can't write,' and Mr. Pinckski said, 'Should I know if she 
can't write or not when her own son brings me a note signed 
with her name?' and Mrs. Zilich says, 'Let's see it.' 

"Sister hadn't said anything at all, like she wasn't even 
there, and Mr. Pinckski showed them the note. I saw it too. 
It said, 'Received of Mr. Pinckski a hundred and thirty 



Pennsy hania Station 623 

dollars being the full amount deposited with him less inter- 
est. Mrs. Margaret N. Gihon.' And Mrs. Zilich said how she 
thought about that hundred and thirty dollars and she 
thought how Sister had paid twenty-six dollars a year for 
five years and seven months, and she said, 'Interest? What 
interest?' and Mr. Pinckski said, Tor taking the name off 
the coffin,' because that made the coffin second-handed. And 
Mrs. Zilich said that Sister turned and went toward the door. 
'Wait,' Mrs. Zilich said. 'We're going to stay right here 
until you get that money. There's something funny about 
this because you can't write to sign a note.' But Sister just 
went on toward the door until Mrs. Zilich said, 'Wait, Mar- 
garet.' And then Sister said, 'I signed it.' " 

VI 

THE VOICE of the man in uniform could be heard now as 
he worked slowly toward them: "Tickets. Tickets. Show 
your tickets." 

"I guess it's hard enough to know what a single woman 
will do," the old man said. "But a widow woman with just 
one child. I didn't know she could write, either. I guess she 
picked it up cleaning up them offices every night. Anyway, 
Mr. Pinckski showed me the note, how she admitted she 
signed it, and he explained to me how the difference was; 
that he had to charge to protect himself in case the coffins 
ever were refused and become second-hand; that some folks 
was mighty particular about having a brand new coffin. 

"He had put the plate with Sister's name on it back onto 
the cheap coffin that she started off with, so she was still all 
right for a coffin, even if it never had any handles and lining. 
I never said anything about that; that twenty-six dollars she 
had paid in since she give the money to Danny wouldn't 
have helped any; I had already spent that much getting back 



624 The Middle Ground 

to see about the money, and anyway, Sister still had a cof- 
fin " 

The voice of the man in uniform was quite near now, 
with a quality methodical, monotonous, and implacable: 
"Tickets. Tickets. Show your tickets. All without railroad 
tickets." 

The young man rose. "I'll be seeing you," he said. The 
old man rose too. Beyond the man in uniform the room was 
almost empty. 

"I guess it's about time," the old man said. He followed 
the young man into the rotunda. There was an airplane in it, 
motionless, squatting, with a still, beetling look like a huge 
bug preserved in alcohol. There was a placard beside it, 
about how it had flown over mountains and vast wastes of 
snow. 

"They might have tried it over New York," the young 
man said. "It would have been closer." 

"Yes," the old man said. "It costs more, though. But I 
guess that's fair, since it is faster. When Sister died, Danny 
sent a wreath of flowers by air. It must have cost two hun- 
dred dollars. The wreath did, I mean. I don't know what it 
cost to send it by air." 

Then they both looked up the ramp and through the 
arcade, toward the doors on Seventh Avenue. Beyond the 
doors lay a thick, moribund light that seemed to fill the 
arcade with the smell of snow and of cold, so that for a 
while longer they seemed to stand in the grip of a dreadful 
reluctance and inertia. 

"So they went on back home," the old man said. "Mrs. 
Zilich said how Sister was already shaking and she got Sister 
to bed. And that night Sister had a fever and Mrs. Zilich sent 
for the doctor and the doctor looked at Sister and told Mrs. 
Zilich she had better telegraph if there was anybody to tele- 
graph to. When I got home Sister didn't know me. The 



Pennsy Ivania Station 625 

priest was already there, and we never could tell if she knew 
anything or not, not even when we read the letter from 
Danny that we had fixed up in the jail, about how he was 
all right. The priest read it to her, but we couldn't tell if 
she heard him or not. That night she died." 

"Is that so?" The young man said, looking up the ramp. 
He moved. "I'm going to the Grand Central." 

Again the old man moved, with that same unwearying 
alacrity. "I guess that's the best thing to do. We might have 
a good while there." He looked up at the clock; he said 
with pleased surprise: "Half past one already. And a half 
an hour to get there. And if we're lucky, we'll have two 
hours before he comes along. Maybe three. That'll be five 
o'clock. Then it will be only two hours more till daylight." 



Artist at Home 



ROGER HOWES WAS a fattish, mild, nondescript man of forty, 
who came to New York from the Mississippi Valley some- 
where as an advertisement writer and married and turned 
novelist aud sold a book and bought a house in the Valley of 
Virginia and never went back to New York again, even on 
a visit. For five years he had lived in the old brick house with 
his wife Anne and their two children, where old ladies came 
to tea in horsedrawn carriages or sent the empty carriages 
for him or sent by Negro servants in the otherwise empty 
carriages shoots and cuttings of flowering shrubs and jars of 
pickle or preserves and copies of his books for autographs. 

He didn't go back to New York any more, but now and 
then New York came to visit him: the ones he used to know, 
the artists and poets and such he knew before he began to 
earn enough food to need a cupboard to put it in. The paint- 
ers, the writers, that hadn't sold a book or a picture men 
with beards sometimes in place of collars, who came and 
wore his shirts and socks and left them under the bureau 
when they departed, and women in smocks but sometimes 
not: those gaunt and eager and carnivorous tymbesteres of 
Art. 

At first it had been just hard to refuse them, but now it 
was harder to tell his wife that they were coming. Sometimes 
he did not know himself they were coming. They usually 

627 



628 The Middle Ground 

wired him, on the day on which they would arrive, usually 
collect. He lived four miles from the village and the book 
hadn't sold quite enough to own a car too, and he was a little 
fat, a little overweight, so sometimes it would be two or three 
days before he would get his mail. Maybe he would just wait 
for the next batch of company to bring the mail up with 
them. After the first year the man at the station (he was the 
telegraph agent and the station agent and Roger's kind of 
town agent all in one) got to where he could recognize them 
on sight. They would be standing on the little platform, with 
that blank air, with nothing to look at except a little yellow 
station and the back end of a moving train and some moun- 
tains already beginning to get dark, and the agent would 
come out of his little den with a handful of mail and a pack- 
age or so, and the telegram. "He lives about four miles up the 
Valley. You can't miss it." 

"Who lives about four miles up the valley?" 

"Howes does. If you all are going up there, I thought 
maybe you wouldn't mind taking these letters to him. One 
of them is a telegram." 

"A telegram?" 

"It come this a.m. But he ain't been to town in two-three 
days. I thought maybe you'd take it to him." 

"Telegram? Hell. Give it here." 

"It's forty-eight cents to pay on it." 

"Keep it, then. Hell." 

So they would take everything except the telegram and 
they would walk the four miles to Howes', getting there after 
supper. Which would be all right, because the women would 
all be too mad to eat anyway, including Mrs. Howes, Anne. 
So a couple of days later, someone would send a carriage for 
Roger and he would stop at the village and pay out the wire 
telling him how his guests would arrive two days ago. 

So when this poet in the sky-blue coat gets off the train, 



Artist at Home 629 

the agent comes right out of his little den, with the telegram. 
"It's about four miles up the Valley/' he says. "You can't 
miss it. I thought maybe you'd take this telegram up to him. 
It come this a.m., but he ain't been to town for two-three 
days. You can take it. It's paid." 

"I know it is," the poet says. "Hell. You say it is four miles 
up there?" 

"Right straight up the road. You can't miss it." 
So the poet took the telegram and the agent watched him 
go on out of sight up the Valley Road, with a couple or three 
other folks coming to the doors to look at the blue coat 
maybe. The agent grunted. "Four miles," he said. "That 
don't mean no more to that fellow than if I had said four 
switch frogs. But maybe with that dressing-sacque he can 
turn bird and fly it." 

Roger hadn't told his wife, Anne, about this poet at all, 
maybe because he didn't know himself. Anyway, she didn't 
know anything about it until the poet came limping into the 
garden where she was cutting flowers for the supper table, 
and told her she owed him forty-eight cents. 

"Forty-eight cents?" Anne said. 

He gave her the telegram. "You don't have to open it now, 
you see," the poet said. "You can just pay me back the forty- 
eight cents and you won't have to even open it." She stared 
at him, with a handful of flowers and the scissors in the other 
hand, so finally maybe it occurred to him to tell her who he 
was. "I'm John Blair," he said. "I sent this telegram this 
morning to tell you I was coming. It cost me forty-eight 
cents. But now I'm here, so you don't need the telegram." 

So Anne stands there, holding the flowers and the scissors, 
saying "Damn, Damn, Damn" while the poet tells her how 
she ought to get her mail oftener. "You want to keep up with 
what's going on," he tells her, and her saying "Damn,. Damiu 



630 The Middle Ground 

Damn," until at last he says he'll just stay to supper and then 
walk back to the village, if it's going to put her out that much. 

"Walk?" she said, looking him up and down. "You walk? 
Up here from the village? I don't believe it. Where is your 
baggage?" 

"I've got it on. Two shirts, and I have an extra pair of socks 
in my pocket. Your cook can wash, can't she?" 

She looks at him, holding the flowers and the scissors. Then 
she tells him to come on into the house and live there forever. 
Except she didn't say exactly that. She said: "You walk? 
Nonsense. I think you're sick. You come in and sit down and 
rest." Then she went to find Roger and tell him to bring 
down the pram from the attic. Of course she didn't say ex- 
actly that, either. 

Roger hadn't told her about this poet; he hadn't got the 
telegram himself yet. Maybe that was why she hauled him 
over the coals so that night: because he hadn't got the tele- 
gram. 

They were in their bedroom. Anne was combing out her 
hair. The children were spending the summer up in Connect- 
icut, with Anne's folks. He was a minister, her father was. 
"You told me that the last time would be the last. Not a 
month ago. Less than that, because when that last batch left 
I had to paint the furniture in the guest room again to hide 
where they put their cigarettes on the dressing table and the 
window ledges. And I found in a drawer a broken comb I 
would not have asked Pinkie (Pinkie was the Negro cook) 
to pick up, and two socks that were not even mates that I 
bought for you myself last winter, and a single stocking that 
I couldn't even recognize any more as mine. You tell me that 
Poverty looks after its own: well, let it. But why must we 
be instruments of Poverty? " 

"This is a poet. That last batch were not poets. We haven't 



Artist at Home 63 1 

had a poet in the house in some time. Place losing all its mel- 
lifluous overtones and subtleties." 

"How about that woman that wouldn't bathe in the bath- 
room? who insisted on going down to the creek every morn- 
ing without even a bathing suit, until Amos Grain's (he was 
a farmer that lived across the creek from them) wife had to 
send me word that Amos was afraid to try to plow his lower 
field? What do people like that think that out-doors, the 
country, is? I cannot understand it, any more than I can un- 
derstand why you feel that you should feed and lodge " 

"Ah, that was just a touch of panic fear that probably did 
Amos good. Jolted him out of himself, out of his rut." 

"The rut where he made his wife's and children's daily 
bread, for six days. And worse than that. Amos is young. He 
probably had illusions about women until he saw that crea- 
ture down there without a stitch on." 

"Well, you are in the majority, you and Mrs. Grain." He 
looked at the back of her head, her hands combing out her 
hair, and her probably watching him in the mirror and him 
not knowing it, what with being an artist and all. "This is a 
man poet." 

"Then I suppose he will refuse to leave the bathroom at all. 
I suppose you'll have to carry a tray to him in the tub three 
times a day. Why do you feel compelled to lodge and feed 
these people? Can't you see they consider you an easy mark? 
that they eat your food and wear your clothes and consider 
us hopelessly bourgeois for having enough food for other 
people to eat, and a little soft-brained for giving it away? 
And now this one, in a sky-blue dressing-sacque." 

"There's a lot of wear and tear to just being a poet. I don't 
think you realize that." 

"Oh, I don't mind. Let him wear a lamp shade or a sauce 
pan too. What does he want of you? advice, or just food and 
lodging?" 



632 The Middle Ground 

"Not advice. You must have gathered at supper what his 
opinion of my mentality is." 

"He revealed pretty clearly what his own mentality is. 
The only thing in the house that really pleased him was 
Pinkie's colored head-rag." 

"Not advice," Roger said. "I don't know why he shows 
me his stuff. He does it like you'd give caviar to an elephant." 

"And of course you accept his dictum about the elephant. 
And I suppose you are going to get them to publish his book, 
too." 

"Well, there's some good stuff in it. And maybe if he sees 
it in print, he'll really get busy. Work. Or maybe someone 
will make him mad enough to really write something. Some- 
thing with an entrail in it. He's got it in him. It may not be 
but one poem. But it's there. Maybe if he can just stop talk- 
ing long enough to get it out. And I thought if he came down 
here, where he will have to walk four miles to find somebody 
to talk to, once Amos comes to recognize that blue coat." 

"Ah," Anne said. "So you wrote him to come. I knew you 
had, but I'm glad to hear you admit it of your own free will. 
Go on to bed," she said. "You haven't done a stroke of work 
today, and Lord only knows now when you will." 

Thus life went along in its old pleasant way. Because poets 
are all different from one another, it seemed; this one, any- 
way. Because it soon developed that Anne doesn't see this 
poet at all, hardly. It seems that she can't even know he is in 
the house unless she hears him snoring at night. So it took her 
two weeks to get steamed up again. And this time she is not 
even combing her hair. "Is it two weeks he's been here, or 
just two years?" She is sitting at the dressing table, but she is 
not doing anything, which any husband, even an artist, 
should know is a bad sign. When you see a woman sitting 
half dressed before a dressing table with a mirror and not 



Artist at Home 633 

even watching herself talk in the mirror, it's time to smell 
smoke in the wind. 

"He has been here two weeks, but unless I happen to go to 
the kitchen, I never see him, since he prefers Pinkie's com- 
pany to ours. And when he was missing that first Wednes- 
day night, on Pinkie's evening off, I said at first, 'What tact/ 
That was before I learned that he had taken supper with 
Pinkie's family at her house and had gone with them to prayer 
meeting. And he went again Sunday night and again last 
Wednesday night, and now tonight (and though he tells me 
I have neither intelligence nor imagination) he would be sur- 
prised to know that I am imagining right now that sky-blue 
dressing-sacque in a wooden church full of sweating niggers 
without any incongruity at all." 

"Yes. It's quite a picture, isn't it?" 

"But apart from such minor embarrassments like not 
knowing where our guest is, and bearing upon our patient 
brows a certain amount of reflected ridiculousness, he is a 
very pleasant companion. Instructing, edifying, and self- 
effacing. I never know he is even in the house unless I hear 
your typewriter, because I know it is not you because you 
have not written a line in is it two weeks, or just two years? 
He enters the room which the children are absolutely forbid- 
den and puts his one finger on that typewriter which Pinkie is 
not even permitted to touch with a dust-cloth, and writes a 
poem about freedom and flings it at you to commend and 
applaud. What is it he says?" 

"You tell. This is fine." 

"He flings it at you like like . . . Wait; I've got it: like 
flinging caviar at an elephant, and he says, 'Will this sell?' 
Not, Is this good? or Do you like it? Will this sell? and 
you " 

"Go on. I couldn't hope to even compete." 

"You read it, carefully. Maybe the same poem, I don't 



634 The Middle Ground 

know; I've learned recently on the best authority that I am 
not intelligent enough to get my poetry at first hand. You 
read it, carefully, and then you say, 'It ought to. Stamps in 
the drawer there.' " She went to the window. "No, I haven't 
evolved far enough yet to take my poetry straight; I won't 
understand it. It has to be fed to me by hand, when he has 
time, on the terrace after supper on the nights when there is 
no prayer meeting at Pinkie's church. Freedom. Equality. In 
words of one syllable, because it seems that, being a woman, 
I don't want freedom and don't know what equality means, 
until you take him up and show him in professional words 
how he is not so wise, except he is wise enough to shut up 
then and let you show both of us how you are not so wise 
either." The window was above the garden. There were cur- 
tains in it. She stood between the curtains, looking out. "So 
Young Shelley has not crashed through yet." 

"Not yet. But it's there. Give him time." 

"I'm glad to hear that. He's been here two weeks now. I'm 
glad his racket is poetry, something you can perpetrate in 
two lines. Otherwise, at this rate . . ." She stood between the 
curtains. They were blowing, slow, in and out. "Damn. 
Damn. Damn. He doesn't eat enough." 

So Roger went and put another cushion in the pram. Only 
she didn't say exactly that and he didn't do exactly that. 

Now get this. This is where it starts. On the days when 
there wasn't any prayer meeting at the nigger church, the 
poet has taken to doping along behind her in the garden while 
she cut the flowers for the supper table, talking to her about 
poetry or freedom or maybe about the flowers. Talking 
about something, anyway; maybe when he quit talking all of 
a sudden that night when he and she were walking in the 
garden after supper, it should have tipped her off. But it 
didn't. Or at least, when they came to the end of the path 



Artist at Home 635 

and turned, the next thing she seemed to know was his mug 
all set for the haymaker. Anyway, she didn't move until the 
clinch was over. Then she flung back, her hand lifted. "You 
damned idiot! " she says. 

He doesn't move either, like he is giving her a fair shot. 
"What satisfaction will it be to slap this mug?" he says. 

"I know that," she says. She hits him on the chest with her 
fist, light, full, yet restrained all at the same time: mad and 
careful too. "Why did you do such a clumsy thing?" 

But she doesn't get anything out of him. He just stands 
there, offering her a clean shot; maybe he is not even looking 
at her, with his hair all over the place and this sky-blue coat 
that fits him like a short horse-blanket. You take a rooster, an 
old rooster. An old bull is different. See him where the herd 
has run him out, blind and spavined or whatever, yet he still 
looks married. Like he was saying, "Well, boys, you can look 
at me now. But I was a husband and father in my day." But 
an old rooster. He just looks unmarried, a born bachelor. 
Born a bachelor in a world without hens and he found it out 
^o long ago he don't even remember there are not any hens. 
"Come along," she says, turning fast, stiff-backed, and the 
poet doping along behind her. Maybe that's what gave him 
away. Anyway, she looks back, slowing. She stops. "So you 
think you are the hot shot, do you?" she says. "You think 
I'm going to tell Roger, do you?" 

"I don't know," he says. "I hadn't thought about it." 

"You mean, you don't care whether I tell him or not?" 

"Yes," he says. 

"Yes what?" 

It seems she can't tell whether he's looking at her or not, 
whether he ever looked at her. He just stands there, doping, 
about twice as tall as she is. "When I was a little boy, we 
would have sherbet on Sunday," he says. "Just a breath of 
lemon in it. Like narcissus smells, I remember. I think I re- 



636 The Middle Ground 

member. I was . . . four . . . three. Mother died and we moved 
to a city. Boarding-house. A brick wall. There was one win- 
dow, like a one-eyed man with sore eyes. And a dead cat. 
But before that we had lots of trees, like you have. I would 
sit on the kitchen steps in the late afternoon, watching the 
Sunday light in the trees, eating sherbet." 

She is watching him. Then she turns, walking fast. He fol- 
lows, doping along a little behind her, so that when she stops 
in the shadow of a clump of bushes, with her face all fixed, he 
stands there like this dope until she touches him. And even 
then he doesn't get it. She has to tell him to hurry. So he gets 
it, then. A poet is human, it seems, just like a man. 

But that's not it. That can be seen in any movie. This is 
what it is, what is good. 

About this time, coincident with this second clinch, Roger 
happens to come out from behind this bush. He comes out 
kind of happen-so; pleasant and quiet from taking a little 
stroll in the moonlight to settle his supper. They all three 
stroll back to the house, Roger in the middle. They get there 
so quick that nobody thinks to say goodnight when Anne 
goes on in the house and up the stairs. Or maybe it is because 
Roger is doing all the talking himself at that moment, poetry 
having gone into a slump, you might say. "Moonlight," 
Roger is saying, looking at the moon like he owned it too; "I 
can't stand it any more. I run to walls, an electric light. That 
is, moonlight used to make me feel sad and old and I would 
do that. But now I'm afraid it don't even make me feel lonely 
any more. So I guess I am old." 

"That's a fact," the poet says. "Where can we talk?" 

"Talk?" Roger says. He looked like a head- waiter, any- 
way: a little bald, flourishing, that comes to the table and lifts 
off a cover and looks at it like he is saying, "Well, you can 
eat this muck, if you want to pay to do it." "Right this wav~" 



Artist at Home 637 

he says. They go to the office, the room where he writes his 
books, where he doesn't even let the children come at all. He 
sits behind the typewriter and fills his pipe. Then he sees that 
the poet hasn't sat down. "Sit down," he says. 

"No," the poet says. "Listen," he says. "Tonight I kissed 
your wife. I'm going to again, if I can." 

"Ah," Roger says. He is too busy filling the pipe right to 
look at the poet, it seems. "Sit down." 

"No," the poet says. 

Roger lights the pipe. "Well," he says, "I'm afraid I can't 
advise you about that. I have written a little poetry, but I 
never could seduce women." He looks at the poet now. 
"Look here," he says, "you are not well. You go on to bed. 
We'll talk about this tomorrow." 

"No," the poet says, "I cannot sleep under your roof." 

"Anne keeps on saying you are not well," Roger says. "Do 
you know of anything that's wrong with you?" 

"I don't know," the poet says. 

Roger sucks at the pipe. He seems to be having a little 
trouble making it burn right. Maybe that is why he slams 
the pipe down on the desk, or maybe he is human too, like a 
poet. Anyway, he slams the pipe down on the desk so that 
the tobacco pops out burning among the papers. And there 
they are: the bald husband with next week's flour and meat 
actually in sight, and the home-wrecker that needs a haircut, 
in one of these light blue jackets that ladies used to wear with 
lace boudoir caps when they would be sick and eat in bed. 
"What in hell do you mean," Roger says, "coming in my 
house and eating my food and bothering Anne with your 
damned . . ." But that was all. But even that was pretty good 
for a writer, an artist; maybe that's all that should be expected 
from them. Or maybe it was because the poet wasn't even 
listening to him. "He's not even here," Roger says to himself; 
like he had told the poet, he used to write poetry himself, 



638 The Middle Ground 

and so he knew them. "He's up there at Anne's door now, 
kneeling outside her door." And outside that door was as 
close to Anne as Roger got too, for some time. But that was 
later, and he and the poet are now in the office, with him 
trying to make the poet shut his yap and go up to bed, and 
the poet refusing. 

"I cannot lie under your roof," the poet says. "May I see 
Anne?" 

"You can see her in the morning. Any time. All day, if 
you want to. Don't talk drivel." 

"May I speak to Anne?" the poet says, like he might have 
been speaking to a one-syllable feeb. 

So Roger goes up and tells Anne and comes back and sits 
behind the typewriter again and then Anne comes down and 
Roger hears her and the poet goes out the front door. After 
awhile Anne comes back alone. "He's gone," she says. 

"Is he?" Roger says, like he is not listening. Then he 
jumps up. "Gone? He can't this late. Call him back." 

"He won't come back," Anne says. "Let him alone." She 
goes on upstairs. When Roger went up a little later, the door 
was locked. 

Now get this. This is it. He came back down to the office 
and put some paper into the typewriter and began to write. 
He didn't go very fast at first, but by daylight he was sound- 
ing like forty hens in a sheet-iron corn-crib, and the written 
sheets on the desk were piling up. . . . 

He didn't see or hear of the poet for two days. But the 
poet was still in town. Amos Grain saw him and came and 
told Roger. It seems that Amos happened to come to the 
house for something, because that was the only way anybody 
could have got to Roger to tell him anything for two days 
and nights. "I heard that typewriter before I crossed the 
creek," Amos says. "I see that blue dressing-sacque at the 
hotel yesterday," he says. 



Artist at Home 639 

That night, while Roger was at work, Anne came down 
the stairs. She looked in the office door. "I'm going to meet 
him," she said. 

"Will you tell him to come back?" Roger said. "Will you 
tell him I sent the message?" 

"No," Anne said. 

And the last thing she heard when she went out and when 
she came back an hour later and went upstairs and locked her 
door (Roger was sleeping on the sleeping-porch now, on an 
army cot) was the typewriter. 

And so life went on in its old, pleasant, happy way. They 
saw one another often, sometimes twice a day after Anne 
quit coming down to breakfast. Only, a day or so after that, 
she missed the sound of the typewriter; maybe she missed 
being kept awake by it. "Have you finished it?" she said. 
"The story?" 

"Oh. No. No, it's not finished yet. Just resting for a day 
or so." Bull market in typewriting, you might say. 

It stayed bullish for several days. He had got into the habit 
of going to bed early, of being in his cot on the sleeping- 
porch when Anne came back into the house. One night she 
came out onto the sleeping-porch, where he was reading in 
bed. "I'm not going back again," she said. "I'm afraid to." 

"Afraid of what? Aren't two children enough for you? 
Three, counting me." 

"I don't know." It was a reading lamp and her face was in 
the shadow. "I don't know." He turned the light, to shine it 
on her face, but before it got to her face she turned, running. 
He got there just in time to have the door banged in his face. 
"Blind! Blind!" she said beyond the door. "Go away! Go 
away!" 

He went away, but he couldn't get to sleep. So after a 
while he took the metal shade off the reading lamp and jim- 



640 The Middle Ground 

mied the window into the room where the children slept. 
The door from here into Anne's room wasn't locked. Anne 
was asleep. The moon was getting down then, and he could 
see her face. He hadn't made any noise, but she waked any- 
way, looking up at him, not moving. "He's had nothing, 
nothing. The only thing he remembers of his mother is the 
taste of sherbet on Sunday afternoon. He says my mouth 
tastes like that. He says my mouth is his mother." She began 
to cry. She didn't move, face-up on the pillow, her arms 
under the sheet, crying. Roger sat on the edge of the bed 
and touched her and she flopped over then, with her face 
down against his knee, crying. 

They talked until about daylight. "I don't know what to 
do. Adultery wouldn't get me anybody into that place 

where he lives. Lives? He's never lived. He's " She was 

breathing quiet, her face turned down, but still against his 
knee him stroking her shoulder. "Would you take me 
back?" 

"I don't know." He stroked her shoulder. "Yes. Yes. I'd 
take you back." 

And so the typewriting market picked up again. It took a 
spurt that night, as soon as Anne got herself cried off to sleep, 
and the market held steady for three or four days, without 
closing at night, even after Pinkie told him how the telephone 
was out of fix and he found where the wires were cut and 
knows where he can find the scissors that did it when he 
wants to. He doesn't go to the village at all, even when he 
had a free ride. He would spend half a morning sitting by the 
road, waiting for somebody to pass that would bring him 
back a package of tobacco or sugar or something. "If I went 
to the village, he might have left town," he said. 

On the fifth day, Amos Grain brought him his mail. That 
was the dav the rain came UD. There was a letter for Anne. 



Artist at Home 641 

"He evidently doesn't want my advice on this," he said to 
himself. "Maybe he has already sold it." He gave the letter 
to Anne. She read it, once. 

"Will you read it?" she said. 

"I wouldn't care to," he said. 

But the typing market is still steady, so that when the rain 
came up this afternoon, he had to turn on the light. The rain 
was so hard on the house that he could watch his fingers (he 
used two or three of them) hitting the keys without hearing 
a sound. Pinkie didn't come, so after a while he quit and fixed 
a tray and took it up and left it on a chair outside Anne's 
door. He didn't stop to eat, himself. 

It was after dark when she came down the first time. It 
was still raining. He saw her cross the door, going fast, in a 
raincoat and a rubber hat. He caught her as she opened the 
front door, with the rain blowing in. "Where are you 
going? " he said. 

She tried to jerk her arm loose. "Let me alone." 

"You can't go out in this. What is it?" 

"Let me alone. Please." She jerked her arm, pulling at the 
door which he was holding. 

"You can't. What is it? I'll do it. What is it?" 

But she just looked at him, jerking at her arm and at the 
door knob. "I must go to the village. Please, Roger." 

"You can't do that. At night, and in all this rain." 

"Please. Please." He held her. "Please. Please." But he held 
her, and she let the door go and went back up stairs. And he 
went back to the typewriter, to this market still going great 
guns. 

He is still at it at midnight. This time Anne has on a bath- 
robe. She stands in the door, holding to the door. Her hair is 
down. "Roger," she says. "Roger." 

He goes to her, fast for a fat man; maybe he thinks she is 
sick. "What? What is it?" 



642 The Middle Ground 

She goes to the front door and opens it; the rain comes in 
again. "There," she says. "Out there." 

"What?" 

"He is. Blair." 

He draws her back. He makes her go to the office, then 
he puts on his raincoat and takes the umbrella and goes out. 
"Blair!" he calls. "John!" Then the shade on the office win- 
dow goes up, where Anne has raised it and carried the desk 
lamp to the window and turned the light out-doors, and then 
he sees Blair, standing in the rain, without any hat, with his 
blue coat like it was put on him by a paper-hanger, with his 
face lifted toward Anne's window. 

And here we are again: the bald husband, the rural plute, 
and this dashing blade, this home-wrecking poet. Both gen- 
tlemen, being artists: the one that doesn't want the other to 
get wet; the other whose conscience won't let him wreck 
the house from inside. Here we are, with Roger trying to 
hold one of these green silk, female umbrellas over himself 
and the poet too, jerking at the poet's arm. 

"You damned fool! Come in the house!" 

"No." His arm gives a little as Roger jerks at it, but the 
poet himself doesn't move. 

"Do you want to drown? Come on, man!" 

"No." 

Roger jerks at the poet's arm, like jerking at the arm of a 
wet saw-dust doll. Then he begins to yell at the house: 
"Anne! Anne!" 

"Did she say for me to come in?" the poet says. 

"I Yes. Yes. Come in the house. Are you mad?" 

"You're lying," the poet says. "Let me alone." 

"What are you trying to do?" Roger says. "You can't 
stand here like this." 

"Yes, I can. You go on in. You'll take cold." 

Roger runs back to the house; they have an argument first; 



Artist at Home 643 

because Roger wants the poet to keep the umbrella and the 
poet won't do it. So Roger runs back to the house. Anne is at 

the door. "The fool," Roger says. "I can't " 

"Come in!" Anne calls. "John! Please!" But the poet has 
stepped out of the light and vanished. "John!" Anne calls. 
Then she began to laugh, staring at Roger from between her 
hair brushing at her hair with her hands. "He he looked so 

f funny. He 1 looked so " Then she was not laughing 

and Roger had to hold her up. He carried her upstairs and put 
her to bed and sat with her until she could stop crying. Then 
he went back to the office. The lamp was still at the window, 
and when he moved it the light went across the lawn and he 
saw Blair again. He was sitting on the ground, with his back 
against a tree, his face raised in the rain toward Anne's win- 
dow. Roger rushed out again, but when he got there, Blair 
was gone. Roger stood under the umbrella and called him for 
a while, but he never got any answer. Maybe he was going to 
try again to make the poet take the umbrella. So maybe he 
didn't know as much about poets as he thought he did. Or 
maybe he was thinking about Pope. Pope might have had an 
umbrella. 

They never saw the poet again. This one, that is. Because 
this happened almost six months ago, and they still live there. 
But they never saw this one. Three days later, Anne gets the 
second letter, mailed from the village. It is a menu card from 
the Elite Cafe, or maybe they call it the Palace. It was already 
autographed by the flies that eat there, and the poet had writ- 
ten on the back of it. Anne left it on Roger's desk and went 
out, and then Roger read it. 

It seems that this was the shot. The one that Roger had 
always claimed to be waiting for. Anyway, the magazines 
that don't have any pictures took the poem, stealing it from 
one another while the interest or whatever it was ate up the 



644 The Middle Ground 

money that the poet never got for it. But that was all right, 
too, because by that time Blair was dead. 

Amos Grain's wife told them how the poet had left town. 
And a week later Anne left too. She went up to Connecticut 
to spend the rest of the summer with her mother and father, 
where the children were. The last thing she heard when she 
left the house was the typewriter. 

But it was two weeks after Anne left before Roger finished 
it, wrote the last word. At first he wanted to put the poem 
in too, this poem on the menu card that wasn't about free- 
dom, either, but he didn't. Conscience, maybe he called it, 
put over the old haymaker, and Roger took it standing, like 
a little man, and sent off the poem for the magazines to jaw 
over, and tied up the papers he had written and sent them 
off too. And what was it he had been writing? Him, and 
Anne, and the poet. Word for word, between the waiting 
spells to find out what to write down next, with a few 
changes here and there, of course, because live people do not 
make good copy, the most interesting copy being gossip, 
since it mostly is not true. 

So he bundled the pages up and sent them off and they 
sent him the money. It came just in time, because the winter 
was coming and he still owed a balance on Blair's hospital and 
funeral. So he paid that, and with the rest of the money he 
bought Anne a fur coat and himself and the children some 
winter underwear. 

Blair died in September. Anne and the children were still 
away when he got the wire, three or four days late, since the 
next batch of them had not arrived yet. So here he is, sitting 
at his desk, in the empty house, with the typewriting all fin- 
ished, holding the wire in his hand. "Shelley," he says. "His 
whole life was a not very successful imitation of itself. Even 
to the amount of water it took." 

He didn't tell Anne about the poet until after the fur coat 
came. "Did vou see that he . . ." Anne said. 



Artist at Home 645 

"Yes. He had a nice room, in the sun. A good nurse. The 
doctor didn't want him to have a special nurse at first. Damn 
butcher." 

Sometimes when a man thinks about them making poets 
and artists and such pay these taxes which they say indicates 
that a man is free, twenty-one, and capable of taking care of 
himself in this close competition, it seems like they are ob- 
taining money under false pretenses. Anyway, here's the 
rest of it, what they did next. 

He reads the book, the story, to her, and her not saying 
anything until he had finished. "So that's what you were 
doing," she said. 

He doesn't look at her, either; he is busy evening the pages, 
getting them smooth again. "It's your fur coat," he said. 

"Oh," she says. "Yes. My fur coat." 

So the fur coat comes. And what does she do then? She 
gave it away. Yes. Gave it to Mrs. Grain. Gave it to her, and 
her in the kitchen, churning, with her hair in her face, brush- 
ing her hair back with a wrist that looked like a lean ham. 
"Why, Miz Howes," she says. "I caint. I reely caint." 

"You'll have to take it," Anne says. "We I got it under 
false pretenses. I don't deserve it. You put bread into the 
ground and reap it; I don't. So I can't wear a coat like this." 

And they leave it there with Mrs. Grain and they go back 
home, walking. Only they stop in broad daylight, with Mrs. 
Grain watching them from the window, and go into a clinch 
on their own account. "I feel better," Anne says. 

"So do I," Roger says. "Because Blair wasn't there to see 
Mrs. Grain's face when you gave her that coat. No freedom 
there, or equality either." 

But Anne is not listening. "Not to think," she says, "that 
he ... to dress me in the skins of little slain beasts. . . . You 
put him in a book, but you didn't finish it. You didn't know 
about that coat, did you? God beat you, that time, Roger." 



646 The Middle Ground 

"Ay," Roger says. "God beats me lots of times. But there's 
one thing about it. Their children are bigger than ours, and 
even Mrs. Grain can't wear my underclothes. So that's all 
right." 

Sure. That was all right. Because it was Christmas soon, 
and then spring; and then summer, the long summer, the long 
days. 



The Brooch 



THE TELEPHONE waked him. He waked already hurrying, 
fumbling in the dark for robe and slippers, because he knew 
before waking that the bed beside his own was still empty, 
and the instrument was downstairs just opposite the door 
beyond which his mother had lain propped upright in bed 
for five years, and he knew on waking that he would be too 
late because she would already have heard it, just as she 
heard everything that happened at any hour in the house. 

She was a widow, he the only child. When he went away 
to college she went with him; she kept a house in Charlottes- 
ville, Virginia, for four years while he graduated. She was 
the daughter of a well-to-do merchant. Her husband had 
been a travelling man who came one summer to the town 
with letters of introduction: one to a minister, the other to 
her father. Three months later the travelling man and the 
daughter were married. His name was Boyd. He resigned 
his position within the year and moved into his wife's house 
and spent his days sitting in front of the hotel with the 
lawyers and the cotton-planters a dark man with a gallant 
swaggering way of removing his hat to ladies. In the second 
year, the son was born. Six months later, Boyd departed. 
He just went away, leaving a note to his wife in which he 
told her that he could no longer bear to lie in bed at night 
and watch her rolling onto empty spools the string saved 

647 



648 The Middle Ground 

from parcels from the stores. His wife never heard of him 
again, though she refused to let her father have the marriage 
annulled and change the son's name. 

Then the merchant died, leaving all his property to the 
daughter and the grandson who, though he ,had been out 
of Fauntleroy suits since he was seven or eight, at twelve 
wore even on weekdays clothes which made him look not 
like a child but like a midget; he probably could not have 
long associated with other children even if his mother had 
let him. In due time the mother found a boys' school where 
the boy could wear a round jacket and a man's hard hat 
with impunity, though by the time the two of them re- 
moved to Charlottesville for these next four years, the son 
did not look like a midget. He looked now like a character 
out of Dante a man a little slighter than his father but 
with something of his father's dark handsomeness, who 
hurried with averted head, even when his mother was not 
with him, past the young girls on the streets not only of 
Charlottesville but of the little lost Mississippi hamlet to 
which they presently returned, with an expression of face 
like the young monks or angels in fifteenth-century alle- 
gories. Then his mother had her stroke, and presently the 
mother's friends brought to her bed reports of almost exactly 
the sort of girl which perhaps even the mother might have 
expected the son to become not only involved with but to 
marry. 

Her name was Amy, daughter of a railroad conductor 
who had been killed in a wreck. She lived now with an 
aunt who kept a boarding-house a vivid, daring girl whose 
later reputation was due more to folly and the caste handicap 
of the little Southern town than to badness and which at the 
last was doubtless more smoke than fire; whose name, though 
she always had invitations to the more public dances, was a 
light word, especially among the older women, daughters 



The Brooch 649 

of decaying old houses like this in which her future husband 
had been born. 

So presently the son had acquired some skill in entering 
the house and passing the door beyond which his mother lay 
propped in bed, and mounting the stairs in the dark to his 
own room. But one night he failed to do so. When he 
entered the house the transom above his mother's door was 
dark, as usual, and even if it had not been he could not have 
known that this was the afternoon on which the mother's 
friends had called and told her about Amy, and that his 
mother had lain for five hours, propped bolt upright, in the 
darkness, watching the invisible door. He entered quietly 
as usual, his shoes in his hand, yet he had not even closed 
the front door when she called his name. Her voice was not 
raised. She called his name once: 

"Howard." 

He opened the door. As he did so the lamp beside her bed 
came on. It sat on a table beside the bed; beside it sat a clock 
with a dead face; to stop it had been the first act of his 
mother when she could move her hands two years ago. He 
approached the bed from which she watched him a thick 
woman with a face the color of tallow and dark eyes ap- 
parently both pupil-less and iris-less beneath perfectly white 
hair. "What?" he said. "Are you sick?" 

"Come closer," she said. He came nearer. They looked at 
one another. Then he seemed to know; perhaps he had been 
expecting it. 

"I know who's been talking to you," he said. "Those 
damned old buzzards." 

"I'm glad to hear it's carrion," she said. "Now I can rest 
easy that you won't bring it into our house." 

"Go on. Say, your house." 

"Not necessary. Any. house where a lady lives." They 
looked at one another in the steady lamp which possessed 



650 The Middle Ground 

that stale glow of sickroom lights. "You are a man. I don't 
reproach you. I am not even surprised. I just want to warn 
you before you make yourself ridiculous. Don't confuse the 
house with the stable." 

"With the Hah!" he said. He stepped back and jerked 
the door open with something of his father's swaggering 
theatricalism. "With your permission," he said. He did not 
close the door. She lay bolt upright on the pillows and 
looked into the dark hall and listened to him go to the tele- 
phone, call the girl, and ask her to marry him tomorrow. 
Then he reappeared at the door. "With your permission," 
he said again, with that swaggering reminiscence of his 
father, closing the door. After a while the mother turned 
the light off. It was daylight in the room then. 

They were not married the next day, however. "I'm 
scared to," Amy said. "I'm scared of your mother. What 
does she say about me?" 

"I don't know. I never talk to her about you." 

"You don't even tell her you love me?" 

"What does it matter? Let's get married." 

"And live there with her?" They looked at one another. 
"Will you go to work, get us a house of our own?" 

"What for? I have enough money. And it's a big house." 

"Her house. Her money." 

"It'll be mine ours some day. Please." 

"Come on. Let's try to dance again." This was in the 
parlor of the boarding-house, where she was trying to teach 
him to dance, but without success. The music meant nothing 
to him; the noise of it or perhaps the touch of her body de- 
stroyed what little co-ordination he could have had. But he 
took her to the Country Club dances; they were known to 
be engaged. Yet she still staid out dances with other men, in 
the parked cars about the dark lawn. He tried to argue with 
her about it, and about drinking. 



The Brooch 65 k 

"Sit out and drink with me, then," he said. 

"We're engaged. It's no fun with you." 

"Yes," he said, with the docility with which he accepted 
each refusal; then he stopped suddenly and faced her. 
"What's no fun with me?" She fell back a little as he gripped 
her shoulder. "What's no fun with me?" 

"Oh," she said. "You're hurting me!" 

"I know it. What's no fun with me?" 

Then another couple came up and he let her go. Then 
an hour later, during an intermission, he dragged her, scream- 
ing and struggling, out of a dark car and across the dance 
floor, empty now and lined with chaperones like a theater 
audience, and drew out a chair and took her across his lap 
and spanked her. By daylight they had driven twenty miles 
to another town and were married. 

That morning Amy called Mrs. Boyd "Mother" for the 
first and (except one, and that perhaps shocked out of her 
by surprise or perhaps by exultation) last time, though the 
same day Mrs. Boyd formally presented Amy with the 
brooch: an ancient, clumsy thing, yet valuable. Amy carried 
it back to their room, and he watched her stand looking at 
it, perfectly cold, perfectly inscrutable. Then she put it into 
a drawer. She held it over the open drawer with two fingers 
and released it and then drew the two fingers across her 
thigh. 

"You will have to wear it sometimes," Howard said. 

"Oh, I will. I'll show my gratitude. Don't worry." Pres- 
ently it seemed to him that she took pleasure in wearing it. 
That is, she began to wear it quite often. Then he realized 
that it was not pleasure but vindictive incongruity; she wore 
it for an entire week once on the bosom of a gingham house 
dress, an apron. But she always wore it where Mrs. Boyd 
would see it, always when she and Howard had dressed to 



652 The Middle Ground 

go out and would stop in the mother's room to say good 
night. 

They lived upstairs, where, a year later, their child was 
born. They took the child down for Mrs. Boyd to see it. 
She turned her head on the pillows and looked at the child 
once. "Ah," she said. "I never saw Amy's father, that I 
know of. But then, I never travelled on a train a great deal." 

"The old the old " Amy cried, shuddering and cling- 
ing to Howard. "Why does she hate me so? What have I 
ever done to her? Let's move. You can work." 

"No. She won't live always." 

"Yes, she will. She'll live forever, just to hate me." 

"No," Howard said. In the next year the child died. Again 
Amy tried to get him to move. 

"Anywhere. I won't care how we have to live." 

"No. I can't leave her helpless on her back. You will have 
to start going out again. Dance. Then it won't be so bad." 

"Yes," she said, quieter. "I'll have to. I can't stand this." 

One said "you," the other, "I." Neither of them said 
"we." So, on Saturday nights Amy would dress and Howard 
would put on scarf and overcoat, sometimes over his shirt- 
sleeves, and they would descend the stairs and stop at Mrs. 
Boyd's door and then Howard would put Amy into the 
car and watch her drive away. Then he would re-enter the 
house and with his shoes in his hand return up the stairs, as he 
had used to do before they married, slipping past the lighted 
transom. Just before midnight, in the overcoat and scarf 
again, he would slip back down the stairs and past the still 
lighted transom and be waiting on the porch when Amy 
drove up. Then they would enter the house and look into 
Mrs. Boyd's room and say good night. 

One night it was one o'clock before she returned. He had 
been waiting for an hour in slippers and pajamas on the 



The Brooch 653 

porch; it was November. The transom above Mrs. Boyd's 
door was dark and they did not stop. 

"Some jelly beans set the clock back," she said. She did 
not look at him, dragging her clothes off, flinging the brooch 
along with her other jewelry onto the dressing table. "I had 
hoped you wouldn't be fool enough to stand out there and 
wait for me." 

"Maybe next time they set the clock back I won't." 

She stopped, suddenly and perfectly still, looking at him 
over her shoulder. "Do you mean that?" she said. He was 
not looking at her; he heard, felt, her approach and stand 
beside him. Then she touched his shoulder. "Howard?" she 
said. He didn't move. Then she was clinging to him, flung 
onto his lap, crying wildly: "What's happening to us?" 
striking herself against him with a wild abandon: "What is 
it? What is it?" He held her quiet, though after they were 
each in their beds (they already had two of them) he heard 
and then felt her cross the intervening gap and fling herself 
against him again with that wild terrified abandon not of a 
woman but of a child in the dark, enveloping him, whisper- 
ing: "You don't have to trust me, Howard! You can! You 
can! You don't have to!" 

"Yes," he said. "I know. It's all right. It's all right." So 
after that, just before twelve, he would put on the overcoat 
and scarf, creep down the stairs and past the lighted transom, 
open and close the front door noisily, and then open his 
mother's door where the mother would be propped high on 
the pillows, the book open and face down on her knees. 

"Back already?" Mrs. Boyd would say. 

"Yes. Amy's gone on up. Do you want anything?" 

"No. Good night." 

"Good night." 

Then he would go up and go to bed, and after a time 
(sometimes) to sleeo. But before this sometimes, taking it 



654 The Middle Ground 

sometimes into sleep with him, he would think, tell himself 
with that quiet and fatalistic pessimism of the impotent in- 
telligent: But this cannot go on forever. Some night some- 
thing is going to happen; she is going to catch Amy. And I 
know what she is going to do. But what am I going to do? 
He believed that he did know. That is, the top of his mind 
assured him that it knew, but he discounted this; the intel- 
ligence again: not to bury it, flee from it: just discounting it, 
the intelligence speaking out of the impotence: Because no 
man ever knows what he will do in any given situation, set 
of circumstances: the wise, others perhaps, drawing conclu- 
sions, but never himsetf. The next morning Amy would be 
in the other bed, and then, in the light of day, it would be 
gone. But now and then, even by daylight, it returned and 
he from the detachment of his cerebration contemplating his 
life, that faulty whole whose third the two of them had pro- 
duced yet whose lack the two of them could not fill, telling 
himself, Yes. I know what she will do and I know what 
Amy will ask me to do and I know that I will not do that. 
But what will I do? but not for long, telling himself now 
that it had not happened so far, and that anyway it was six 
long days until Saturday: the impotence now, not even the 
intellect. 

II 

So IT was that when he waked to the bell's shrilling he 
already knew that the bed beside his own was still empty, 
just as he knew that, no matter how quickly he reached the 
telephone, it would already be too late. He did not even 
wait for his slippers; he ran down the now icy stairs, seeing 
the transom above his mother's door come alight as he passed 
it and went to the phone and took the receiver down: "Oh, 
Howard, I'm so sorry this is Martha Ross so sorry to dis- 



The Brooch 655 

turb you, but I knew that Amy would be anxious about it. 
I found it in the car, tell her, when we got back home." 

"Yes," he said. "In the car." 

"In our car. After she lost her switch key and we brought 
her home, to the corner. We tried to get her to come on 
home with us and have some ham and eggs, but she " 
Then the voice died away. He held the cold receiver to his 
ear and heard the other end of the wire, the silence, fill with 
a sort of consternation like an indrawn breath: something 
instinctive and feminine and self-protective. But the pause 
itself was hardly a pause; almost immediately the voice went 
on, though completely changed now, blank, smooth, re- 
served: "Amy's in bed, I suppose/' 

"Yes. She's in bed." 

"Oh. So sorry I bothered you, got you up. But I knew 
she would be anxious about it, since it was your mother's, 
the family piece. But of course, if she hasn't missed it yet, 
you won't need to bother her." The wire hummed, tense, 
"That I called or anything." The wire hummed. "Hello. 
Howard?" 

"No," he said. "I won't bother her tonight. You can call 
her in the morning." 

"Yes, I will. So sorry I bothered you. I hope I didn't 
wake your mother." 

He put the receiver back. He was cold. He could feel his 
bare toes curling back from the icelike floor as he stood 
looking at the blank door beyond which his mother would 
be sitting, high-propped on the pillows, with her tallow face 
and dark inscrutable eyes and the hair which Amy said re- 
sembled weathered cotton, beside the clock whose hands 
she had stopped herself at ten minutes to four on the after- 
noon five years ago when she first moved again. When he 
opened the door his picture had been exact, almost to the 
position of the hands even. 



656 The Middle Ground 

"She is not in this house," Mrs. Boyd said. 

"Yes. She's in bed. You know when we came in. She just 
left one of her rings with Martha Ross tonight and Martha 
telephoned." 

But apparently she had not even listened to him. "So you 
swear she is in this house this minute." 

"Yes. Of course she is. She's asleep, I tell you." 

"Then send her down here to say good night to me." 

"Nonsense. Of course I won't." 

They looked at one another across the bed's footboard. 

"You refuse?" 

"Yes." 

They looked at one another a moment longer. Then he 
began to turn away; he could feel her watching him. "Then 
tell me something else. It was the brooch she lost." 

He did not answer this either. He just looked at her again 
as he closed the door: the two of them curiously similar, 
mortal and implacable foes in the fierce close antipathy of 
blood. He went out. 

He returned to the bedroom and turned on the light and 
found his slippers and went to the fire and put some coal on 
the embers and punched and prodded it into flame. The 
clock on the mantel said twenty minutes to one. Presently 
he had a fair blaze; he had quit shivering. He went back to 
bed and turned off the light, leaving only the firelight puls- 
ing and gleaming on the furniture and among the phials and 
mirrors of the dressing table, and in the smaller mirror above 
his own chest of drawers, upon which sat the three silver 
photograph frames, the two larger ones containing himself 
and Amy, the smaller one between them empty. He just 
lay. He was not thinking at all. He had just thought once, 
quietly, So that's that. So now I suppose I will know, find 
out what I am going to do and then no more, not even think- 
ing that again. 



The Brooch 657 

The house seemed still to be filled with the shrill sound 
of the telephone like a stubborn echo. Then he began to hear 
the clock on the mantel, reiterant, cold, not loud. He turned 
on the light and took up the book face down and open from 
the table beside his pillow, but he found that he could not 
keep his mind on the words for the sound which the clock 
made, so he rose and went to the mantel. The hands were 
now at half past two. He stopped the clock and turned its 
face to the wall and brought his book to the fire and found 
that he could now keep his mind on the words, the sense, 
reading on now untroubled by time. So he could not have 
said just when it was that he found he had ceased to read, 
had jerked his head up. He had heard no sound, yet he knew 
that Amy was in the house. He did not know how he knew: 
he just sat holding his breath, immobile, the peaceful book 
raised and motionless, waiting. Then he heard Amy say, 
"It's me, Mother." 

She said "Mother" he thought, not moving yet. She called 
her "Mother" again. He moved now, putting the book care- 
fully down, his place marked, but as he crossed the room he 
walked naturally, not trying to deaden his footsteps, to the 
door and opened it and saw Amy just emerging from Mrs. 
Boyd's room. She began to mount the stairs, walking natu- 
rally too, her hard heels sharp and unnaturally loud in the 
nightbound house. She must have stooped when Mother 
called her and put her slippers on again, he thought. She had 
not seen him yet, mounting steadily, her face in the dim hall 
light vague and petal-like against the collar of her fur coat, 
projecting already ahead of her to where he waited a sort 
of rosy and crystal fragrance of the frozen night out of 
which she had just emerged. Then she saw him at the head 
of the stairs. For just a second, an instant, she stopped dead 
still, though she was moving again before it could have been 
called pause, already speaking as she passed him where he 



658 The Middle Ground 

stood aside, and entered the bedroom: "Is it very late? I was 
with the Rosses. They just let me out at the corner; I lost 
my car key out at the club. Maybe it was the car that 
waked her." 

"No. She was already awake. It was the telephone." 
She went on to the fire and spread her hands to it, still in 
her coat; she did not seem to have heard him, her face rosy 
in the firelight, her presence emanating that smell of cold, 
that frosty fragrance which had preceded her up the stairs: 
"I suppose so. Her light was already on. I knew as soon as 
I opened the front door that we were sunk. I hadn't even 
got in the house good when she said 'Amy' and I said 'It's 
me, Mother' and she said, 'Come in here, please,' and there 
she was with those eyes that haven't got any edges to them 
and that hair that looks like somebody pulled it out of the 
middle of a last year's cotton bale, and she said, 'Of course 
you understand that you will have to leave this house at 
once. Good night.' " 

"Yes," he said. "She has been awake since about half past 
twelve. But there wasn't anything to do but insist that you 
were already in bed asleep and trust to luck." 
"You mean, she hasn't been asleep at all?" 
"No. It was the telephone, like I told you. About half 
past twelve." 

With her hands still spread to the fire she glanced at him 
over her furred shoulder, her face rosy, her eyes at once 
bright and heavy, like a woman's eyes after pleasure, with 
a kind of inattentive conspiratorial commiseration. "Tele- 
phone? Here? At half past twelve? What absolutely putrid 
But no matter." She turned now, facing him, as if she 
had only been waiting until she became warm, the rich coat 
open upon the fragile glitter of her dress; there was a quality 
actually beautiful about her now not of the face whose 
impeccable replica looks out from the covers of a thousand 



The Brooch 659 

magazines each month, nor of the figure, the shape of de- 
liberately epicene provocation into which the miles of cellu- 
loid film have constricted the female body of an entire 
race; but a quality completely female in the old eternal 
fashion, primitive assured and ruthless as she approached 
him, already raising her arms. "Yes! I say luck too!" she 
said, putting her arms around him, her upper body leaned 
back to look into his face, her own face triumphant, the 
smell now warm woman-odor where the frosty fragrance 
had thawed. "She said at once, now. So we can go. You see? 
Do you understand? \Ve can leave now. Give her the 
money, let her have it all. We won't care. You can find 
work; I won't care how and where we will have to live. 
You don't have to stay here now, with her now. She has 
what do you call it? absolved you herself. Only I have lost 
the car key. But no matter: we can walk. Yes, walk; with 
nothing, taking nothing of hers, like we came here." 
"Now?" he said. "Tonight?" 

"Yes! She said at once. So it will have to be tonight." 
"No," he said. That was all, no indication of which ques- 
tion he had answered, which denied. But then, he did not 
need to because she still held him; it was only the expression 
of her face that changed. It did not die yet nor even become 
terrified yet: it just became unbelieving, like a child's in- 
credulity. "You mean, you still won't go? You still won't 
leave her? That you would just take me to the hotel for 
tonight and that you will come back here tomorrow? Or 
do you mean you won't even stay at the hotel with me 
tonight? That you will take me there and leave me and then 
you " She held him, staring at him; she began to say, 
''Wait, wait. There must be some reason, something 
Wait," she cried; "wait! You said, telephone. At half past 
twelve." She still stared at him, her hands hard, her pupils 
like pinpoints, her face ferocious. "That's it. That's the 



660 The Middle Ground 

reason. Who was it that telephoned here about me? Tell me! 
I defy you to! I will explain it. Tell me!" 

"It was Martha Ross. She said she had just let you out at 
the corner/' 

"She lied!" she cried at once, immediately, scarce waiting 
to hear the name. "She lied! They did bring me home then 
but it was still early and so I decided to go on with them to 
their house and have some ham and eggs. So I called to 
Frank before he got turned around and I went with them. 
Frank will prove it! She lied! They just this minute put me 
out at the corner!" 

She looked at him. They stared at one another for a full 
immobile moment. Then he said, "Then where is the 
brooch?" 

"The brooch?" she said. "What brooch?" But already he 
had seen her hand move upward beneath the coat; besides, 
he could see her face and watch it gape like that of a child 
which has lost its breath before she began to cry with a wild 
yet immobile abandon, so that she spoke through the weep- 
ing in the choked gasping of a child, with complete and 
despairing surrender: "Oh, Howard! I wouldn't have done 
that to you! I wouldn't have! I wouldn't have!" 

"All right," he said. "Hush, now. Hush, Amy. She will 
hear you." 

"All right. I'm trying to." But she still faced him with 
that wrung and curiously rigid face beneath its incredible 
flow of moisture, as though not the eyes but all the pores had 
sprung at once; now she too spoke directly out of thinking, 
without mention of subject or circumstance, nothing more 
of defiance or denial: "Would you have gone with me if 
you hadn't found out?" 

"No. Not even then. I won't leave her. I will not, until 
she is dead. Or this house. I won't. I can't. I " They looked 
at one another, she staring at him as if she saw reflected in 



The Brooch 66 1 

his pupils not herself but the parchment-colored face below 
stairs the piled dirty white hair, the fierce implacable eyes 
her own image blanked out by something beyond mere 
blindness: by a quality determined, invincible, and crucified. 

"Yes," she said. From somewhere she produced a scrap 
of chiffon and began to dab at her eyes, delicately, even 
now by instinct careful of the streaked mascara. "She beat 
us. She lay there in that bed and beat us." She turned and 
went to the closet and drew out an overnight bag and put 
the crystal objects from the dressing-table into it and opened 
a drawer. "I can't take everything tonight. I will have 
to " 

He moved also; from the chest of drawers where the small 
empty photograph frame sat he took his wallet and removed 
the bills from it and returned and put the money into her 
hand. "I don't think there is very much here. But you won't 
need money until tomorrow." 

"Yes," she said. "You can send the rest of my things then, 
too." 

"Yes," he said. She folded and smoothed the notes in her 
fingers; she was not looking at him. He did not know what 
she was looking at except it was not at the money. "Haven't 
you got a purse or something to carry it in?" 

"Yes," she said. But she did not stop folding and smooth- 
ing the bills, still not looking at them, apparently not aware 
of them, as if they had no value and she had merely picked 
them idly up without being aware of it. "Yes," she said. 
"She beat us. She lay there in that bed she will never move 
from until they come in and carry her out some day, and 
took that brooch and beat us both." Then she began to cry. 
It was as quiet now as the way she had spoken. "My little 
baby," she said. "My dear little baby." 

He didn't even say Hush now. He just waited until she 
dried her eyes again, almost briskly, rousing, looking at him 



662 The Middle Ground 

with an expression almost like smiling, her face, the make-up, 
the careful evening face haggard and streaked and filled 
with the weary and peaceful aftermath of tears. "Well," she 
said. "It's late." She stooped, but he anticipated her and took 
the bag; they descended the stairs together; they could see 
the lighted transom above Mrs. Boyd's door. 

"It's too bad you haven't got the car," he said. 

"Yes. I lost the key at the club. But I telephoned the 
garage. They will bring it in in the morning." 

They stopped in the hall while he telephoned for a cab. 
Then they waited, talking quietly now and then. "You had 
better go straight to bed." 

"Yes. I'm tired. I danced a good deal." 

"What was the music? Was it good?" 

"Yes. I don't know. I suppose so. When you are dancing 
yourself, you don't usually notice whether the music is or 
isn't." 

"Yes, I guess that's so." Then the car came. They went 
out to it, he in pajamas and robe; the earth was frozen and 
iron-hard, the sky bitter and brilliant. He helped her in. 

"Now you run back into the house," she said. "You didn't 
even put on your overcoat." 

"Yes. I'll get your things to the hotel early." 

"Not too early. Run, now." She had already sat back, the 
coat close about her. He had already remarked how some- 
time, at some moment back in the bedroom, the warm 
woman-odor had congealed again and that she now ema- 
nated once more that faint frosty fragrance, fragile, imperma- 
nent and forlorn; the car moved away, he did not look 
back. As he was closing the front door his mother called his 
name. But he did not pause or even glance toward the door. 
He just mounted the stairs, out of the dead, level, unsleeping, 
peremptory voice. The fire had burned down: a strong rosy 
glow, peaceful and quiet and warmly reflected from mirror 



The Brooch 663 

and polished wood. The book still lay, face down and open, 
in the chair. He took it up and went to the table between 
the two beds and sought and found the cellophane envelope 
which had once contained pipe cleaners, which he used for 
a bookmark, and marked his place and put the book down. 
It was the coat-pocket size, Modern Library Green Man- 
sions. He had discovered the book during adolescence; he 
had read it ever since. During that period he read only the 
part about the journey of the three people in search of the 
Riolama which did not exist, seeking this part out and read- 
ing it in secret as the normal boy would have normal and 
conventional erotica or obscenity, mounting the barren 
mountain with Rima toward the cave, not knowing then 
that it was the cave-symbol which he sought, escaping it at 
last through the same desire and need to flee and escape 
which Rima had, following her on past the cave to where 
she poised, not even waiting for him, impermanent as a 
match flame and as weak, in the cold and ungrieving moon. 
In his innocence then he believed, with a sort of urgent and 
despairing joy, that the mystery about her was not mystery 
since it was physical: that she was corporeally impenetrable, 
incomplete; with peaceful despair justifying, vindicating, 
what he was through (so he believed) no fault of his own, 
with what he read in books, as the young do. But after his 
marriage he did not read the book again until the child died 
and the Saturday nights began. And then he avoided the 
journey to Riolama as he had used to seek it out. Now he 
read only where Abel (the one man on earth who knew 
that he was alone) wandered in the impervious and interdict 
forest filled with the sound of birds. Then he went to the 
chest and opened again the drawer where he kept the wallet 
and stood for a moment, his hand still lying on the edge of 
the drawer. "Yes," he said quietly, aloud: "it seems to have 
been right all the time about what I will do." 



664 The Middle Ground 

The bathroom was at the end of the hall, built onto the 
house later, warm too where he had left the electric heater 
on for Amy and they had forgot it. It was here that he kept 
his whiskey also. He had begun to drink after his mother's 
stroke, in the beginning of what he had believed to be his 
freedom, and since the death of the child he had begun to 
keep a two-gallon keg of corn whiskey in the bathroom. 
Although it was detached from the house proper and the 
whole depth of it from his mother's room, he nevertheless 
stuffed towels carefully about and beneath the door, and 
then removed them and returned to the bedroom and took 
the down coverlet from Amy's bed and returned and stuffed 
the door again and then hung the coverlet before it. But 
even then he was not satisfied. He stood there, thoughtful, 
musing, a little pudgy (he had never taken any exercise since 
he gave up trying to learn to dance, and now what with the 
steady drinking, there was little of the young Italian novice 
about his figure any more), the pistol hanging from his 
hand. He began to look about. His glance fell upon the 
bath mat folded over the edge of the tub. He wrapped his 
hand, pistol and all, in the mat and pointed it toward the 
rear wall and fired it, the report muffled and jarring though 
not loud. Yet even now he stood and listened as if he ex- 
pected to hear from this distance. But he heard nothing; 
even when, the door freed again, he moved quietly down 
the hall and then down the steps to where he could see 
clearly the dark transom above his mother's door. But again 
he did not pause. He returned up the stairs, quietly, hearing 
the cold and impotent ratiocination without listening to it: 
Like your father, you cannot seem to live with either of 
them, but unlike your father you cannot seem to live 'with- 
out them; telling himself quietly, "Yes, it seems that it was 
right. It seems to have known us better than I did," and he 
shut the bathroom door again and stuffed the towels care- 



The Brooch 665 

fully about and beneath it. But he did not hang the coverlet 
this time. He drew it over himself, squatting, huddling into 
it, the muzzle of the pistol between his teeth like a pipe, 
wadding the thick soft coverlet about his head, hurrying, 
moving swiftly now because he was already beginning to 
suffocate. 



My Grandmother Millard and 

General Bedford Forrest and 

The Battle of Harrykin Creek 



i 

IT WOULD BE right after supper, before we had left the table. 
At first, beginning with the day the news came that the 
Yankees had taken Memphis, we did it three nights in suc- 
cession. But after that, as we got better and better and faster 
and faster, once a week suited Granny. Then after Cousin 
Melisandre finally got out of Memphis and came to live with 
us, it would be just once a month, and when the regiment in 
Virginia voted Father out of the colonelcy and he came 
home and stayed three months while he made a crop and got 
over his mad and organized his cavalry troop for General 
Forrest's command, we quit doing it at all. That is, we did it 
one time with Father there too, watching, and that night 
Ringo and I heard him laughing in the library, the first time 
he had laughed since he came home, until in about a half a 
minute Granny came out already holding her skirts up and 
went sailing up the stairs. So we didn't do it any more until 
Father had organized his troop and was gone again. 

Granny would fold her napkin beside her plate. She would 
speak to Ringo standing behind her chair without even turn- 
ing her head: 

"Go call Joby and Lucius." 

And Ringo would go back through the kitchen without 
stopping. He would just say, "All right. Look out," at Lou- 

667 



668 The Middle Ground 

vinia's back and go to the cabin and come back with not only 
Joby and Lucius and the lighted lantern but Philadelphia too, 
even though Philadelphia wasn't going to do anything but 
stand and watch and then follow to the orchard and back to 
the house until Granny said we were done for that time and 
she and Lucius could go back home to bed. And we would 
bring down from the attic the big trunk (we had done it so 
many times by now that we didn't even need the lantern any 
more to go to the attic and get the trunk) whose lock it was 
my job to oil every Monday morning with a feather dipped 
in chicken fat, and Louvinia would come in from the kitchen 
with the unwashed silver from supper in a dishpan under one 
arm and the kitchen clock under the other and set the clock 
and the dishpan on the table and take from her apron pocket 
a pair of Granny's rolled-up stockings and hand them to 
Granny and Granny would unroll the stockings and take 
from the toe of one of them a wadded rag and open the rag 
and take out the key to the trunk and unpin her watch from 
her bosom and fold it into the rag and put the rag back into 
the stocking and roll the stockings back into a ball and put 
the ball into the trunk. Then with Cousin Melisandre and 
Philadelphia watching, and Father too on that one time when 
he was there, Granny would stand facing the clock, her 
hands raised and about eight inches apart and her neck bowed 
so she could watch the clock-face over her spectacles, until 
the big hand reached the nearest hour-mark. 

The rest of us watched her hands. She wouldn't speak 
again. She didn't need to. There would be just the single 
light loud pop of her palms when the hand came to the near- 
est hour-mark; sometimes we would be already moving, even 
before her hands came together, all of us that is except Phila- 
delphia. Granny wouldn't let her help at all, because of 
Lucius, even though Lucius had done nearly all the digging 
of the pit and did most of the carrying of the trunk each time. 



My Grandmother Millard 669 

But Philadelphia had to be there. Granny didn't have to tell 
her but once. "I want the wives of all the free men here too," 
Granny said. "I want all of you free folks to watch what the 
rest of us that aint free have to do to keep that way." 

That began about eight months ago. One day even I 
realized that something had happened to Lucius. Then I 
knew that Ringo had already seen it and that he knew what 
it was, so that when at last Louvinia came and told Granny, 
it was not as if Lucius had dared his mother to tell her but as 
if he had actually forced somebody, he didn't care who, to 
tell her. He had said it more than once, in the cabin one 
night probably for the first time, then after that in other 
places and to other people, to Negroes from other plantations 
even. Memphis was already gone then, and New Orleans, 
and all we had left of the River was Vicksburg and although 
we didn't believe it then, we wouldn't have that long. Then 
one morning Louvinia came in where Granny was cutting 
down the worn-out uniform pants Father had worn home 
from Virginia so they would fit me, and told Granny how 
Lucius was saying that soon the Yankees would have all of 
Mississippi and Yoknapatawpha County too and all the nig- 
gers would be free and that when that happened, he was 
going to be long gone. Lucius was working in the garden 
that morning. Granny went out to the back gallery, still 
carrying the pants and the needle. She didn't even push her 
spectacles up. She said, "You, Lucius," just once, and Lucius 
came out of the garden with the hoe and Granny stood look- 
ing down at him over the spectacles as she looked over them 
at everything she did, from reading or sewing to watching 
the clock-face until the instant came to start burying the 
silver. 

"You can go now," she said. "You needn't wait on the 
Yankees." 

"Go?" Lucius said. "I aint free." 



670 The Middle Ground 

"You've been free for almost three minutes," Granny said. 
"Go on." 

Lucius blinked his eyes while you could have counted 
about ten. "Go where?" he said. 

"I can't tell you," Granny said. "I aint free. I would 
imagine you will have all Yankeedom to move around in." 

Lucius blinked his eyes. He didn't look at Granny now. 
"Was that all you wanted?" he said. 

"Yes," Granny said. So he went back to the garden. And 
that was the last we heard about being free from him. That 
is, it quit showing in the way he acted, and if he talked any 
more of it, even Louvinia never thought it was worth both- 
ering Granny with. It was Granny who would do the re- 
minding of it, especially to Philadelphia, especially on the 
nights when we would stand like race-horses at the barrier, 
watching Granny's hands until they clapped together. 

Each one of us knew exactly what he was to do. I would 
go upstairs for Granny's gold hatpin and her silver-headed 
umbrella and her plumed Sunday hat because she had already 
sent her ear-rings and brooch to Richmond a long time ago, 
and to Father's room for his silver-backed brushes and to 
Cousin Melisandre's room after she came to live with us for 
her things because the one time Granny let Cousin Meli- 
sandre try to help too, Cousin Melisandre brought all her 
dresses down. Ringo would go to the parlor for the candle- 
sticks and Granny's dulcimer and the medallion of Father's 
mother back in Carolina. And we would run back to the 
dining-room where Louvinia and Lucius would have the side- 
board almost cleared, and Granny still standing there and 
watching the clock-face and the trunk both now with her 
hands ready to pop again and they would pop and Ringo and 
I would stop at the cellar door just long enough to snatch up 
the shovels and run on to the orchard and snatch the brush 
and grass and the criss-crossed sticks away and have the pit 



My Grandmother Millar d 67 1 

open and ready by the time we saw them coming: first Lou- 
vinia with the lantern, then Joby and Lucius with the trunk 
and Granny walking beside it and Cousin Melisandre and 
Philadelphia (and on that one time Father, walking along and 
laughing) following behind. And on that first night, the 
kitchen clock wasn't in the trunk. Granny was carrying it, 
while Louvinia held the lantern so that Granny could watch 
the hand, Granny made us put the trunk into the pit and 
shovel the dirt back and smooth it off and lay the brush and 
grass back over it again and then dig up the trunk and carry 
it back to the house. And one night, it seemed like we had 
been bringing the trunk down from the attic and putting the 
silver into it and carrying it out to the pit and uncovering the 
pit and then covering the pit again and turning around and 
carrying the trunk back to the house and taking the silver 
out and putting it back where we got it from all winter and 
all summer too; that night, and I don't know who thought 
of it first, maybe it was all of us at once. But anyway the 
clock-hand had passed four hour-marks before Granny's 
hands even popped for Ringo and me to run and open the 
pit. And they came with the trunk and Ringo and I hadn't 
even put down the last armful of brush and sticks, to save 
having to stoop to pick it up again, and Lucius hadn't even 
put down his end of the trunk for the same reason and I 
reckon Louvinia was the only one that knew what was com- 
ing next because Ringo and I didn't know that the kitchen 
clock was still sitting on the dining-room table. Then Granny 
spoke. It was the first time we had ever heard her speak be- 
tween when she would tell Ringo, "Go call Joby and Lu- 
cius," and then tell us both about thirty minutes later: "Wash 
your feet and go to bed." It was not loud and not long, just 
vwo words: "Bury it." And we lowered the trunk into the 
pit and Joby and Lucius threw the dirt back in and even then 
Ringo and I didn't move with the brush until Grannv spoke 



672 The Middle Ground 

again, not loud this time either: "Go on. Hide the pit." And 
we put the brush back and Granny said, "Dig it up." And we 
dug up the trunk and carried it back into the house and put 
the things back where we got them from and that was when 
I saw the kitchen clock still sitting on the dining-room table. 
And we all stood there watching Granny's hands until they 
popped together and that time we filled the trunk and car- 
ried it out to the orchard and lowered it into the pit quicker 
than we had ever done before. 



II 

AND THEN when the time came to really bury the silver, it 
was too late. After it was all over and Cousin Melisandre and 
Cousin Philip were finally married and Father had got done 
laughing, Father said that always happened when a hetero- 
geneous collection of people who were cohered simply by an 
uncomplex will for freedom engaged with a tyrannous ma- 
chine. He said they would always lose the first battles, and if 
they were outnumbered and outweighed enough, it would 
seem to an outsider that they were going to lose them all. But 
they would not. They could not be defeated; if they just 
willed that freedom strongly and completely enough to 
sacrifice all else for it ease and comfort and fatness of spirit 
and all, until whatever it was they had left would be enough, 
no matter how little it was that very freedom itself would 
finally conquer the machine as a negative force like drouth 
or flood could strangle it. And later still, after two more years 
and we knew we were going to lose the war, he was still 
saying that. He said, "I won't see it but you will. You will 
see it in the next war, and in all the wars Americans will have 
to fight from then on. There will be men from the South in 
the forefront of all the battles, even leading some of them, 
helping those who conauered us defend that same freedom 



My Grandmother Millar d 673 

which they believed they had taken from us." And that hap- 
pened: thirty years later, and General Wheeler, whom 
Father would have called apostate, commanding in Cuba, 
and whom old General Early did call apostate and matricide 
too in the office* of the Richmond editor when he said: "I 
would like to have lived so that when my time comes, I will 
see Robert Lee again. But since I haven't, I'm certainly going 
to enjoy watching the devil burn that blue coat off Joe 
Wheeler." 

We didn't have time. We didn't even know there were 
any Yankees in Jefferson, let alone within a mile of Sartoris. 
There never had been many. There was no railroad then and 
no river big enough for big boats and nothing in Jefferson 
they would have wanted even if they had come, since this 
was before Father had had time to worry them enough for 
General Grant to issue a general order with a reward for his 
capture. So we had got used to the war. We thought of it as 
being definitely fixed and established as a railroad or a river 
is, moving east along the railroad from Memphis and south 
along the River toward Vicksburg. We had heard tales of 
Yankee pillage and most of the people around Jefferson 
stayed ready to bury their silver fast too, though I don't 
reckon any of them practiced doing it like we did. But no- 
body we knew was even kin to anyone who had been pil- 
laged, and so I don't think that even Lucius really expected 
any Yankees until that morning. 

It was about eleven o'clock. The table was already set 
for dinner and everybody was beginning to kind of ease up 
so we would be sure to hear when Louvinia went out to the 
back gallery and rang the bell, when Ab Snopes came in at a 
dead run, on a strange horse as usual. He was a member of 
Father's troop. Not a fighting member; he called himself 
father's horse-captain, whatever he meant by it, though we 
had a pretty good idea, and none of us at least knew what he 



674 The Middle Ground 

was doing in Jefferson when the troop was supposed to be 
up in Tennessee with General Bragg, and probably nobody 
anywhere knew the actual truth about how he got the horse, 
galloping across the yard and right through one of Granny's 
flower beds because I reckon he figured that carrying a mes- 
sage he could risk it, and on around to the back because he 
knew that, message or no message, he better not come to 
Granny's front door hollering that way, sitting that strange 
blown horse with a U.S. army brand on it you could read 
three hundred yards and yelling up at Granny that General 
Forrest was in Jefferson but there was a whole regiment of 
Yankee cavalry not a half a mile down the road. 

So we never had time. Afterward Father admitted that 
Granny's error was not in strategy nor tactics either, even 
though she had copied from someone else. Because he said it 
had been a long time now since originality had been a com- 
ponent of military success. It just happened too fast. I went 
for Joby and Lucius and Philadelphia because Granny had 
already sent Ringo down to the road with a cup towel to 
wave when they came in sight. Then she sent me to the front 
window where I could watch Ringo. \Vhen Ab Snopes came 
back from hiding his new Yankee horse, he offered to go up- 
stairs to get the things there. Granny had told us a long time 
ago never to let Ab Snopes go anywhere about the house 
unless somebody was with him. She said she would rather 
have Yankees in the house any day because at least Yankees 
would have more delicacy, even if it wasn't anything but 
good sense, than to steal a spoon or candlestick and then try 
to sell it to one of her own neighbors, as Ab Snopes would 
probably do. She didn't even answer him. She just said, 
"Stand over there by that door and be quiet." So Cousin Meli- 
sandre went upstairs after all and Granny and Philadelphia 
went to the parlor for the candlesticks and the medallion and 
the dulcimer, Philadelphia not only helping this time, free or 
not, but Granny wasn't even using the clock. 



My Grandmother Millar d 675 

It just all happened at once. One second Ringo was sitting 
on the gate-post, looking up the road. The next second he 
was standing on it and waving the cup towel and then I was 
running and hollering, back to the dining-room, and I re- 
member the whites of Joby's and Lucius's and Philadelphia's 
eyes and I remembered Cousin Melisandre's eyes where she 
leaned against the sideboard with the back of her hand against 
her mouth, and Granny and Louvinia and Ab Snopes glaring 
at one another across the trunk and I could hear Louvinia's 
voice even louder than mine: 

"Miz Cawmpson! Miz Cawmpson!" 

"What?" Granny cried. "What? Mrs. Compson?" Then 
we all remembered. It was when the first Yankee scouting 
patrol entered Jefferson over a year ago. The war was new 
then and I suppose General Compson was the only Jefferson 
soldier they had heard of yet. Anyway, the officer asked 
someone in the Square where General Compson lived and old 
Doctor Holston sent his Negro boy by back alleys and across 
lots to warn Mrs. Compson in time, and the story was how 
the Yankee officer sent some of his men through the empty 
house and himself rode around to the back where old Aunt 
Roxanne was standing in front of the outhouse behind the 
closed door of which Mrs. Compson was sitting, fully dressed 
even to her hat and parasol, on the wicker hamper containing 
her plate and silver. "Miss in dar," Roxanne said. "Stop where 
you is." And the story told how the Yankee officer said, "Ex- 
cuse me," and raised his hat and even backed the horse a few 
steps before he turned and called his men and rode away. 
"The privy!" Granny cried. 

"Hell fire, Miz Millard!" Ab Snopes said. And Granny 
never said anything. It wasn't like she didn't hear, because 
she was looking right at him. It was like she didn't care; that 
she might have even said it herself. And that shows how 
things were then: we just never had time for anything. "Hell 
fire," Ab Snopes said, "all north Missippi has done heard 



676 The Middle Ground 

about that! There aint a white lady between here and Mem- 
phis that aint setting in the back house on a grip full of silver 
right this minute." 

"Then we're already late," Granny said. "Hurry." 
"Wait! " Ab Snopes said. "Wait! Even them Yankees have 
done caught onto that by now!" 

"Then let's hope these are different Yankees," Granny 
said. "Hurry." 

"But Miz Millard!" Ab Snopes cried. "Wait! Wait!" 
But then we could hear Ringo yelling down at the gate and 
I remember Joby and Lucius and Philadelphia and Louvinia 
and the balloon-like swaying of Cousin Melisandre's skirts as 
they ran across the back yard, the trunk somewhere among 
them; I remember how Joby and Lucius tumbled the trunk 
into the little tall narrow flimsy sentry-box and Louvinia 
thrust Cousin Melisandre in and slammed the door and we 
could hear Ringo yelling good now, almost to the house, and 
then I was back at the front window and I saw them just as 
they swept around the house in a kind of straggling-clump 
six men in blue, riding fast yet with something curious in 
the action of the horses, as if they were not only yoked to- 
gether in spans but were hitched to a single wagon-tongue, 
then Ringo on foot running and not yelling now, and last of 
all the seventh rider, bareheaded and standing in his stirrups 
and with a sabre over his head. Then I was on the back gal- 
lery again, standing beside Granny above that moil of horses 
and men in the yard, and she was wrong. It was as if these 
were not only the same ones who had been at Mrs. Comp- 
son's last year, but somebody had even told them exactly 
where our outhouse was. The horses were yoked in pairs, 
but it was not a wagon-tongue, it was a pole, almost a log, 
twenty feet long, slung from saddle to saddle between the 
three span; and I remember the faces, unshaven and wan and 
not so much peering as frantically gleeful, glaring up at us 



My Grandmother Millar d 677 

for an instant before the men leaped down and unslung the 
pole and jerked the horses aside and picked up the pole, three 
to a side, and began to run across the yard with it as the last 
rider came around the house, in gray (an officer: it was 
Cousin Philip, though of course we didn't know that then, 
and there was going to be a considerable more uproar and con- 
fusion before he finally became Cousin Philip and of course 
we didn't know that either), the sabre still lifted and not 
only standing in the stirrups but almost lying down along the 
horse's neck. The six Yankees never saw him. And we used to 
watch Father drilling his troop in the pasture, changing them 
from column to troop front at full gallop, and you could hear 
his voice even above the sound of the galloping hooves but 
it wasn't a bit louder than Granny's. "There's a lady in 
there!" she said. But the Yankees never heard her any more 
than they had seen Cousin Philip yet, the whole mass of 
them, the six men running with the pole and Cousin Philip 
on the horse, leaning out above them with a lifted sabre, 
rushing on across the yard until the end of the pole struck the 
outhouse door. It didn't just overturn, it exploded. One sec- 
ond it stood there, tall and narrow and flimsy; the next sec- 
ond it was gone and there was a boil of yelling men in blue 
coats darting and dodging around under Cousin Philip's 
horse and the flashing sabre until they could find a chance to 
turn and run. Then there was a scatter of planks and shingles 
and Cousin Melisandre sitting beside the trunk in the middle 
of it, in the spread of her hoops, her eyes shut and her mouth 
open, still screaming, and after a while a feeble popping of 
pistol-shots from down along the creek that didn't sound 
any more like war than a boy with firecrackers. 

"I tried to tell you to wait!" Ab Sncpes said behind us, "I 
tried to tell you them Yankees had done caught on!" 

After Joby and Lucius and Ringo and I finished burying 
*Jie trunk in the pit and hiding the shovel-marks, I found 



678 The Middle Ground 

Cousin Philip in the summer house. His sabre and belt were 
propped against the wall but I don't reckon even he knew 
what had become of his hat. He had his coat off too and was 
wiping it with his handkerchief and watching the house with 
one eye around the edge of the door. When I came in he 
straightened up and I thought at first he was looking at me. 
Then I don't know what he was looking at. "That beautiful 
girl," he said. "Fetch me a comb." 

"They're waiting for you in the house," I said. "Granny 
wants to know what's the matter." Cousin Melisandre was 
all right now. It took Louvinia and Philadelphia both and 
finally Granny to get her into the house but Louvinia 
brought the elder-flower wine before Granny had time to 
send her after it and now Cousin Melisandre and Granny 
were waiting in the parlor. 

"Your sister," Cousin Philip said. "And a hand-mirror." 

"No, Sir," I said. "She's just our cousin. From Memphis. 
Granny says " Because he didn't know Granny. It was 
pretty good for her to wait any time for anybody. But he 
didn't even let me finish. 

"That beautiful, tender girl," he said. "And send a nigger 
with a basin of water and a towel." I went back toward the 
house. This time when I looked back I couldn't see his eye 
around the door-edge. "And a clothes brush," he said. 

Granny wasn't waiting very much. She was at the front 
door. "Now what?" she said. I told her. "Does the man think 
we are giving a ball here in the middle of the day? Tell him 
I said to come on in and wash on the back gallery like we do. 
Louvinia's putting dinner on, and we're already late." But 
Granny didn't know Cousin Philip either. I told her again. 
She looked at me. "What did he say?" she said. 

"He didn't say anything," I said. "Just that beautiful girl." 

"That's all he said to me too," Ringo said. I hadn't heard 



My Grandmother Millard 679 

him come in. " 'Sides the soap and water. Just that beautiful 

girl." 

"Was he looking at you either when he said it?" I said. 

"No," Ringo said. "I just thought for a minute he was." 

Now Granny looked at Ringo and me both. "Hah," she 
said, and afterward when I was older I found out that 
Granny already knew Cousin Philip too, that she could look 
at one of them and know all the other Cousin Melisandres 
and Cousin Philips both without having to see them. "I some- 
times think that bullets are just about the least fatal things 
that fly, especially in war. All right," she said. "Take him 
his soap and water. But hurry." 

We did. This time he didn't say "that beautiful girl." He 
said it twice. He took off his coat and handed it to Ringo. 
"Brush it good," he said. "Your sister, I heard you say." 

"No, you didn't," I said. 

"No matter," he said. "I want a nosegay. To carry in my 
hand." 

"Those flowers are Granny's," I said. 

"No matter," he said. He rolled up his sleeves and began 
to wash. "A small one. About a dozen blooms. Get something 
pink." 

I went and got the flowers. I don't know whether Granny 
was still at the front door or not. Maybe she wasn't. At least 
she never said anything. So I picked the ones Ab Snope's 
new Yankee horse had already trampled down and wiped the 
dirt off of them and straightened them out and went back to 
the summer house where Ringo was holding the hand-glass 
while Cousin Philip combed his hair. Then he put on his coat 
and buckled on his sabre again and held his feet out one at a 
time for Ringo to wipe his boots off with the towel, and 
Ringo saw it. I wouldn't have spoken at all because we were 
already later for dinner than ever now, even if there hadn't 



680 The Middle Ground 

never been a Yankee on the place. "You tore your britches 
on them Yankees," Ringo said. 

So I went back to the house. Granny was standing in the 
hall. This time she just said, "Yes?" It was almost quiet. 

"He tore his britches," I said. And she knew more about 
Cousin Philip than even Ringo could find out by looking at 
him. She had the needle already threaded in the bosom of 
her dress. And I went back to the summer house and then 
we came back to the house and up to the front door and I 
waited for him to go into the hall but he didn't, he just stood 
there holding the nosegay in one hand and his hat in the 
other, not very old, looking at that moment anyway not very 
much older than Ringo and me for all his braid and sash and 
sabre and boots and spurs, and even after just two years look- 
ing like all our soldiers and most of the other people too did: 
as if it had been so long now since he had had all he wanted 
to eat at one time that even his memory and palate had for- 
gotten it and only his body remembered, standing there with 
his nosegay and that beautiful-girl look in his face like he 
couldn't have seen anything even if he had been looking at it. 

"No," he said. "Announce me. It should be your nigger. 
But no matter." He said his full name, all three of them, 
twice, as if he thought I might forget them before I could 
reach the parlor. 

"Go on in," I said. "They're waiting for you. They had 
already been waiting for you even before you found your 
pants were torn." 

"Announce me," he said. He said his name again. "Of 
Tennessee. Lieutenant, Savage's Battalion, Forrest's Com- 
mand, Provisional Army, Department of the West." 

So I did. We crossed the hall to the parlor, where Granny 
stood between Cousin Melisandre's chair and the table where 
the decanter of elder-flower wine and three fresh glasses and 
even a plate of the tea cakes Louvinia had learned to make 



My Grandmother Millar d 68 1 

from cornmeal and molasses were sitting, and he stopped 
again at that door too and I know he couldn't even see Cousin 
Melisandre for a minute, even though he never had looked at 
anything else but her. "Lieutenant Philip St-Just Backhouse," 
I said. I said it loud, because he had repeated it to me three 
times so I would be sure to get it right and I wanted to say it 
to suit him too since even if he had made us a good hour late 
for dinner, at least he had saved the silver. "Of Tennessee," 
I said. "Savage's Battalion, Forrest's Command, Provisional 
Army, Department of the West." 

While you could count maybe five, there wasn't anything 
at all. Then Cousin Melisandre screamed. She sat bolt upright 
on the chair like she had sat beside the trunk in the litter of 
planks and shingles in the back yard this morning, with her 
eyes shut and her mouth open again, screaming. 

Ill 

So WE were still another half an hour late for dinner. Though 
this time it never needed anybody but Cousin Philip to get 
Cousin Melisandre upstairs. All he needed to do was to try 
to speak to her again. Then Granny came back down and 
said, "Well, if we don't want to just quit and start calling it 
supper, we'd better walk in and eat it within the next hour 
and a half at least." So we walked in. Ab Snopes was already 
waiting in the dining-room. I reckon he had been waiting 
longer than anybody, because after all Cousin Melisandre 
wasn't any kin to him. Ringo drew Granny's chair and we 
sat down. Some of it was cold. The rest of it had been on the 
stove so long now that when you ate it it didn't matter 
whether it was cold or not. But Cousin Philip didn't seem to 
mind. And maybe it didn't take his memory very long to 
remember again what it was like to have all he wanted to eat, 
but I don't think his palate ever tasted any of it. He would 



682 The Middle Ground 

sit there eating like he hadn't seen any food of any kind in at 
least a week, and like he was expecting what was even al- 
ready on his fork to vanish before he could get it into his 
mouth. Then he would stop with the fork halfway to his 
mouth and sit there looking at Cousin Melisandre's empty 
place, laughing. That is, I don't know what else to call it but 
laughing. Until at last I said, 

"Why don't you change your name?" 

Then Granny quit eating too. She looked at me over her 
spectacles. Then she took both hands and lifted the spectacles 
up her nose until she could look at me through them. Then 
she even pushed the spectacles up into her front hair and 
looked at me. "That's the first sensible thing I've heard said 
on this place since eleven o'clock this morning," she said. 
"It's so sensible and simple that I reckon only a child could 
have thought of it." She looked at him. "Why don't you?' 7 

He laughed some more. That is, his face did the same way 
and he made the same sound again. "My grandfather was at 
King's Mountain, with Marion all through Carolina. My 
uncle was defeated for Governor of Tennessee by a corrupt 
and traitorous cabal of tavern-keepers and Republican Aboli- 
tionists, and my father died at Chapultepec. After that, the 
name they bore is not mine to change. Even my life is not 
mine so long as my country lies bleeding and ravished be- 
neath an invader's iron heel." Then he stopped laughing, or 
whatever it was. Then his face looked surprised. Then it quit 
looking surprised, the surprise fading out of it steady at first 
and gradually faster but not very much faster like the heat 
fades out of a piece of iron on a blacksmith's anvil until his 
face just looked amazed and quiet and almost peaceful. "Un- 
less I lose it in battle," he said. 

"You can't very well do that sitting here," Granny said. 

"No," he said. But I don't think he even heard her except 
with his ears. He stood up. Even Ab Snopes was watching 



My Grandmother Millar d 683 

him now, his knife stopped halfway to his mouth with a wad 
of greens on the end of the blade. "Yes," Cousin Philip said. 
His face even had the beautiful-girl look on it again. "Yes," 
he said. He thanked Granny for his dinner. That is, I reckon 
that's what he had told his mouth to say. It didn't make much 
sense to us, but I don't think he was paying any attention to 
it at all. He bowed. He wasn't looking at Granny nor at any- 
thing else. He said "Yes" again. Then he went out. Ringo and 
I followed to the front door and watched him mount his 
horse and sit there for a minute, bareheaded, looking up at 
the upstairs windows. It was Granny's room he was looking 
at, with mine and Ringo's room next to it. But Cousin Meli- 
sandre couldn't have seen him even if she had been in either 
one of them, since she was in bed on the other side of the 
house with Philadelphia probably still wringing the cloths out 
in cold water to lay on her head. He sat the horse well. He 
rode it well too: light and easy and back in the saddle and 
toes in and perpendicular from ankle to knee as Father had 
taught me. It was a good horse too. 

"It's a damn good horse," I said. 

"Git the soap," Ringo said. 

But even then I looked quick back down the hall, even if 
I could hear Granny talking to Ab Snopes in the dining- 
room. "She's still in there," I said. 

"Hah," Ringo said. "I done tasted soap in my mouth for a 
cuss I thought was a heap further off than that." 

Then Cousin Philip spurred the horse and was gone. Or so 
Ringo and I thouglit. Two hours ago none of us had ever 
even heard of him; Cousin Melisandre had seen him twice 
and sat with her eyes shut screaming both times. But after we 
were older, Ringo and I realized that Cousin Philip was prob- 
ably the only one in the whole lot of us that really believed 
even for one moment that he had said goodbye forever, that 
not only Granny and Louvinia knew better but Cousin Meli- 



684 Th e Middle Ground 

sandre did too, no matter what his last name had the bad 
luck to be. 

We went back to the dining-room. Then I realized that Ab 
Snopes had been waiting for us to come back. Then we both 
knew he was going to ask Granny something because nobody 
wanted to be alone when they had to ask Granny something 
even when they didn't know they were going to have trouble 
with it. We had known Ab for over a year now. I should 
have known what it was like Granny already did. He stood 
up. "Well, Miz Millard," he said. "I figger you'll be safe all 
right from now on, with Bed Forrest and his boys right there 
in Jefferson. But until things quiet down a mite more, I'll just 
leave the horses in your lot for a day or two." 

"What horses?" Granny said. She and Ab didn't just look 
at one another. They watched one another. 

"Them fresh-captured horses from this morning," Ab said. 

"What horses?" Granny said. Then Ab said it. 

"My horses." Ab watched her. 

"Why?" Granny said. But Ab knew what she meant. 

"I'm the only grown man here," he said. Then he said, "I 

seen them first. They were chasing me before " Then 

he said, talking fast now; his eyes had gone kind of glazed for 
a second but now they were bright again, looking in the stub- 
bly dirt-colored fuzz on his face like two chips of broken 
plate in a worn-out door-mat: "Spoils of war! I brought them 
here! I tolled them in here: a military and-bush! And as the 
only and ranking Confedrit military soldier present " 

"You ain't a soldier," Granny said. "You stipulated that to 
Colonel Sartoris yourself while I was listening. You told him 
yourself you would be his independent horse-captain but 
nothing more." 

"Ain't that just exactly what I am trying to be?" he said. 
"Didn't I bring all six of them horses in here in my own 
possession, the same as if I was leading them on a rope?" 



My Grandmother Millar d 685 

"Hah," Granny said. "A spoil of war or any other kind of 
spoil don't belong to a man or a woman either until they can 
take it home and put it down and turn their back on it. You 
never had time to get home with even the one you were rid- 
ing. You ran in the first open gate you came to, no matter 
whose gate it was." 

"Except it was the wrong one," he said. His eyes quit 
looking like china. They didn't look like anything. But I 
reckon his face would still look like an old door-mat even 
after he had turned all the way white. "So I reckon I got 
to even walk back to town," he said. "The woman that 
would . . ." His voice stopped. He and Granny looked at 
one another. 

"Don't you say it," Granny said. 

"Nome," he said. He didn't say it. "... a man of seven 
horses ain't likely to lend him a mule." 

"No," Granny said. "But you won't have to walk." 

We all went out to the lot. I don't reckon that even Ab 
knew until then that Granny had already found where he 
thought he had hidden the first horse and had it brought up 
to the lot with the other six. But at least he already had his 
saddle and bridle with him. But it was too late. Six of the 
horses moved about loose in the lot. The seventh one was tied 
just inside the gate with a piece of plow-line. It wasn't the 
horse Ab had come on because that horse had a blaze. Ab had 
known Granny long enough too. He should have known. 
Maybe he did. But at least he tried. He opened the gate. 

"Well," he said, "it ain't getting no earlier. I reckon I 
better " 

"Wait," Granny said. Then we looked at the horse which 
was tied to the fence. At first glance it looked the best one of 
the seven. You had to see it just right to tell its near leg was 
sprung a little, maybe from being worked too hard too young 
under too much weight. "Take that one," Granny said. 



686 The Middle Ground 

"That ain't mine," Ab said. "That's one of yourn. I'll 
just " 

"Take that one," Granny said. Ab looked at her. You 
could have counted at least ten. 

"Hell fire, Miz Millard," he said. 

"I've told you before about cursing on this place," Granny 
said. 

"Yessum," Ab said. Then he said it again: "Hell fire." He 
went into the lot and rammed the bit into the tied horse's 
mouth and clapped the saddle on and snatched the piece of 
plow-line off and threw it over the fence and got up and 
Granny stood there until he had ridden out of the lot and 
Ringo closed the gate and that was the first time I noticed the 
chain and padlock from the smokehouse door and Ringo 
locked it and handed Granny the key and Ab sat for a min- 
ute, looking down at her. "Well, good-day," he said. "I just 
hope for the sake of the Confedricy that Bed Forrest don't 
never tangle with you with all the horses he's got." Then he 
said it again, maybe worse this time because now he was al- 
ready on a horse pointed toward the gate: u Or you'll damn 
shore leave him just one more passel of infantry before he 
can spit twice." 

Then he was gone too. Except for hearing Cousin Meli- 
sandre now and then, and those six horses with U.S. branded 
on their hips standing in the lot, it might never have hap- 
pened. At least Ringo and I thought that was all of it. Every 
now and then Philadelphia would come downstairs with the 
pitcher and draw some more cold water for Cousin Meli- 
sandre's cloths but we thought that after a while even that 
would just wear out and quit. Then Philadelphia came down 
again and came in to where Granny was cutting down a pair 
of Yankee pants that Father had worn home last time so they 
would fit Ringo. She didn't say anything. She just stood in 
the door until Grannv said. "All right. What now?" 



My Grandmother Millard 687 

"She want the banjo," Philadelphia said. 

"What?" Granny said. "My dulcimer? She can't play it. 
Go back upstairs." 

But Philadelphia didn't move. "Could I ax Mammy to come 
help me?" 

"No," Granny said. "Louvinia's resting. She's had about as 
much of this as I want her to stand. Go back upstairs. Give 
her some more wine if you can't think of anything else." And 
she told Ringo and me to go somewhere else, anywhere else, 
but even in the yard you could still hear Cousin Melisandre 
talking to Philadelphia. And once we even heard Granny 
though it was still mostly Cousin Melisandre telling Granny 
that she had already forgiven her, that nothing whatever had 
happened and that all she wanted now was peace. And after 
a while Louvinia came up from the cabin without even being 
sent for and went upstairs and then it began to look like we 
were going to be late for supper too. But Philadelphia finally 
came down and cooked it and carried Cousin Melisandre's 
tray up and then we quit eating; we could hear Louvinia 
overhead, in Granny's room now, and she came down and 
set the untasted tray on the table and stood beside Granny's 
chair with the key to the trunk in her hand. 

"All right," Granny said. "Go call Joby and Lucius." We 
got the lantern and the shovels. We went to the orchard and 
removed the brush and dug up the trunk and got the dulci- 
mer and buried the trunk and put the brush back and brought 
the key in to Granny. And Ringo and I could hear her from 
our room and Granny was right. We heard her for a long 
time and Granny was surely right; she just never said but 
half of it. The moon came up after a while and we could look 
down from our window into the garden, at Cousin Melisan- 
dre sitting on the bench with the moonlight glinting on the 
pearl inlay of the dulcimer, and Philadelphia squatting on the 



688 The Middle Ground 

sill of the gate with her apron over her head. Maybe she was 
asleep. It was already late. But I don't see how. 

So we didn't hear Granny until she was already in the 
room, her shawl over her nightgown and carrying a candle. 
"In a minute I'm going to have about all of this I aim to stand 
too," she said. "Go wake Lucius and tell him to saddle the 
mule," she told Ringo. "Bring me the pen and ink and a 
sheet of paper." I fetched them. She didn't sit down. She 
stood at the bureau while I held the candle, writing even 
and steady and not very much, and signed her name and let 
the paper lie open to dry until Lucius came in. "Ab Snopes 
said that Mr. Forrest is in Jefferson," she told Lucius. "Find 
him. Tell him I will expect him here for breakfast in the 
morning and to bring that boy." She used to know General 
Forrest in Memphis before he got to be a general. He used to 
trade with Grandfather Millard's supply house and some- 
times he would come out to sit with Grandfather on the front 
gallery and sometimes he would eat with them. "You can tell 
him I have six captured horses for him," she said. "And never 
mind patter-rollers or soldiers either. Haven't you got my 
signature on that paper?" 

"I ain't worrying about them," Lucius said. "But suppose 
them Yankees " 

"I see," Granny said. "Hah. I forgot. You've been waiting 
for Yankees, haven't you? But those this morning seemed to 
be too busy trying to stay free to have much time to talk 
about it, didn't they? Get along," she said. "Do you think 
any Yankee is going to dare ignore what a Southern soldier 
or even a patter-roller wouldn't? And you go to bed," she 
said. 

We lay down, both of us on Ringo's pallet. We heard the 
mule when Lucius left. Then we heard the mule and at first 
we didn't know we had been asleep, the mule coming back 
now and the moon had started down the west and Cousin 



My Grandmother Millard 689 

Melisandre and Philadelphia were gone from the garden, to 
where Philadelphia at least could sleep better than sitting on 
a square sill with an apron over her head, or at least where it 
was quieter. And we heard Lucius fumbling up the stairs but 
we never heard Granny at all because she was already at the 
top of the stairs, talking down at the noise Lucius was trying 
not to make. "Speak up," she said. "I ain't asleep but I ain't 
a lip-reader either. Not in the dark." 

"Genl Fawhrest say he respectful compliments," Lucius 
said, "and he can't come to breakfast this morning because 
he gonter to be whuppin Genl Smith at Tallahatchie Cross- 
ing about that time. But providin he ain't too 1 ur away in the 
wrong direction when him and Genl Smith git done, he be 
proud to accept your invitation next time he in the neighbor- 
hood. And he say 'whut boy'." 

While you could count about five, Granny didn't say any- 
thing. Then she said, "What?" 

"He say Vhut boy'," Lucius said. 

Then you could have counted ten. All we could hear was 
Lucius breathing. Then Granny said: "Did you wipe the 
mule down?" 

"Yessum," Lucius said. 

"Did you turn her back into the pasture?" 

"Yessum," Lucius said. 

"Then go to bed," Granny said. "And you too," she said. 

General Forrest found out what boy. This time we didn't 
know we had been asleep either, and it was no one mule now. 
The sun was just rising. When we heard Granny and scram- 
bled to the window, yesterday wasn't a patch on it. There 
were at least fifty of them now, in gray; the whole outdoors 
was full of men on horses, with Cousin Philip out in front of 
them, sitting his horse in almost exactly the same spot where 
he had been yesterday, looking up at Granny's window and 
not seeing it or anything else this tJme either. He had a hat 



690 The Middle Ground 

now. He was holding it clamped over his heart and he hadn't 
shaved and yesterday he had looked younger than Ringo 
because Ringo always had looked about ten years older than 
me. But now, with the first sun-ray making a little soft fuzz 
in the gold-colored stubble on his face, he looked even 
younger than I did, and gaunt and worn in the face like he 
hadn't slept any last night and something else in his face too: 
like he not only hadn't slept last night but by godfrey he 
wasn't going to sleep tonight either as long as he had any- 
thing to do with it. "Goodbye," he said. "Goodbye," and 
whirled his horse, spurring, and raised the new hat over his 
head like he had carried the sabre yesterday and the whole 
mass of them went piling back across flower beds and lawns 
and all and back down the drive toward the gate while 
Granny still stood at her window in her nightgown, her voice 
louder than any man's anywhere, I don't care who he is or 
what he would be doing: "Backhouse! Backhouse! You, 
Backhouse!" 

So we ate breakfast early. Granny sent Ringo in his night- 
shirt to wake Louvinia and Lucius both. So Lucius had the 
mule saddled before Louvinia even got the fire lit. This time 
Granny didn't write a note. "Go to Tallahatchie Crossing," 
she told Lucius. "Sit there and wait for him if necessary." 

"Suppose they done already started the battle?" Lucius 
said. 

"Suppose they have?" Granny said. "What business is that 
of yours or mine either? You find Bedford Forrest. Tell him 
this is important; it won't take long. But don't you show 
your face here again without him." 

Lucius rode away. He was gone four days. He didn't even 
get back in time for the wedding, coming back up the drive 
about sundown on the fourth day with two soldiers in one 
of General Forrest's forage wagons with the mule tied to the 
tailgate. He didn't know where he had been and he never 



My Grandmother Millar d 69 1 

did catch up with the battle. "I never even heard it," he told 
Joby and Lucius and Louvinia and Philadelphia and Ringo 
and me. "If wars always moves that far and that fast, I don't 
see how they ever have time to fight." 

But it was all over then. It was the second day, the day 
after Lucius left. It was just after dinner this time and by 
now we were used to soldiers. But these were different, just 
five of them, and we never had seen just that few of them 
before and we had come to think of soldiers as either jumping 
on and off horses in the yard or going back and forth through 
Granny's flower beds at full gallop. These were all officers 
and I reckon maybe I hadn't seen so many soldiers after all 
because I never saw this much braid before. They came up 
the drive at a trot, like people just taking a ride, and stopped 
without trompling even one flower bed and General Forrest 
got down and came up the walk toward where Granny 
waited on the front gallery a big, dusty man with a big 
beard so black it looked almost blue and eyes like a sleepy 
owl, already taking off his hat. "Well, Miss Rosie," he said. 

"Don't call me Rosie," Granny said. "Come in. Ask your 
gentlemen to alight and come in." 

"They'll wait there," General Forrest said. "We are a little 
rushed. My plans have. . . ." Then we were in the library. He 
wouldn't sit down. He looked tired all right, but there was 
something else a good deal livelier than just tired. "Well y 
Miss Rosie," he said. "I " 

"Don't call me Rosie," Granny said. "Can't you even say 
Rosa?" 

"Yessum," he said. But he couldn't. At least, he never did, 
"I reckon we both have had about enough of this. That 
boy " 

"Hah," Granny said. "Night before last you were saying 
what boy. Where is he? I sent you word to bring him with 
you." 



692 The Middle Ground 

"Under arrest," General Forrest said. It was a considerable 
more than just tired. "I spent four days getting Smith just 
where I wanted him. After that, this boy here could have 
fought the battle." He said 'fit' for fought just as he said 
'druv' for drove and 'drug' for dragged. But maybe when 
you fought battles like he did, even Granny didn't mind how 
you talked. "I won't bother you with details. He didn't know 
them either. All he had to do was exactly what I told him. I 
did everything but draw a diagram on his coat-tail of exactly 
what he was to do, no more and no less, from the time he left 
me until he saw me again: which was to make contact and 
then fall back. I gave him just exactly the right number of 
men so that he couldn't do anything else but that. I told him 
exactly how fast to fall back and how much racket to make 
doing it and even how to make the racket. But what do you 
think he did?" 

"I can tell you," Granny said. "He sat on his horse at five 
o'clock yesterday morning, with my whole yard full of men 
behind him, yelling goodbye at my window." 

"He divided his men and sent half of them into the bushes 
to make a noise and took the other half who were the nearest 
to complete fools and led a sabre charge on that outpost. He 
didn't fire a shot. He drove it clean back with sabres onto 
Smith's main body and scared Smith so that he threw out all 
his cavalry and pulled out behind it and now I don't know 
whether I'm about to catch him or he's about to catch me. 
My provost finally caught the boy last night. He had come 
back and got the other thirty men of his company and was 
twenty miles ahead again, trying to find something to lead 
another charge against. 'Do you want to be killed?' I said. 
'Not especially,' he said. 'That is, I don't especially care one 
way or the other.' 'Then neither do I,' I said. 'But you risked 
a whole company of my men.' 'Ain't that what they enlisted 
for?' he said. 'They enlisted into a military establishment the 



My Grandmother Millar d 693 

purpose of which is to expend each man only at a profit. Or 
maybe you don't consider me a shrewd enough trader in 
human meat?' 1 can't say,' he said. 'Since day before yester- 
day I ain't thought very much about how you or anybody 
else runs this war.' 'And just what were you doing day before 
yesterday that changed your ideas and habits? ' I said. Tight- 
ing some of it/ he said. 'Dispersing the enemy.' 'Where?' I 
said. 'At a lady's house a few miles from Jefferson,' he said. 
'One of the niggers called her Granny like the white boy did. 
The others called her Miss Rosie.' " This time Granny didn't 
say anything. She just waited. 

"Go on," she said. 

" Tm still trying to win battles, even if since day before 
yesterday you ain't,' I said. I'll send you down to Johnston 
at Jackson,' I said. 'He'll put you inside Vicksburg, where 
you can lead private charges day and night too if you want.' 
'Like hell you will,' he said. And I said excuse me 'Like 
hell I won't.' " And Granny didn't say anything. It was like 
day before yesterday with Ab Snopes: not like she hadn't 
heard but as if right now it didn't matter, that this was no 
time either to bother with such. 

"And did you?" she said. 

"I can't. He knows it. You can't punish a man for routing 
an enemy four times his weight. What would I say back 
there in Tennessee, where we both live, let alone that uncle 
of his, the one they licked for Governor six years ago, on 
Bragg's personal staff now, with his face over Bragg's shoul- 
der every time Bragg opens a dispatch or picks up a pen. And 
I'm still trying to win battles. But I can't. Because of a girl, 
one single lone young female girl that ain't got anything 
under the sun against him except that, since it was his mis- 
fortune to save her from a passel of raiding enemy in a situa- 
tion that everybody but her is trying to forget, she can't seem 
to bear to hear his last name. Yet because of that, every battle 



694 The Middle Ground 

I plan from now on will be at the mercy of a twenty-two- 
year-old shavetail excuse me again who might decide to 
lead a private charge any time he can holler at least two men 
in gray coats into moving in the same direction." He stopped. 
He looked at Granny. "Well?" he said. 

"So now youVe got to it," Granny said. "Well what, Mr. 
Forrest?" 

"Why, just have done with this foolishness. I told you I've 
got that boy, in close arrest, with a guard with a bayonet. 
But there won't be any trouble there. I figured even yester- 
day morning that he had already lost his mind. But I reckon 
he's recovered enough of it since the Provost took him last 
night to comprehend that I still consider myself his com- 
mander even if he don't. So all necessary now is for you to 
put your foot down. Put it down hard. Now. You're her 
grandma. She lives in your home. And it looks like she is 
going to live in it a good while yet before she gets back to 
Memphis to that uncle or whoever it is that calls himself her 
guardian. So just put your foot down. Make her. Mr. Millard 
would have already done that if he had been here. And I 
know when. It would have been two days ago by now." 

Granny waited until he got done. She stood with her arms 
crossed, holding each elbow in the other. "Is that all I'm to 
do?" she said. 

"Yes," General Forrest said. "If she don't want to listen 
to you right at first, maybe as his commander " 

Granny didn't even say "Hah." She didn't even send me. 
She didn't even stop in the hall and call. She went upstairs 
herself and we stood there and I thought maybe she was 
going to bring the dulcimer too and I thought how if I was 
General Forrest I would go back and get Cousin Philip and 
make him sit in the library until about supper-time while 
Cousin Melisandre played the dulcimer and sang. Then he 



My Grandmother Millard 695 

could take Cousin Philip on back and then he could finish 
the war without worrying. 

She didn't have the dulcimer. She just had Cousin Meh- 
sandre. They came in- and Granny stood to one side again 
with her arms crossed, holding her elbows. "Here she is," she 
said. "Say it This is Mr. Bedford Forrest," she told Cousin 
Melisandre. "Say it," she told General Forrest. 

He didn't have time. When Cousin Melisandre first came, 
she tried to read aloud to Ringo and me. It wasn't much. That 
is, what she insisted on reading to us wasn't so bad, even if it 
was mostly about ladies looking out windows and playing 
on something (maybe they were dulcimers too) while some- 
body else was off somewhere fighting. It was the way she 
read it. When Granny said this is Mister Forrest, Cousin 
Melisandre's face looked exactly like her voice would sound 
when she read to us. She took two steps into the library and 
curtsied, spreading her hoops back, and stood up. "General 
Forrest," she said. "I am acquainted with an associate of his. 
Will the General please give him the sinccrest wishes for 
triumph in war and success in love, from one who will never 
see him again?" Then she curtsied again and spread her hoops 
backward and stood up and took two steps backward and 
turned and went out. 

After a while Granny said, "Well, Mr. Forrest?" 

General Forrest began to cough. He lifted his coattail with 
one hand and reached the other into his hip pocket like he 
was going to pull at least a musket out of it and got his hand- 
kerchief and coughed into it a while. It wasn't very clean. It 
looked about like the one Cousin Philip was trying to wipe his 
coat off with in the summer house day before yesterday. 
Then he put the handkerchief back. He didn't say "Hah" 
either. "Can I reach the Holly Branch road without having 
to go through Jefferson?" he said. 

Then Granny moved. "Open the desk," she said. "Lay out 



696 The Middle Ground 

a sheet of note-paper." I did. And I remember how I stood at 
one side of the desk and General Forrest at the other, and 
watched Granny's hand move the pen steady and not very 
slow and not very long across the paper because it never did 
take her very long to say anything, no matter what it was, 
whether she was talking it or writing it. Though I didn't see 
it then, but only later, when it hung framed under glass 
above Cousin Melisandre's and Cousin Philip's mantel: the 
fine steady slant of Granny's hand and General Forrest's 
sprawling signatures below it that looked itself a good deal 
like a charge of massed cavalry: 

Lieutenant P. S. Backhouse, Company D, Tennessee Cavalry, 
ivas this day raised to the honorary rank of Brevet Major 
General <& killed while engaging the enemy. Vice whom 
Philip St-Just Backus is hereby appointed Lieutenant, Com- 
pany D y Tennessee Cavalry. 

N. B. Forrest Genl 

I didn't see it then. General Forrest picked it up. "Now 
I've got to have a battle," he said. "Another sheet, son." I 
laid that one out on the desk. 

"A battle?" Granny said. 

"To give Johnston," he said. "Confound it, Miss Rosie, 
can't you understand either that I'm just a fallible mortal man 
trying to run a military command according to certain fixed 
and inviolable rules, no matter how foolish the business looks 
to superior outside folks?" 

"All right," Granny said. "You had one. I was looking at 
it." 

"So I did," General Forrest said. "Hah," he said. "The 
battle of Sartoris." 

"No," Granny said. "Not at my house." 

"They did all the shooting down at the creek," I said. 

"What creek?" he said. 



My Grandmother Millard 697 

So I told him. It ran through the pasture. Its name was 
Hurricane Creek but not even the white people called it hur- 
ricane except Granny. General Forrest didn't either when he 
sat down at the desk and wrote the report to General John- 
ston at Jackson: 

A unit of my command on detached duty engaged a body 
of the enemy & drove him from the field & dispersed him 
this day 28th ult. April 1862 at Harry kin Creek. With loss of 
one man. 

N. B. Forrest Genl 

I saw that. I watched him write it. Then he got up and 
folded the sheets into his pocket and was already going 
toward the table where his hat was. 

"Wait," Granny said. "Lay out another sheet," she said. 
"Come back here." 

General Forrest stopped and turned. "Another one?" 

"Yes!" Granny said. "A furlough, pass whatever you 
busy military establishments call them! So John Sartoris can 

come home long enough to " and she said it herself, she 

looked straight at me and even backed up and said some of it 
over as though to make sure there wouldn't be any mistake: 
" can come back home and give away that damn bride!" 

IV 

AND THAT was all. The day came and Granny waked Ringo 
and me before sunup and we ate what breakfast we had from 
two plates on the back steps. And we dug up the trunk and 
brought it into the house and polished the silver and Ringo 
and I brought dogwood and redbud branches from the pas- 
ture and Granny cut the flowers, all of them, cutting them 
herself with Cousin Melisandre and Philadelphia just carrying 
the baskets; so many of them until the house was so full that 



698 The Middle Ground 

Ringo and I would believe we smelled them even across the 
pasture each time we came up. Though of course we could, 
it was just the food the last ham from the smokehouse and 
the chickens and the flour which Granny had been saving 
and the last of the sugar which she had been saving along 
with the bottle of champagne for the day when the North 
surrendered which Louvinia had been cooking for two days 
now, to remind us each time we approached the house of 
what was going on and that the flowers were there. As if we 
could have forgotten about the food. And they dressed 
Cousin Melisandre and, Ringo in his new blue pants and I in 
my gray ones which were not so new, we stood in the late 
afternoon on the gallery Granny and Cousin Melisandre 
and Louvinia and Philadelphia and Ringo and I and watched 
them enter the gate. General Forrest was not one. Ringo and 
I had thought maybe he might be, if only to bring Cousin 
Philip. Then we thought that maybe, since Father was com- 
ing anyway, General Forrest would let Father bring him, 
with Cousin Philip maybe handcuffed to Father and the sol- 
dier with the bayonet following, or maybe still just hand- 
cuffed to the soldier until he and Cousin Melisandre were 
married and Father unlocked him. 

But General Forrest wasn't one, and Cousin Philip wasn't 
handcuffed to anybody and there was no bayonet and not 
even a soldier because these were all officers too. And we 
stood in the parlor while the home-made candles burnt in the 
last of sunset in the bright candlesticks which Philadelphia 
and Ringo and I had polished with the rest of the silver be- 
cause Granny and Louvinia were both busy cooking and 
even Cousin Melisandre polished a little of it although Lou- 
vinia could pick out the ones she polished without hardly 
looking and hand them to Philadelphia to polish again: 
Cousin Melisandre in the dress which hadn't needed to be 
altered for her at all because Mother wasn't much older than 



My Grandmother Millard 699 

Cousin Melisandre even when she died, and which would still 
button on Granny too just like it did the day she married in 
it, and the chaplain and Father and Cousin Philip and the four 
others in their gray and braid and sabres and Cousin Meli- 
sandre's face was all right now and Cousin Philip's was too 
because it just had the beautiful-girl look on it and none of 
us had ever seen him look any other way. Then we ate, and 
Ringo and I anyway had been waiting on that for three days 
and then we did it and then it was over too, fading just a little 
each day until the palate no longer remembered and only our 
mouths would run a little water as we would name the dishes 
aloud to one another, until even the water would run less 
and less and less and it would take something we just hoped 
to eat some day if they ever got done fighting, to make it run 
at all. 

And that was all. The last sound of wheel and hoof died 
away, Philadelphia came in from the parlor carrying the 
candlesticks and blowing out the candles as she came, and 
Louvinia set the kitchen clock on the table and gathered the 
last of soiled silver from supper into the dishpan and it might 
never have even been. "Well," Granny said. She didn't move, 
leaning her forearms on the table a little and we had never 
seen that before. She spoke to Ringo without turning her 
head: "Go call Joby and Lucius." And even when we 
brought the trunk in and set it against the wall and opened 
back the lid, she didn't move. She didn't even look at Lou- 
vinia either. "Put the clock in too/' she said. "I don't think 
we'll bother to time ourselves tonight." 



Golden Land 



IF HE had been thirty, he would not have needed the two 
aspirin tablets and the half glass of raw gin before he could 
bear the shower's needling on his body and steady his hands 
to shave. But then when he had been thirty neither could 
he have afforded to drink as much each evening as he now 
drank; certainly he would not have done it in the company 
of the men and the women in which, at forty-eight, he did 
each evening, even though knowing during the very final 
hours filled with the breaking of glass and the shrill cries of 
drunken women above the drums and saxophones the 
hours during which he carried a little better than his weight 
both in the amount of liquor consumed and in the number 
and sum of checks paid that six or eight hours later he 
would rouse from what had not been sleep at all but instead 
that dreamless stupefaction of alcohol out of which last 
night's turgid and licensed uproar would die, as though 
without any interval for rest or recuperation, into the fa- 
miliar shape of his bedroom the bed's foot silhouetted by 
the morning light which entered the bougainvillaea-bound 
windows beyond which his painful and almost unbearable 
eyes could see the view which might be called the monu- 
ment to almost twenty-five years of industry and desire, of 
shrewdness and luck and even fortitude the opposite can- 
yonflank dotted with the white villas half hidden in imported 

701 



7 02 The Middle Ground 

olive groves or friezed by the sombre spaced columns of 
cypress like the facades of eastern temples, whose owners 1 
names and faces and even voices were glib and familiar in 
back corners of the United States and of America and of the 
world where those of Einstein and Rousseau and Esculapius 
had never sounded. 

He didn't waken sick. He never wakened ill nor became 
ill from drinking, not only because he had drunk too long 
and too steadily for that, but because he was too tough even 
after the thirty soft years; he came from too tough stock 
on that day thirty-four years ago when at fourteen he had 
fled, on the brakebeam of a westbound freight, the little lost 
Nebraska town named for, permeated with, his father's 
history and existence a town to be sure, but only in the 
sense that any shadow is larger than the object which casts 
it. It was still frontier even as he remembered it at five and 
six the projected and increased shadow of a small outpost 
of sodroofed dugouts on the immense desolation of the 
plains where his father, Ira Ewing too, had been first to essay 
to wring wheat during the six days between those when, 
outdoors in spring and summer and in the fetid half dark of a 
snowbound dugout in the winter and fall, he preached. The 
second Ira Ewing had come a long way since then, from 
that barren and treeless village which he had fled by a night 
freight to where he now lay in a hundred-thousand-dollar 
house, waiting until he knew that he could rise and go to 
the bath and put the two aspirin tablets into his mouth. 
They his mother and father had tried to explain it to him 
something about fortitude, the will to endure. At fourteen 
he could neither answer them with logic and reason nor 
explain what he wanted: he could only flee. Nor was he 
fleeing his father's harshness and wrath. He was fleeing the 
scene itself the treeless immensity in the lost center of 
which he seemed to see the sum of his father's and mother's 



Golden Land 703 

dead youth and bartered lives as a tiny forlorn spot which 
nature permitted to green into brief and niggard wheat for 
a season's moment before blotting it all with the primal and 
invincible snow as though (not even promise, not even 
threat) in grim and almost playful augury of the final doom 
of all life. And it was not even this that he was fleeing be- 
cause he was not fleeing: it was only that absence, removal, 
was the only argument which fourteen knew how to employ 
against adults with any hope of success. He spent the next 
ten years half tramp half casual laborer as he drifted down 
the Pacific Coast to Los Angeles; at thirty he was married, 
to a Los Angeles girl, daughter of a carpenter, and father 
of a son and a daughter and with a foothold in real estate; 
at forty-eight he spent fifty thousand dollars a year, owning 
a business which he had built up unaided and preserved in- 
tact through nineteen-twenty-nine; he had given to his chil- 
dren luxuries and advantages which his own father not only 
could not have conceived in fact but would have condemned 
completely in theory as it proved, as the paper which the 
Filipino chauffeur, who each morning carried him into the 
house and undressed him and put him to bed, had removed 
from the pocket of his topcoat and laid on the reading table 
proved, with reason. On the death of his father twenty 
years ago he had returned to Nebraska, for the first time, 
and fetched his mother back with him, and she was now 
established in a home of her own only the less sumptuous 
because she refused (with a kind of abashed and thoughtful 
unshakability which he did not remark) anything finer or 
more elaborate. It was the house in which they had all lived 
at first, though he and his wife and children had moved 
within the year. Three years ago they had moved again, 
into the house where he now waked in a select residential 
section of Beverley Hills, but not once in the nineteen years 
had he failed to stop (not even during the last five, when to 



704 The Middle Ground 

move at all in the mornings required a terrific drain on that 
character or strength which the elder Ira had bequeathed 
him, which had enabled the other Ira to pause on the Ne- 
braska plain and dig a hole for his wife to bear children in 
while he planted wheat) on his way to the office (twenty 
miles out of his way to the office) and spend ten minutes 
with her. She lived in as complete physical ease and peace 
as he could devise. He had arranged her affairs so that she 
did not even need to bother with money, cash, in order to 
live; he had arranged credit for her with a neighboring 
market and butcher so that the Japanese gardener who came 
each day to water and tend the flowers could do her shop- 
ping for her; she never even saw the bills. And the only 
reason she had no servant was that even at seventy she ap- 
parently clung stubbornly to the old habit of doing her own 
cooking and housework. So it would seem that he had been 
right. Perhaps there were times when, lying in bed like this 
and waiting for the will to rise and take the aspirin and the 
gin (mornings perhaps following evenings when he had 
drunk more than ordinarily and when even the six or seven 
hours of oblivion had not been sufficient to enable him to 
distinguish between reality and illusion) something of the 
old strong harsh Campbellite blood which the elder Ira must 
have bequeathed him might have caused him to see or feel 
or imagine his father looking down from somewhere upon 
him, the prodigal, and what he had accomplished. If this 
were so, then surely the elder Ira, looking down for the last 
two mornings upon the two tabloid papers which the Fili- 
pino removed from his master's topcoat and laid on the read- 
ing table, might have taken advantage of that old blood and 
taken his revenge, not just for that afternoon thirty-four 
years ago but for the entire thirty-four years. 

When he gathered himself, his will, his body, at last and 
rose from the bed he struck the paper so that it fell to the 



Golden Land 705 

floor and lay open at his feet, but he did not look at it. He 
just stood so, tall, in silk pajamas, thin where his father had 
been gaunt with the years of hard work and unceasing strug- 
gle with the unpredictable and implacable earth (even now, 
despite the life which he had led, he had very little paunch) 
looking at nothing while at his feet the black headline flared 
above the row of five or six tabloid photographs from which 
his daughter alternately stared back or flaunted long pale 
shins: APRIL LALEAR BARES ORGY SECRETS. When 
he moved at last he stepped on the paper, walking on his 
bare feet into the bath; now it was his trembling and jerk- 
ing hands that he watched as he shook the two tablets onto 
the glass shelf and set the tumbler into the rack and un- 
stoppered the gin bottle and braced his knuckles against the 
wall in order to pour into the tumbler. But he did not look 
at the paper, not even when, shaved, he re-entered the bed- 
room and went to the bed beside which his slippers sat and 
shoved the paper aside with his foot in order to step into 
them. Perhaps, doubtless, he did not need to. The trial was 
but entering its third tabloidal day now, and so for two days 
his daughter's face had sprung out at him, hard, blonde and 
inscrutable, from every paper he opened; doubtless he had 
never forgot her while he slept even, that he had waked 
into thinking about remembering her as he had waked into 
the dying drunken uproar of the evening eight hours behind 
him without any interval between for rest or forgetting. 

Nevertheless as, dressed, in a burnt orange turtleneck 
sweater beneath his gray flannels, he descended the Spanish 
staircase, he was outwardly calm and possessed. The delicate 
iron balustrade and the marble steps coiled down to the tile- 
floored and barnlike living room beyond which he could 
hear his wife and son talking on the breakfast terrace. The 
son's name was Voyd. He and his wife had named the two 
children by what might have been called mutual contemptu- 



706 The Middle Ground 

ous armistice his wife called the boy Voyd, for what 
reason he never knew; he in his turn named the girl (the 
child whose woman's face had met him from every paper 
he touched for two days now beneath or above the name, 
April Lalear) Samantha, after his own mother. He could 
hear them talking the wife between whom and himself 
there had been nothing save civility, and not always a great 
deal of that, for ten years now; and the son who one after- 
noon two years ago had been delivered at the door drunk 
and insensible by a car whose occupants he did not see and, 
it devolving upon him to undress the son and put him to bed, 
whom he discovered to be wearing, in place of underclothes, 
a woman's brassiere and step-ins. A few minutes later, hear- 
ing the blows perhaps, Voyd's mother ran in and found her 
husband beating the still unconscious son with a series of 
towels which a servant was steeping in rotation in a basin of 
ice-water. He was beating the son hard, with grim and de- 
liberate fury. Whether he was trying to sober the son up or 
was merely beating him, possibly he himself did not know. 
His wife though jumped to the latter conclusion. In his 
raging disillusionment he tried to tell her about the woman's 
garments but she refused to listen; she assailed him in turn 
with virago fury. Since that day the son had contrived to see 
his father only in his mother's presence (which neither the 
son nor the mother found very difficult, by the way) and at 
which times the son treated his father with a blend of cring- 
ing spite and vindictive insolence half a cat's and half a 
woman's. 

He emerged onto the terrace; the voices ceased. The sun, 
strained by the vague high soft almost nebulous California 
haze, fell upon the terrace with a kind of treacherous un- 
brightness. The terrace, the sundrenched terra cotta tiles, 
butted into a rough and savage shear of canyonwall bare yet 
without dust, on or against which a solid mat of flowers 



Golden Land 707 

bloomed in fierce lush myriad-colored paradox as though in 
place of being rooted into and drawing from the soil they 
lived upon air alone and had been merely leaned intact 
against the sustenanceless lavawall by someone who would 
later return and take them away. The son, Voyd, appar- 
ently naked save for a pair of straw-colored shorts, his body 
brown with sun and scented faintly by the depilatory which 
he used on arms, chest and legs, lay in a wicker chair, his 
feet in straw beach shoes, an open newspaper across his 
brown legs. The paper was the highest class one of the city, 
yet there was a black headline across half of it too, and even 
without pausing, without even being aware that he had 
looked, Ira saw there too the name which he recognized. 
He went on to his place; the Filipino who put him to bed 
each night, in a white service jacket now, drew his chair. 
Beside the glass of orange juice and the waiting cup lay a 
neat pile of mail topped by a telegram. He sat down and 
took up the telegram; he had not glanced at his wife until 
she spoke: 

"Mrs. Ewing telephoned. She says for you to stop in 
there on your way to town." 

He stopped; his hands opening the telegram stopped. Still 
blinking a little against the sun he looked at the face opposite 
him across the table the smooth dead makeup, the thin 
lips and the thin nostrils and the pale blue unforgiving eyes, 
the meticulous platinum hair which looked as though it had 
been transferred to her skull with a brush from a book of 
silver leaf such as window painters use. "What?" he said. 
"Telephoned? Here?" 

"Why not? Have I ever objected to any of your women 
telephoning you here?" 

The unopened telegram crumpled suddenly in his hand. 
"You know what I mean," he said harshly. "She never tele- 
phoned me in her life. She don't have to. Not that message. 



708 The Middle Ground 

When have I ever failed to go by there on my way to 
town? " 

"How do I know?" she said. "Or are you the same model 
son you have been a husband and seem to be a father?" Her 
voice was not shrill yet, nor even very loud, and none could 
have told how fast her breathing was because she sat so still, 
rigid beneath the impeccable and unbelievable hair, looking 
at him with that pale and outraged unforgiveness. They 
both looked at each other across the luxurious table the 
two people who at one time twenty years ago would have 
turned as immediately and naturally and unthinkingly to 
one another in trouble, who even ten years ago might have 
done so. 

"You know what I mean," he said, harshly again, holding 
himself too against the trembling which he doubtless be- 
lieved was from last night's drinking, from the spent alco- 
hol. "She don't read papers. She never even sees one. Did 
you send it to her?" 

"I? "she said. "Send what?" 

"Damnation!" he cried. "A paper! Did you send it to her? 
Don't lie to me." 

"What if I did?" she cried. "Who is she, that she must 
not know about it? Who is she, that you should shield her 
from knowing it? Did you make any effort to keep me from 
knowing it? Did you make any effort to keep it from hap- 
pening? Why didn't you think about that all those years 
while you were too drunk, too besotted with drink, to know 
or notice or care what Samantha was " 

"Miss April Lalear of the cinema, if you please," Voyd 
said. They paid no attention to him; they glared at one 
another across the table. 

"Ah," he said, quiet and rigid, his lips scarcely moving. 
"So I am to blame for this too, am I? I made my daughter a 
bitch, did I? Maybe you will tell me next that I made my 
son a f " 



Golden Land 709 

"Stop!" she cried. She was panting now; they glared at 
one another across the suave table, across the five feet of 
irrevocable division. 

"Now, now/ 7 Voyd said. "Don't interfere with the girl's 
career. After all these years, when at last she seems to have 
found a part that she can " He ceased; his father had 
turned and was looking at him. Voyd lay in his chair, look- 
ing at his father with that veiled insolence that was almost 
feminine. Suddenly it became completely feminine; with a 
muffled halfscream he swung his legs out to spring up and 
flee but it was too late; Ira stood above him, gripping him 
not by the throat but by the face with one hand, so that 
Voyd's mouth puckered and slobbered in his father's hard, 
shaking hand. Then the mother sprang forward and tried to 
break Ira's grip but he flung her away and then caught and 
held her, struggling too, with the other hand when she 
sprang in again. 

"Go on," he said. "Say it." But Voyd could say nothing 
because of his father's hand gripping his jaws open, or more 
than likely because of terror. His body was free of the chair 
now, writhing and thrashing while he made his slobbering, 
moaning sound of terror while his father held him with one 
hand and held his screaming mother with the other one. 
Then Ira flung Voyd free, onto the terrace; Voyd rolled 
once and came onto his feet, crouching, retreating toward 
the French windows with one arm flung up before his face 
while he cursed his father. Then he was gone. Ira faced his 
wife, holding her quiet too at last, panting too, the skillful 
map of makeup standing into relief now like a paper mask 
trimmed smoothly and pasted onto her skull. He released 
her. 

"You sot," she said. "You drunken sot. And yet you 
wonder why your children " 

"Yes," he said quietly. "All right. That's not the question. 
That's all done. The question is, what to do about it. My 



The Middle Ground 

father would have known. He did it once." He spoke in a 
dry light pleasant voice: so much so that she stood, panting 
still but quiet, watching him. "I remember. I was about ten. 
We had rats in the barn. We tried everything. Terriers. 
Poison. Then one day father said, 'Come. 7 We went to the 
barn and stopped all the cracks, the holes. Then we set fire 
to it. What do you think of that?" Then she was gone too. 
He stood for a moment, blinking a little, his eyeballs beating 
faintly and steadily in his skull with the impact of the soft 
unchanging sunlight, the fierce innocent mass of the flowers. 
"Philip!" he called. The Filipino appeared, brownfaced, im- 
passive, with a pot of hot coffee, and set it beside the empty 
cup and the icebedded glass of orange juice. "Get me a 
drink," Ira said. The Filipino glanced at him, then he be- 
came buj5y at the table, shifting the cup and setting the pot 
down and shifting the cup again while Ira watched him. 
"Did you hear me?" Ira said. The Filipino stood erect and 
looked at him. 

"You told me not to give it to you until you had your 
orange juice and coffee." 

"Will you or won't you get me a drink?" Ira shouted. 

"Very good, sir," the Filipino said. He went out. Ira 
looked after him; this had happened before: he knew well 
that the brandy would not appear until he had finished the 
orange juice and the coffee, though just where the Filipino 
lurked to watch him he never knew. He sat again and opened 
the crumpled telegram and read it, the glass of orange juice 
in the other hand. It was from his secretary: MADE SETUP 
BEFORE I BROKE STORY LAST NIGHT STOP 
THIRTY PERCENT FRONT PAGE STOP MADE 
APPOINTMENT FOR YOU COURTHOUSE THIS 
P.M. STOP WILL YOU COME TO OFFICE OR CALL 
ME. He read the telegram again, the glass of orange juice 
still poised. Then he put both down and rose and went and 



Golden Land 7 1 1 

lifted the paper from the terrace where Voyd had flung it, 
and read the half headline: LALEAR WOMAN DAUGH- 
TER OF PROMINENT LOCAL FAMILY. Admits Real 
Name Is Samantha Ewing, Daughter of Ira Ewing, Local 
Realtor. He read it quietly; he said quietly, aloud: 

"It was that Jap that showed her the paper. It was that 
damned gardener." He returned to the table. After a while 
the Filipino came, with the brandy-and-soda, and wearing 
now a jacket of bright imitation tweed, telling him that the 
car was ready. 

II 

His MOTHER lived in Glendale; it was the house which he 
had taken when he married and later bought, in which his 
son and daughter had been born a bungalow in a cul-de- 
sac of pepper trees and flowering shrubs and vines which the 
Japanese tended, backed into a barren foothill combed and 
curried into a cypress-and-marble cemetery dramatic as a 
stage set and topped by an electric sign in red bulbs which, 
in the San Fernando valley fog, glared in broad sourceless 
ruby as though just beyond the crest lay not heaven but 
hell. The length of his sports model car in which the Filipino 
sat reading a paper dwarfed it. But she would have no other, 
just as she would have neither servant, car, nor telephone 
a gaunt spare slightly stooped woman upon whom even 
California and ease had put no flesh, sitting in one of the 
chairs which she had insisted on bringing all the way from 
Nebraska. At first she had been content to allow the Ne- 
braska furniture to remain in storage, since it had not been 
needed (when Ira moved his wife and family out of the 
house and into the second one, the intermediate one, they 
had bought new furniture too, leaving the first house fur- 
nished complete for his mother) but one day, he could not 



7 1 2 The Middle Ground 

recall just when, he discovered that she had taken the one 
chair out of storage and was using it in the house. Later, 
after he began to sense that quality of unrest in her, he had 
suggested that she let him clear the house of its present 
furniture and take all of hers out of storage but she declined, 
apparently preferring or desiring to leave the Nebraska 
furniture where it was. Sitting so, a knitted shawl about 
her shoulders, she looked less like she lived in or belonged 
to the house, the room, than the son with his beach burn 
and his faintly theatrical gray temples and his bright ex- 
pensive suavely antiphonal garments did. She had changed 
hardly at all in the thirty-four years; she and the older Ira 
Ewing too, as the son remembered him, who, dead, had 
suffered as little of alteration as while he had been alive. As 
the sod Nebraska outpost had grown into a village and then 
into a town, his father's aura alone had increased, growing 
into the proportions of a giant who at some irrevocable yet 
recent time had engaged barehanded in some titanic struggle 
with the pitiless earth and endured and in a sense conquered 
it too, like the town, a shadow out of all proportion to the 
gaunt gnarled figure of the actual man. And the actual 
woman too as the son remembered them back in that time. 
Two people who drank air and who required to eat and 
sleep as he did and who had brought him into the world, 
yet were strangers as though of another race, who stood side 
by side in an irrevocable loneliness as though strayed from 
another planet, not as husband and wife but as blood brother 
and sister, even twins, of the same travail because they had 
gained a strange peace through fortitude and the will and 
strength to endure. 

"Tell me again what it is," she said. "I'll try to under- 
stand." 

"So it was Kazimura that showed you the damned paper," 
he said. She didn't answer this; she was not looking at him. 



Golden Land 7 1 3 

"You tell me she has been in the pictures before, for two 
years. That that was why she had to change her name, that 
they all have to change their names." 

"Yes. They call them extra parts. For about two years, 
God knows why." 

"And then you tell me that this that all this was so she 
could get into the pictures " 

He started to speak, then he caught himself back out of 
some quick impatience, some impatience perhaps of grief or 
despair or at least rage, holding his voice, his tone, quiet: 
"I said that that was one possible reason. All I know is that 
the, man has something to do with pictures, giving out the 
parts. And that the police caught him and Samantha and 
the other girl in an apartment with the doors all locked and 
that Samantha and the other woman were naked. They say 
that he was naked too and he says he was not. He says in 
the trial that he was framed tricked; that they were trying 
to blackmail him into giving them parts in a picture; that 
they fooled him into coming there and arranged for the 
police to break in just after they had taken off their clothes; 
that one of them made a signal from the window. Maybe 
so. Or maybe they were all just having a good time and 
were innocently caught." Unmoving, rigid, his face broke, 
wrung with faint bitter smiling as though with indomitable 
and impassive suffering, or maybe just smiling, just rage. Still 
his mother did not look at him. 

"But you told me she was already in the pictures. That 
that was why she had to change her " 

"I said, extra parts," he said. He had to catch himself 
again, out of his jangled and outraged nerves, back from the 
fierce fury of the impatience. "Can't you understand that 
you don't get into the pictures just by changing your name? 
and that you don't even stay there when you get in? that 
you can't even stay there by being female? that they come 



714 The Middle Ground 

here in droves on every train girls younger and prettier 
than Samantha and who will do anything to get into the 
pictures? So will she, apparently; but who know or are 
willing to learn to do more things than even she seems to 
have thought of? But let's don't talk about it. She has made 
her bed; all I can do is to help her up: I can't wash the 
sheets. Nobody can. I must go, anyway; I'm late." He rose, 
looking down at her. "They said you telephoned me this 
morning. Is this what it was?" 

"No," she said. Now she looked up at him; now her 
gnarled hands began to pick faintly at one another. "You 
offered me a servant once." 

"Yes. I thought fifteen years ago that you ought to have 
one. Have you changed your mind? Do you want me to " 

Now she stopped looking at him again, though her hands 
did not cease. "That was fifteen years ago. It would have 
cost at least five hundred dollars a year. That would be " 

He laughed, short and harsh. "I'd like to see the Los 
Angeles servant you could get for five hundred dollars a 
year. But what " He stopped laughing, looking down at 
her. 

"That would be at least five thousand dollars," she said. 

He looked down at her. After a while he said, "Are you 
asking me again for money?" She didn't answer nor move, 
her hands picking slowly and quietly at one another. "Ah," 
he said. "You want to go away. You want to run from it. 
So do I!" he cried, before he could catch himself this time; 
"so do I! But you did not choose me when you elected a 
child; neither did I choose my two. But I shall have to bear 
them and you will have to bear all of us. There is no help 
for it." He caught himself now, panting, quieting himself by 
will as when he would rise from bed, though his voice was 
still harsh: "Where would you go? Where would you hide 
from it?" 



Golden Land 7 1 5 

"Home," she said. 

"Home?" he repeated; he repeated in a kind of amaze- 
ment: "home?" before he understood. "You would go back 
there? with those winters, that snow and all? Why, you 
wouldn't live to see the first Christmas: don't you know 
that?" She didn't move nor look up at him. "Nonsense," he 
said. "This will blow over. In a month there will be two 
others and nobody except us will even remember it. And 
you don't need money. You have been asking me for money 
for years, but you don't need it. I had to worry about 
money so much at one time myself that I swore that the 
least I could do was to arrange your affairs so you would 
never even have to look at the stuff. I must go; there is 
something at the office today. I'll see you tomorrow." 

It was already one o'clock. "Courthouse," he told the 
Filipino, settling back into the car. "My God, I want a 
drink." He rode with his eyes closed against the sun; the 
secretary had already sprung onto the runningboard before 
he realized that they had reached the courthouse. The secre- 
tary, bareheaded too, wore a jacket of authentic tweed; his 
turtleneck sweater was dead black, his hair was black too, 
varnished smooth to his skull; he spread before Ira a dummy 
newspaper page laid out to embrace the blank space for the 
photograph beneath the caption: APRIL LALEAR'S 
FATHER. Beneath the space was the legend: IRA 
EWING, PRESIDENT OF THE EWING REALTY 
CO. , WILSHIRE BOULEVARD, BEVERLY HILLS. 

"Is thirty percent all you could get?" Ira said. The secre- 
tary was young; he glared at Ira for an instant in vague im- 
patient fury. 

"Jesus, thirty percent is thirty percent. They are going to 
print a thousand extra copies and use our mailing list. It will 
be spread all up and down the Coast and as far East as Reno. 
What do you want? We can't expect them to put under 



7 1 6 The Middle Ground 

your picture, 'Turn to page fourteen for halfpage ad/ can 
we?" Ira sat again with his eyes closed, waiting for his head 
to stop. 

"All right," he said. "Are they ready now?" 

"All set. You will have to go inside. They insisted it be 
inside, so everybody that sees it will know it is the court- 
house." 

"All right," Ira said. He got out; with his eyes half closed 
and the secretary at his elbow he mounted the steps and 
entered the courthouse. The reporter and the photographer 
were waiting but he did not see them yet; he was aware 
only of being enclosed in a gaping crowd which he knew 
would be mostly women, hearing the secretary and a police- 
man clearing the way in the corridor outside the courtroom 
door. 

"This is O.K.," the secretary said. Ira stopped; the dark- 
ness was easier on his eyes though he did not open them yet; 
he just stood, hearing the secretary and the policeman herd- 
ing the women, the faces, back; someone took him by the 
arm and turned him; he stood obediently; the magnesium 
flashed and glared, striking against his painful eyeballs like 
blows; he had a vision of wan faces craned to look at him 
from either side of a narrow human lane; with his eyes shut 
tight now he turned, blundering until the reporter in charge 
spoke to him: 

"Just a minute, chief. We better get another one just in 
case." This time his eyes were tightly closed; the magnesium 
flashed, washed over them; in the thin acrid smell of it he 
turned and with the secretary again at his elbow he moved 
blindly back and into the sunlight and into his car. He gave 
no order this time, he just said, "Get me a drink." He rode 
with his eyes closed again while the car cleared the down- 
town traffic and then began to move quiet, powerful and 
fast under him; he rode so for a long while before he felt 



Golden Land 7 1 7 

the car swing into the palmbordered drive, slowing. It 
stopped; the doorman opened the door for him, speaking to 
him by name. The elevator boy called him by name too, 
stopping at the right floor without direction; he followed 
the corridor and knocked at a door and was fumbling for 
the key when the door opened upon a woman in a bathing 
suit beneath a loose beach cloak a woman with treated 
hair also and brown eyes, who swung the door back for him 
to enter and then to behind him, looking at him with the 
quick bright faint serene smiling which only a woman near- 
ing forty can give to a man to whom she is not married and 
from whom she has had no secrets physical and few mental 
over a long time of pleasant and absolute intimacy. She had 
been married though and divorced; she had a child, a daugh- 
ter of fourteen, whom he was now keeping in boarding 
school. He looked at her, blinking, as she closed the door. 

"You saw the papers," he said. She kissed him, not sud- 
denly, without heat, in a continuation of the movement 
which closed the door, with a sort of warm envelopment; 
suddenly he cried, "I can't understand it! After all the ad- 
vantages that . . . after all I tried to do for them " 

"Hush," she said. "Hush, now. Get into your trunks; I'll 
have a drink ready for you when you have changed. Will 
you eat some lunch if I have it sent up?" 

"No. I don't want any lunch. after all I have tried to 
give-" 

"Hush, now. Get into your trunks while I fix you a drink. 
It's going to be swell at the beach." In the bedroom his 
bathing trunks and robe were laid out on the bed. He 
changed, hanging his suit in the closet where her clothes 
hung, where there hung already another suit of his and 
clothes for the evening. When he returned to the sitting 
room she had fixed the drink for him; she held the match 
to his cigarette and watched him sit down and take up the 



7 1 8 The Middle Ground 

glass, watching him still with that serene impersonal smiling. 
Now he watched her slip off the cape and kneel at the 
cellarette, filling a silver flask, in the bathing costume of the 
moment, such as ten thousand wax female dummies wore in 
ten thousand shop windows that summer, such as a hundred 
thousand young girls wore on California beaches; he looked 
at her, kneeling back, buttocks and flanks trim enough, 
even firm enough (so firm in fact as to be a little on the 
muscular side, what with unremitting and perhaps even 
rigorous care) but still those of forty. But I don't want a 
young girl, he thought. Would to God that all young girls, 
all young female flesh, were removed, blasted even, from 
the earth. He finished the drink before she had filled the 
flask. 

"I want another one," he said. 

"All right," she said. "As soon as we get to the beach." 

"No. Now." 

"Let's go on to the beach first. It's almost three o'clock. 
Won't that be better?" 

"Just so you are not trying to tell me I can't have another 
drink now." 

"Of course not," she said, slipping the flask into the cape's 
pocket and looking at him again with that warm, faint, in- 
scrutable smiling. "I just want to have a dip before the water 
gets too cold." They went down to the car; the Filipino 
knew this too: he held the door for her to slip under the 
wheel, then he got himself into the back. The car moved 
on; she drove well. "Why not lean back and shut your 
eyes," she told Ira, "and rest until we get to the beach? 
Then we will have a dip and a drink." 

"I don't want to rest," he said. "I'm all right." But he did 
close his eyes again and again the car ran powerful, smooth, 
and fast beneath him, performing its afternoon's jaunt over 
the incredible distances of which the city was composed; 



Golden Land 719 

from time to time, had he looked, he could have seen the 
city in the bright soft vague hazy sunlight, random, scat- 
tered about the arid earth like so many gay scraps of paper 
blown without order, with its curious air of being rootless 
of houses bright beautiful and gay, without basements or 
foundations, lightly attached to a few inches of light pene- 
trable earth, lighter even than dust and laid lightly in turn 
upon the profound and primeval lava, which one good hard 
rain would wash forever from the sight and memory of man 
as a firehose flushes down a gutter that city of almost in- 
calculable wealth whose queerly appropriate fate it is to be 
erected upon a few spools of a substance whose value is 
computed in billions and which may be completely de- 
stroyed in that second's instant of a careless match between 
the moment of striking and the moment when the striker 
might have sprung and stamped it out. 

"You saw your mother today," she said. "Has she " 
"Yes." He didn't open his eyes. "That damned Jap gave it 
to her. She asked me for money again. I found out what 
she wants with it. She wants to run, to go back to Nebraska. 
I told her, so did I. ... If she went back there, she would 
not live until Christmas. The first month of winter would 
kill her. Maybe it wouldn't even take winter to do it." 

She still drove, she still watched the road, yet somehow 
she had contrived to become completely immobile. "So 
Jiat's what it is," she said. 

He did not open his eyes. "What what is?" 
"The reason she has been after you all this time to give 
her money, cash. Why, even when you won't do it, every 
now and then she asks you again." 

"What what . . ." He opened his eyes, looking at her pro- 
file; he sat up suddenly. "You mean, she's been wanting to 
go back there all the time? That all these years she has been 



720 The Middle Ground 

asking me for money, that that was what she wanted with 
it?" 

She glanced at him swiftly, then back to the road. "What 
else can it be? What else could she use money for?" 

"Back there?" he said. "To those winters, that town, that 
way of living, where she's bound to know that the first 
winter would . . . You'd almost think she wanted to die, 
wouldn't you?" 

"Hush," she said quickly. "Shhhhh. Don't say that. Don't 
say that about anybody." Already they could smell the sea; 
now they swung down toward it; the bright salt wind blew 
upon them, with the long-spaced sound of the rollers; now 
they could see it the dark blue of water creaming into the 
blanched curve of beach dotted with bathers. "We won't 
go through the club," she said. "I'll park in here and we can 
go straight to the water." They left the Filipino in the car 
and descended to the beach. It was already crowded, bright 
and gay with movement. She chose a vacant space and 
spread her cape. 

"Now that drink," he said. 

"Have your dip first," she said. He looked at her. Then 
he slipped his robe off slowly; she took it and spread it 
beside her own; he looked down at her. 

"Which is it? Will you always be too clever for me, or 
is it that every time I will always believe you again?" 

She looked at him, bright, warm, fond and inscrutable. 
"Maybe both. Maybe neither. Have your dip; I will have the 
flask and a cigarette ready when you come out." When he 
came back from the water, wet, panting, his heart a little too 
hard and fast, she had the towel ready, and she lit the ciga- 
rette and uncapped the flask as he lay on the spread robes. 
She lay too, lifted to one elbow, smiling down at him, 
smoothing the water from his hair with the towel while he 
panted, waiting for his heart to slow and quiet. Steadily be- 



Golden Land 721 

tween them and the water, and as far up and down the 
beach as they could see, the bathers passed young people, 
young men in trunks, and young girls in little more, with 
bronzed, unselfconscious bodies. Lying so, they seemed to 
him to walk along the rim of the world as though they and 
their kind alone inhabited it, and he with his forty-eight 
years were the forgotten last survivor of another race and 
kind, and they in turn precursors of a new race not yet seen 
on the earth: of men and women without age, beautiful as 
gods and goddesses, and with the minds of infants. He turned 
quickly and looked at the woman beside him at the quiet 
face, the wise, smiling eyes, the grained skin and temples, the 
hairroots showing where the dye had grown out, the legs 
veined faint and blue and myriad beneath the skin. "You 
look better than any of them!" he cried. "You look better 
to me than any of them!" 

Ill 

THE JAPANESE GARDENER, with his hat on, stood tapping on 
the glass and beckoning and grimacing until old Mrs. Ewing 
went out to him. He had the afternoon's paper with its black 
headline: LALEAR WOMAN CREATES SCENE IN 
COURTROOM. "You take," the Japanese said. "Read 
while I catch water." But she declined; she just stood in the 
soft halcyon sunlight, surrounded by the myriad and almost 
fierce blooming of flowers, and looked quietly at the head- 
line without even taking the paper, and that was all. 

"I guess I won't look at the paper today," she said. "Thank 
you just the same." She returned to the living room. Save 
for the chair, it was exactly as it had been when she first 
saw it that day when her son brought her into it and told 
her that it was now her home and that her daughter-in-law 
and her grandchildren were now her family. It had changed 



722 The Middle Ground 

very little, and that which had altered was the part which 
her son knew nothing about, and that too had changed not 
at all in so long that she could not even remember now 
when she had added the last coin to the hoard. This was in 
a china vase on the mantel. She knew what was in it to the 
penny; nevertheless, she took it down and sat in the chair 
which she had brought all the way from Nebraska and 
emptied the coins and the worn timetable into her lap. The 
timetable was folded back at the page on which she had 
folded it the day she walked downtown to the ticket office 
and got it fifteen years ago, though that was so long ago 
now that the pencil circle about the name of the nearest 
junction point to Ewing, Nebraska, had faded away. But 
she did not need that either; she knew the distance to the 
exact half mile, just as she knew the fare to the penny, and 
back in the early twenties when the railroads began to be- 
come worried and passenger fares began to drop, no broker 
ever watched the grain and utilities market any closer than 
she watched the railroad advertisements and quotations. 
Then at last the fares became stabilized with the fare back 
to Ewing thirteen dollars more than she had been able to 
save, and at a time when her source of income had ceased. 
This was the two grandchildren. When she entered the 
house that day twenty years ago and looked at the two 
babies for the first time, it was with diffidence and eagerness 
both. She would be dependent for the rest of her life, but 
she would give something in return for it. It was not that 
she would attempt to make another Ira and Samantha 
Ewing of them; she had made that mistake with her own 
son and had driven him from home. She was wiser now; 
she saw now that it was not the repetition of hardship: she 
would merely take what had been of value in hers and her 
husband's hard lives that which they had learned through 
hardship and endurance of honor and courage and pride 



Golden Land 723 

and transmit it to the children without their having to suffer 
the hardship at all, the travail and the despairs. She had ex- 
pected that there would be some friction between her and 
the young daughter-in-law, but she had believed that her 
son, the actual Ewing, would be her ally; she had even 
reconciled herself after a year to waiting, since the children 
were still but babies; she was not alarmed, since they were 
Ewings too: after she had looked that first searching time at 
the two puttysoft little faces feature by feature, she had 
said it was because they were babies yet and so looked like 
no one. So she was content to bide and wait; she did not 
even know that her son was planning to move until he told 
her that the other house was bought and that the present 
one was to be hers until she died. She watched them go; she 
said nothing; it was not to begin then. It did not begin for 
five years, during which she watched her son making money 
faster and faster and easier and easier, gaining with apparent 
contemptible and contemptuous ease that substance for 
which in niggard amounts her husband had striven while 
still clinging with undeviating incorruptibility to honor and 
dignity and pride, and spending it, squandering it, in the 
same way. By that time she had given up the son and she 
had long since learned that she and her daughter-in-law 
were irrevocable and implacable moral enemies. It was in 
the fifth year. One day in her son's home she saw the two 
children take money from their mother's purse lying on a 
table. The mother did not even know how much she had in 
the purse; when the grandmother told her about it she be- 
came angry and dared the older woman to put it to the test. 
The grandmother accused the children, who denied the 
whole affair with perfectly straight faces. That was the 
actual break between herself and her son's family; after that 
she saw the two children only when the son would bring 
them with him occasionally on his unfailing daily visits. She 



724 The Middle Ground 

had a few broken dollars which she had brought from Ne- 
braska and had kept intact for five years, since she had no 
need for money here; one day she planted one of the coins 
while the children were there, and when she went back to 
look, it was gone too. The next morning she tried to talk 
to her son about the children, remembering her experience 
with the daughter-in-law and approaching the matter in- 
directly, speaking generally of money. "Yes," the son said. 
"I'm making money. I'm making it fast while I can. I'm 
going to make a lot of it. I'm going to give my children 
luxuries and advantages that my father never dreamed a 
child might have." 

"That's it," she said. "You make money too easy. This 
whole country is too easy for us Ewings. It may be all right 
for them that have been born here for generations; I don't 
know about that. But not for us." 

"But these children were born here." 

"Just one generation. The generation before that they 
were born in a sodroofed dugout on the Nebraska wheat 
frontier. And the one before that in a log house in Missouri. 
And the one before that in a Kentucky blockhouse with 
Indians around it. This world has never been easy for 
Ewings. Maybe the Lord never intended it to be." 

"But it is from now on," he said; he spoke with a kind 
of triumph. "For you and me too. But mostly for them." 

And that was all. When he was gone she sat quietly in 
the single Nebraska chair which she had taken out of stor- 
age the first chair which the older Ira Ewing had bought 
for her after he built a house and in which she had rocked 
the younger Ira to sleep before he could walk, while the 
older Ira himself sat in the chair which he had made out of 
a flour barrel, grim, quiet and incorruptible, taking his 
earned twilight ease between a day and a day telling her- 
self quietly that that was all. Her next move was curiously 



Golden Land 725 

direct; there was something in it of the actual pioneer's op- 
portunism, of taking immediate and cold advantage of 
Spartan circumstance; it was as though for the first time in 
her life she was able to use something, anything, which she 
had gained by bartering her youth and strong maturity 
against the Nebraska immensity, and this not in order to live 
further but in order to die; apparently she saw neither para- 
dox in it nor dishonesty. She began to make candy and cake 
of the materials which her son bought for her on credit, 
and to sell them to the two grandchildren for the coins which 
their father gave them or which they perhaps purloined also 
from their mother's purse, hiding the coins in the vase with 
the timetable, watching the niggard hoard grow. But after 
a few years the children outgrew candy and cake, and then 
she had watched railroad fares go down and down and then 
stop thirteen dollars away. But she did not give up, even 
then. Her son had tried to give her a servant years ago and 
she had refused; she believed that when the time came, the 
right moment, he would not refuse to give her at least 
thirteen dollars of the money which she had saved him. 
Then this had failed. "Maybe it wasn't the right time," she 
thought. "Maybe I tried it too quick. I was surprised into 
it," she told herself, looking down at the heap of small coins 
in her lap. "Or maybe he was surprised into saying No. 
Maybe when he has had time . . ." She roused; she put the 
coins back into the vase and set it on the mantel again, look- 
ing at the clock as she did so. It was just four, two hours 
yet until time to start supper. The sun was high; she could 
see the water from the sprinkler flashing and glinting in it 
as she went to the window. It was still high, still afternoon; 
the mountains stood serene and drab against it; the city, the 
land, lay sprawled and myriad beneath it the land, the 
earth which spawned a thousand new faiths, nostrums and 
cures each year but no disease to even disprove them on 



726 The Middle Ground 

beneath the golden days unmarred by rain or weather, the 

changeless monotonous beautiful days without end countless 

tut of the halcyon past and endless into the halcyon future. 

"I will stay here and live forever," she said to herself. 



There Was a Queen 



ELNORA entered the back yard, coming up from her cabin. 
In the long afternoon the huge, square house, the premises, 
lay somnolent, peaceful, as they had lain for almost a hundred 
years, since John Sartoris had come from Carolina and built 
it. And he had died in it and his son Bayard had died in it, 
and Bayard's son John and John's son Bayard in turn had 
been buried from it even though the last Bayard didn't die 
there. 

So the quiet was now the quiet of womenfolks. As Elnora 
crossed the back yard toward the kitchen door she remem- 
bered how ten years ago at this hour old Bayard, who was 
her half-brother (though possibly but not probably neither 
of them knew it, including Bayard's father) , would be tramp- 
ing up and down the back porch, shouting stableward for the 
Negro men and for his saddle mare. But he was dead now, 
and his grandson Bayard was also dead at twenty-six years 
old, and the Negro men were gone: Simon, Elnora's mother's 
husband, in the graveyard too, and Caspey, Elnora's husband, 
in the penitentiary for stealing, and Joby, her son, gone to 
Memphis to wear fine clothes on Beale Street. So there were 
left in the house only the first John Sartoris' sister, Virginia, 
who was ninety years old and who lived in a wheel chair 
beside a window above the flower garden, and Narcissa, 
young Bayard's widow, and her son. Virginia Du Pre had 

727 



728 The Middle Ground 

come out to Mississippi in '69, the last of the Carolina family, 
bringing with her the clothes in which she stood and a basket 
containing a few panes of colored glass from a Carolina win- 
dow and a few flower cuttings and two bottles of port. She 
had seen her brother die and then her nephew and then her 
great-nephew and then her two great-great-nephews, and 
now she lived in the unmanned house with her great-great- 
nephew's wife and his son, Benbow, whom she persisted in 
calling Johnny after his uncle, who was killed in France. And 
for Negroes there were Elnora who cooked, and her son Isom 
who tended the grounds, and her daughter Saddic who slept 
on a cot beside Virginia Du Pre's bed and tended her as 
though she were a baby. 

But that was all right. "I can take care of her," Elnora 
thought, crossing the back yard. "I don't need no help," she 
said aloud, to no one a tall, coffee-colored woman with a 
small, high, fine head. "Because it's a Sartoris job. Gunnel 
knowed that when he died and tole me to take care of her. 
Tole me. Not no outsiders from town." She was thinking of 
what had caused her to come up to the house an hour before 
it was necessary. This was that, while busy in her cabin, she 
had seen Narcissa, young Bayard's wife, and the ten-year-old 
boy going down across the pasture in the middle of the after- 
noon. She had come to her door and watched them the boy 
and the big young woman in white going through the hot 
afternoon, down across the pasture toward the creek. She 
had not wondered where they were going, nor why, as a 
white woman would have wondered. But she was half black, 
and she just watched the white woman with that expression 
of quiet and grave contempt with which she contemplated 
or listened to the orders of the wife of the house's heir even 
while he was alive. Just as she had listened two days ago when 
Narcissa had informed her that she was going to Memphis 
for a day or so and that Elnora would have to take care of 



There Was a Queen 729 

the old aunt alone. "Like I ain't always done it," Elnora 
thought. "It's little you done for anybody since you come 
out here. We never needed you. Don't you never think it." 
But she didn't say this. She just thought it, and she helped 
Narcissa prepare for the trip and watched the carriage roll 
away toward town and the station without comment. "And 
you needn't to come back," she thought, watching the car- 
riage disappear. But this morning Narcissa had returned, 
without offering to explain the sudden journey or the sudden 
return, and in the early afternoon Elnora from her cabin door 
had watched the woman and the boy go down across the 
pasture in the hot June sunlight. 

"Well, it's her business where she going," Elnora said 
aloud, mounting the kitchen steps. "Same as it her business 
how come she went off to Memphis, leaving Miss Jenny 
setting yonder in her chair without nobody but niggers to 
look after her," she added, aloud still, with brooding incon- 
sistency. "I ain't surprised she went. I just surprised she come 
back. No. I ain't even that. She ain't going to leave this place, 
now she done got in here." Then she said quietly, aloud, 
without rancor, without heat: "Trash. Town trash." 

She entered the kitchen. Her daughter Saddie sat at the 
table, eating from a dish of cold turnip greens and looking at 
a thumbed and soiled fashion magazine. "What you doing 
back here?" she said. "Why ain't you up yonder where you 
can hear Miss Jenny if she call you?" 

"Miss Jenny ain't need nothing," Saddie said. "She setting 
there by the window." 

"Where did Miss Narcissa go?" 

"I don't know'm," Saddie said. "Her and Bory went off 
somewhere. Ain't come back yet." 

Elnora grunted. Her shoes were not laced, and she stepped 
out of them in two motions and left the kitchen and went 
up the quiet, high-ceiled hall filled with scent from the gar- 



730 The Middle Ground 

den and with the drowsing and myriad sounds of the June 
afternoon, to the open library door. Beside the window (the 
sash was raised now, with its narrow border of colored Caro- 
lina glass which in the winter framed her head and bust like 
a hung portrait) an old woman sat in a wheel chair. She sat 
erect; a thin, upright woman with a delicate nose and hair 
the color of a whitewashed wall. About her shoulders lay a 
shawl of white wool, no whiter than her hair against her 
black dress. She was looking out the window; in profile her 
face was high-arched, motionless. When Elnora entered she 
turned her head and looked at the Negress with an expression 
immediate and interrogative. 

"They ain't come in the back way, have they?" she said. 

"Nome," Elnora said. She approached the chair. 

The old woman looked out the window again. "I must say 
I don't understand this at all. Miss Narcissa's doing a mighty 
lot of traipsing around all of a sudden. Picking up and " 

Elnora came to the chair. "A right smart," she said in her 
cold, quiet voice, "for a woman lazy as her." 

"Picking up " the old woman said. She ceased. "You 
stop talking that way about her." 

"I ain't said nothing but the truth," Elnora said. 

"Then you keep it to yourself. She's Bayard's wife. A 
Sartoris woman, now." 

"She won't never be a Sartoris woman," Elnora said. 

The other was looking out the window. "Picking up all 
of a sudden two days ago and going to Memphis to spend 
two nights, that hadn't spent a night away from that boy 
since he was born. Leaving him for two whole nights, mind 
you, without giving any reason, and then coming home and 
taking him off to walk in the woods in the middle of the day. 
Not that he missed her. Do you think he missed her at all 
while she was gone?" 

"Nome," Elnora said. "Ain't no Sartoris man never missed 
nobody." 



There Was a Queen 731 

"Of course he didn't." The old woman looked out the 
window. Elnora stood a little behind the chair. "Did they go 
on across the pasture?" 

"I don't know. They went out of sight, still going. 
Toward the creek." 

"Toward the creek? What in the world for?" 

Elnora didn't answer. She stood a little behind the chair, 
erect, still as an Indian. The afternoon was drawing on. The 
sun was now falling level across the garden below the win- 
dow, and soon the jasmine in the garden began to smell with 
evening, coming into the room in slow waves almost pal- 
pable; thick, sweet, oversweet. The two women were mo- 
tionless in the window: the one leaning a little forward in the 
wheel chair, the Negress a little behind the chair, motionless 
too and erect as a caryatid. 

The light in the garden was beginning to turn copper- 
colored when the woman and the boy entered the garden and 
approached the house. The old woman in the chair leaned 
suddenly forward. To Elnora it seemed as if the old woman 
in the wheel chair had in that motion escaped her helpless 
body like a bird and crossed the garden to meet the child; 
moving forward a little herself Elnora could see on the 
other's face an expression fond, immediate, and oblivious. So 
the two people had crossed the garden and were almost to 
the house when the old woman sat suddenly and sharply 
back. "Why, they're wet!" she said. "Look at their clothes. 
They have been in the creek with their clothes on!" 

"I reckon I better go and get supper started," Elnora said. 



II 

IN THE kitchen Elnora prepared the lettuce and the tomatoes, 
and sliced the bread (not honest cornbread, not even biscuit) 
which the woman whose very name she did not speak unless 
it was absolutely necessary, had taught her to bake. Isom and 



732 The Middle Ground 

Saddle sat in two chairs against the wall. "I got nothing 
against her," Elnora said. "I nigger and she white. But my 
black children got more blood than she got. More behavior." 

"You and Miss Jenny both think ain't nobody been born 
since Miss Jenny," Isom said. 

"Who is been?" Elnora said. 

"Miss Jenny get along all right with Miss Narcissa," Isom 
said. "Seem to me like she the one to say. I ain't heard her 
say nothing about it." 

"Because Miss Jenny quality," Elnora said. "That's why. 
And that's something you don't know nothing about, because 
you born too late to see any of it except her." 

"Look to me like Miss Narcissa good quality as anybody 
else," Isom said. "I don't see no difference." 

Elnora moved suddenly from the table. Isom as suddenly 
sprang up and moved his chair out of his mother's path. But 
she only went to the cupboard and took a platter from it 
and returned to the table, to the tomatoes. "Born Sartoris or 
born quality of any kind ain't is, it's does." She talked in a 
level, inflectionless voice above her limber, brown, deft 
hands. When she spoke of the two women she used "she" 
indiscriminately, putting the least inflection on the one which 
referred to Miss Jenny. "Come all the way here by Herself, 
and the country still full of Yankees. All the way from Cal- 
lina, with Her folks all killed and dead except old Marse 
John, and him two hundred miles away in Missippi " 

"It's moren two hundred miles from here to Cal-lina," 
Isom said. "Learnt that in school. It's nigher two thousand." 

Elnora's hands did not cease. She did not seem to have 
heard him. "With the Yankees done killed Her paw and Her 
husband and burned the Cal-lina house over Her and Her 
mammy's head, and She come all the way to Missippi by 
Herself, to the only kin She had left. Getting here in the 
dead of winter without nothing in this world of God's but 



There Was a Queen 733 

a basket with some flower seeds and two bottles of wine and 
them colored window panes old Marse John put in the li- 
brary window so She could look through it like it was Cal- 
lina. She got here at dusk-dark on Christmas Day and old 
Marse John and the chillen and my mammy waiting on the 
porch, and Her setting high-headed in the wagon for old 
Marse John to lift Her down. They never even kissed 
then, out where folks could see them. Old Marse John just 
said, 'Well, Jenny,' and she just said, 'Well, Johnny,' and 
they walked into the house, him leading Her by the hand, 
until they was inside the house where the commonalty 
couldn't spy on them. Then She begun to cry, and old Marse 
John holding Her, after all them four thousand miles " 

"It ain't four thousand miles from here to Cal-lina," Isom 
said. "Ain't but two thousand. What the book say in school." 

Elnora paid no attention to him at all; her hands did not 
cease. "It took Her hard, the crying did. 'It's because I ain't 
used to crying,' she said. 'I got out of the habit of it. I never 
had the time. Them goddamn Yankees,' she said. 'Them god- 
damn Yankees.' " Elnora moved again, to the cupboard. It 
was as though she walked out of the sound of her voice on 
her silent, naked feet, leaving it to fill the quiet kitchen 
though the voice itself had ceased. She took another platter 
down and returned to the table, her hands busy again among 
the tomatoes and lettuce, the food which she herself could 
not eat. "And that's how it is that she" (she was now speak- 
ing of Narcissa; the two Negroes knew it) "thinks she can 
pick up and go to Memphis and frolic, and leave Her alone 
in this house for two nights without nobody but niggers to 
look after Her. Move out here under a Sartoris roof and eat 
Sartoris food for ten years, and then pick up and go to 
Memphis same as a nigger on a excursion, without even telling 
why she was going." 

"I thought you said Miss Jenny never needed nobody but 



734 The Middle Ground 

you to take care of her," Isom said. "I thought you said yes- 
terday you never cared if she come back or not." 

Elnora made a sound, harsh, disparaging, not loud. "Her 
not come back? When she worked for five years to get her- 
self married to Bayard? Working on Miss Jenny all the time 
Bayard was off to that war? I watched her. Coming out here 
two or three times a week, with Miss Jenny thinking she was 
just coming out to visit like quality. But I knowed. I knowed 
what she was up to all the time. Because I knows trash. I 
knows the way trash goes about working in with quality. 
Quality can't see that, because it quality. But I can." 

"Then Bory must be trash, too," Isom said. 

Elnora turned now. But Isom was already out of his chair 
before she spoke. "You shut your mouth and get yourself 
ready to serve supper." She watched him go to the sink and 
prepare to wash his hands. Then she turned back to the table, 
her long hands brown and deft among the red tomatoes and 
the pale absinth-green of the lettuce. "Needings," she said. 
"It ain't Bory's needings and it ain't Her needings. It's dead 
folks' needings. Old Marse John's and Gunnel's and Mister 
John's and Bayard's that's dead and can't do nothing about it. 
That's where the needings is. That's what I'm talking about. 
And not nobody to see to it except Her yonder in that chair, 
and me, a nigger, back here in this kitchen. I ain't got noth- 
ing against her. I just say to let quality consort with quality, 
and unquality do the same thing. You get that coat on, now. 
This here is all ready." 

Ill 

IT WAS the boy who told her. She leaned forward in the 
wheel chair and watched through the window as the woman 
and the child crossed the garden and passed out of sight be- 
yond the angle of the house. Still leaning forward and look- 



There Was a Queen 735 

ing down into the garden, she heard them enter the house 
and pass the library door and mount the stairs. She did not 
move, nor look toward the door. She continued to look down 
into the garden, at the now stout shrubs which she had 
fetched from Carolina as shoots not much bigger than 
matches. It was in the garden that she and the younger 
woman who was to marry her nephew and bear a son, had 
become acquainted. That was back in 1918, and young Bay- 
ard and his brother John were still in France. It was before 
John was killed, and two or three times a week Narcissa 
would come out from town to visit her while she worked 
among the flowers. "And she engaged to Bayard all the time 
and not telling me," the old woman thought. "But it was little 
she ever told me about anything," she thought, looking down 
into the garden which was beginning to fill with twilight 
and which she had not entered in five years. "Little enough 
about anything. Sometimes I wonder how she ever got herself 
engaged to Bayard, talking so little. Maybe she did it by just 
being, filling some space, like she got that letter." That was 
one day shortly before Bayard returned home. Narcissa 
came out and stayed for two hours, then just before she left 
she showed the letter. It was anonymous and obscene; it 
sounded mad, and at the time she had tried to get Narcissa 
to let her show the letter to Bayard's grandfather and have 
him make some effort to find the man and punish him, but 
Narcissa refused. "I'll just burn it and forget about it," Nar- 
cissa said. "Well, that's your business," the older woman said. 
"But that should not be permitted. A lady should not be at 
the mercy of a man like that, even by mail. Any gentleman 
will believe that, act upon it. Besides, if you don't do some- 
thing about it, he'll write you again." "Then I'll show it to 
Colonel Sartoris," Narcissa said. She was an orphan, her 
brother also in France. "But can't you see I just can't have 
any man know that anybody thought such things about me." 



The Middle Ground 

"Well, I'd rather have the whole world know that somebody 
thought that way about me once and got horsewhipped for 
it, than to have him keep on thinking that way about me, un- 
punished. But it's your affair." "I'll just burn it and forget 
about it," Narcissa said. Then Bayard returned, and shortly 
afterward he and Narcissa were married and Narcissa came 
out to the house to live. Then she was pregnant, and before 
the child was born Bayard was killed in an airplane, and his 
grandfather, old Bayard, was dead and the child came, and 
it was two years before she thought to ask her niece if any 
more letters had come; and Narcissa told her no. 

So they had lived quietly then, their women's life in the 
big house without men. Now and then she had urged Nar- 
cissa to marry again. But the other had refused, quietly, and 
they had gone on so for years, the two of them and the child 
whom she persisted in calling after his dead uncle. Then one 
evening a week ago, Narcissa had a guest for supper; when 
she learned that the guest was to be a man, she sat quite still 
in her chair for a time. "Ah," she thought, quietly. "It's come. 
Well. But it had to; she is young. And to live out here alone 
with a bedridden old woman. Well. But I wouldn't have her 
do as I did. Would not expect it of her. After all, she is not a 
Sartoris. She is no kin to them, to a lot of fool proud ghosts.'* 
The guest came. She did not see him until she was wheeled 
in to the supper table. Then she saw a bald, youngish man 
with a clever face and a Phi Beta Kappa key on his watch 
chain. The key she did not recognize, but she knew at once 
that he was a Jew, and when he spoke to her her outrage be- 
came fury and she jerked back in the chair like a striking 
snake, the motion strong enough to thrust the chair back 
from the table. "Narcissa," she said, "what is this Yankee 
doing here?" 

There they were, about the candle-lit table, the three rigid 
people. Then the man spoke: "Madam," he said, "there'd be 



There Was a Queen 737 

no Yankees left if your sex had ever taken the field against 
us." 

"You don't have to tell me that, young man," she said. 
"You can thank your stars it was just men your grandfather 
fought." Then she had called Isom and had herself wheeled 
from the table, taking no supper. And even in her bedroom 
she would not let them turn on the light, and she refused the 
tray which Narcissa sent up. She sat beside her dark window 
until the stranger was gone. 

Then three days later Narcissa made her sudden and mys- 
terious trip to Memphis and stayed two nights, who had 
never before been separated overnight from her son since he 
was born. She had gone without explanation and returned 
without explanation, and now the old woman had just 
watched her and the boy cross the garden, their garments still 
damp upon them, as though they had been in the creek. 

It was the boy who told her. He came into the room in 
fresh clothes, his hair still damp, though neatly combed now. 
She said no word as he entered and came to her chair. "We 
been in the creek," he said. "Not swimming, though. Just sit- 
ting in the water. She wanted me to show her the swimming 
hole. But we didn't swim. I don't reckon she can. We just 
sat in the water with our clothes on. All evening. She wanted 
to do it." 

"Ah," the old woman said. "Oh. Well. That must have 
been fun. Is she coming down soon?" 

"Yessum. When she gets dressed." 

"Well. . . . You'll have time to go outdoors a while before 
supper, if you want to." 

"I just as soon stay in here with you, if you want me to." 

"No. You go outdoors. I'll be all right until Saddie comes." 

"All right." He left the room. 

The window faded slowly as the sunset died. The old 
woman's silver head faded too, like something motionless on 



738 The Middle Ground 

a sideboard. The sparse colored panes which framed the 
window dreamed, rich and hushed. She sat there and pres- 
ently she heard her nephew's wife descending the stairs. She 
sat quietly, watching the door, until the young woman 
entered. 

She wore white: a large woman in her thirties, within the 
twilight something about her of that heroic quality of stat- 
uary. "Do you want the light?" she said. 

"No," the old woman said. "No. Not yet." She sat erect in 
the wheel chair, motionless, watching the young woman 
cross the room, her white dress flowing slowly, heroic, like 
a caryatid from a temple facade come to life. She sat down, 

"It was those let " she said. 

''Wait," the old woman said. "Before you begin. The jas- 
mine. Do you smell it?" 

"Yes. It was those " 

"Wait. Always about this time of day it begins. It has 
begun about this time of day in June for fifty-seven years 
this summer. I brought them from Carolina, in a basket. I 
remember how that first March I sat up all one night, burn- 
ing newspapers about the roots. Do you smell it?" 

"Yes." 

"If it's marriage, I told you. I told you five years ago that 
I wouldn't blame you. A young woman, a widow. Even 
though you have a child, I told you that a child would not be 
enough. I told you I would not blame you for not doing as 
I had done. Didn't I?" 

"Yes. But it's not that bad." 

"Not? Not how bad?" The old woman sat erect, her head 
back a little, her thin face fading into the twilight with a 
profound quality. "I won't blame you. I told you that. You 
are not to consider me. My life is done; I need little; nothing 
the Negroes can't do. Don't you mind me, do you hear?" 
The other said nothing, motionless too, serene; their voices 



There Was a Queen 739 

seemed to materialize in the dusk between them, unsourced 
of either mouth, either still and fading face. "You'll have to 
tell me, then," the old woman said. 

"It was those letters. Thirteen years ago: don't you re- 
member? Before Bayard came back from France, before you 
even knew that we were engaged. I showed you one of them 
and you wanted to give it to Colonel Sartoris and let him find 
out who sent it and I wouldn't do it and you said that no 
lady would permit herself to receive anonymous love letters, 
no matter how badly she wanted to." 

"Yes. I said it was better for the world to know that a lady 
had received a letter like that, than to have one man in secret 
thinking such things about her, unpunished. You told me 
you burned it." 

"I lied. I kept it. And I got ten more of them. I didn't tell 
you because of what you said about a lady." 

"Ah," the old woman said. 

"Yes. I kept them all. I thought I had them hidden where 
nobody could ever find them." 

"And you read them again. You would take them out now 
and then and read them again." 

"I thought I had them hidden. Then you remember that 
night after Bayard and I were married when somebody broke 
into our house in town; the same night that book-keeper in 
Colonel Sartoris' bank stole that money and ran away? The 
next morning the letters were gone, and then I knew who had 
sent them." 

"Yes," the old woman said. She had not moved, her fading 
head like something inanimate in silver. 

"So they were out in the world. They were somewhere. 
I was crazy for a while. I thought of people, men, reading 
them, seeing not only my name on them, but the marks of 
.my eyes where I had read them again and again. I was wild. 
When Bayard and I were on our honeymoon, I was wild. 



740 The Middle Ground 

I couldn't even think about him alone. It was like I was 
having to sleep with all the men in the world at the same 
time. 

"Then it was almost twelve years ago, and I had Bory> 
and I supposed I had got over it. Got used to having them out 
in the world. Maybe I had begun to think that they were 
gone, destroyed, and I was safe. Now and then I would 
remember them, but it was like somehow that Bory was 
protecting me, that they couldn't pass him to reach me. As 
though if I just stayed out here and was good to Bory and 
you And then, one afternoon, after twelve years, that man 
came out to see me, that Jew. The one who stayed to supper 
that night." 

"Ah," the old woman said. "Yes." 

"He was a Federal agent. They were still trying to catch 
the man who had robbed the bank, and the agent had got 
hold of my letters. Found them where the book-keeper had 
lost them or thrown them away that night while he was 
running away, and the agent had had them twelve years, 
working on the case. At last he came out to see me, trying 
to find out where the man had gone, thinking I must know, 
since the man had written me letters like that. You remem- 
ber him: how you looked at him and you said, 'Narcissa, 
who is this Yankee?' " 

"Yes. I remember." 

"That man had my letters. He had had them for twelve 
years. He" 

"Had had?" the old woman said. "Had had?" 

"Yes. I have them now. He hadn't sent them to Washing- 
ton yet, so nobody had read them except him. And now 
nobody will ever read them." She ceased; she breathed 
quietly, tranquil. "You don't understand yet, do you? He 
had all the information the letters could give him, but he 
would have to turn them in to the Department anyway 



There Was a Queen 741 

and I asked him for them but he said he would have to turn 
them in and I asked him if he would make his final decision 
in Memphis and he said why Memphis and I told him why. 
I knew I couldn't buy them from him with money, you see. 
That's why I had to go to Memphis. I had that much regard 
for Bory and you, to go somewhere else. And that's all. Men 
are all about the same, with their ideas of good and bad. 
Fools." She breathed quietly. Then she yawned, deep, with 
utter relaxation. Then she stopped yawning. She looked 
again at the rigid, fading silver head opposite her. "Don't 
you understand yet?" she said. "I had to do it. They were 
mine; I had to get them back. That was the only way I 
could do it. But I would have done more than that. So I got 
them. And now they are burned up. Nobody will ever see 
them. Because he can't tell, you see. It would ruin him to 
ever tell that they even existed. They might even put him 
in the penitentiary. And now they are burned up." 

"Yes," the old woman said. "And so you came back home 
and you took Johnny so you and he could sit together in the 
creek, the running water. In Jordan. Yes, Jordan at the back 
of a country pasture in Missippi." 

"I had to get them back. Don't you see that?" 

"Yes," the old woman said. "Yes." She sat bolt upright 
in the wheel chair. "Well, my Lord. Us poor, fool women 
Johnny!" Her voice was sharp, peremptory. 

"What?" the young woman said. "Do you want some- 
thing?" 

"No," the other said. "Call Johnny. I want my hat." The 
young woman rose. "I'll get it." 

"No. I want Johnny to do it." 

The young woman stood looking down at the other, the 
old woman erect in the wheel chair beneath the fading 
silver crown of her hair. Then she left the room. The old 
woman did not move. She sat there in the dusk until the boy 



742 The Middle Ground 

entered, carrying a small black bonnet of an ancient shape. 
Now and then, when the old woman became upset, they 
would fetch her the hat and she would place it on the exact 
top of her head and sit there by the window. He brought 
the bonnet to her. His mother was with him. It was full 
dusk now; the old woman was invisible save for her hair. 
"Do you want the light now?" the young woman said. 

"No," the old woman said. She set the bonnet on the top 
of her head. "You all go on to supper and let me rest awhile. 
Go on, all of you." They obeyed, leaving her sitting there: 
a slender, erect figure indicated only by the single gleam of 
her hair, in the wheel chair beside the window framed by 
the sparse and defunctive Carolina glass. 

IV 

SINCE THE BOY'S eighth birthday, he had had his dead grand- 
father's place at the end of the table. Tonight however his 
mother rearranged things. "With just the two of us," she 
said. "You come and sit by me." The boy hesitated. "Please. 
Won't you? I got so lonesome for you last night in Memphis. 
Weren't you lonesome for me?" 

"I slept with Aunt Jenny," the boy said. "We had a good 
time." 

"Please." 

"All right," he said. He took the chair beside hers. 

"Closer," she said. She drew the chair closer. "But we 
won't ever again, ever. Will we?" She leaned toward him, 
taking his hand. 

"What? Sit in the creek?" 

"Not ever leave one another again." 

"I didn't get lonesome. We had a good time." 

"Promise. Promise, Bory." His name was Benhow, her 
family name. 



There Was a Queen 743 

"All right." 

Isom, in a duck jacket, served them and returned to the 
kitchen. 

"She ain't coming to supper?" Elnora said. 

"Nome," Isom said. "Setting yonder by the window, in 
the dark. She say she don't want no supper." 

Elnora looked at Saddie. "What was they doing last time 
you went to the library?" 

"Her and Miss Narcissa talking." 

"They was still talking when I went to 'nounce supper," 
Isom said. "I tole you that." 

"I know," Elnora said. Her voice was not sharp. Neither 
was it gentle. It was just peremptory, soft, cold. "What 
were they talking about?" 

"I don't know'm," Isom said. "You the one taught me not 
to listen to white folks." 

"What were they talking about, Isom?" Elnora said. She 
was looking at him, grave, intent, commanding. 

" 'Bout somebody getting married. Miss Jenny say 'I tole 
you long time ago I ain't blame you. A young woman like 
you. I want you to marry. Not do like I done,' what she 
say." 

"I bet she fixing to marry, too," Saddie said. 

"Who marry?" Elnora said. "Her marry? What for? Give 
up what she got here? That ain't what it is. I wished I 
knowed what been going on here this last week. . . ." Her 
voice ceased; she turned her head toward the door as though 
she were listening for something. From the dining-room 
came the sound of the young woman's voice. But Elnora 
appeared to listen to something beyond this. Then she left 
the room. She did not go hurriedly, yet her long silent stride 
carried her from sight with an abruptness like that of an 
inanimate figure drawn on wheels, off a stage. 

She went quietly up the dark hall, passing the dining-room 



744 The Middle Ground 

door unremarked by the two people at the table. They sat 
close. The woman was talking, leaning toward the boy. 
Elnora went on without a sound: a converging of shadows 
upon which her lighter face seemed to float without body, 
her eyeballs faintly white. Then she stopped suddenly. She 
had not reached the library door, yet she stopped, invisible, 
soundless, her eyes suddenly quite luminous in her almost- 
vanished face, and she began to chant in faint sing-song: 
"Oh, Lawd; oh, Lawd," not loud. Then she moved, went 
swiftly on to the library door and looked into the room 
where beside the dead window the old woman sat motion- 
less, indicated only by that faint single gleam of white hair, 
as though for ninety years life had died slowly up her spare, 
erect frame, to linger for a twilit instant about her head be- 
fore going out, though life itself had ceased. Elnora looked 
for only an instant into the room. Then she turned and 
retraced her swift and silent steps to the dining-room door. 
The woman still leaned toward the boy, talking. They did 
not remark Elnora at once. She stood in the doorway, tall, 
not touching the jamb on either side. Her face was blank; 
she did not appear to be looking at, speaking to, any one. 

"You better come quick, I reckon/' she said in that soft, 
cold, peremptory voice. 



Mountain Victory 



THROUGH THE CABIN WINDOW the five people watched the 
cavalcade toil up the muddy trail and halt at the gate. First 
came a man on foot, leading a horse. He wore a broad hat 
low on his face, his body shapeless in a weathered gray 
cloak from which his left hand emerged, holding the reins. 
The bridle was silvermounted, the horse a gaunt, mud- 
splashed, thoroughbred bay, wearing in place of saddle a 
navy blue army blanket bound on it by a piece of rope. The 
second horse was a shortbodied, bigheaded, scrub sorrel, also 
mudsplashed. It wore a bridle contrived of rope and 
wire, and an army saddle in which, perched high above the 
dangling stirrups, crouched a shapeless something larger 
than a child, which at that distance appeared to wear no 
garment or garments known to man. 

One of the three men at the cabin window left it quickly. 
The others, without turning, heard him cross the room 
swiftly and then return, carrying a long rifle. 

"No, you don't," the older man said. 

"Don't you see that cloak?" the younger said. "That rebel 
cloak?" 

"I wont have it," the other said. "They have surrendered. 
They have said they are whipped." 

Through the window they watched the horses stop at the 
gate. The gate was of sagging hickory, in a rock fence 

745 



746 The Middle Ground 

which straggled down a gaunt slope sharp in relief against 
the valley and a still further range of mountains dissolving 
into the low, dissolving sky. 

They watched the creature on the second horse descend 
and hand his reins also into the same left hand of the man 
in gray that held the reins of the thoroughbred. They 
watched the creature enter the gate and mount the path and 
disappear beyond the angle of the window. Then they heard 
it cross the porch and knock at the door. They stood there 
and heard it knock again. 

After a while the older man said, without turning his 
head, "Go and see." 

One of the women, the older one, turned from the win- 
dow, her feet making no sound on the floor, since they were 
bare. She went to the front door and opened it. The chill, 
wet light of the dying April afternoon fell in upon her 
upon a small woman with a gnarled expressionless face, in 
a gray shapeless garment. Facing her across the sill was a 
creature a little larger than a large monkey, dressed in a 
voluminous blue overcoat of a private in the Federal army, 
with, tied tentlike over his head and falling about his shoul- 
ders, a piece of oilcloth which might have been cut square 
from the hood of a sutler's wagon; within the orifice the 
woman could see nothing whatever save the whites of two 
eyes, momentary and phantomlike, as with a single glance 
the Negro examined the woman standing barefoot in her 
faded calico garment, and took in the bleak and barren in- 
terior of the cabin hall. 

"Marster Major Soshay Weddel send he compliments en 
say he wishful fo sleeping room fo heself en boy en two 
hawses," he said in a pompous, parrot-like voice. The woman 
looked at him. Her face was like a spent mask. "We been up 
yonder a ways, fighting dem Yankees," the Negro said. 
"Done quit now. Gwine back home." 



Mountain Victory 747 

The woman seemed to speak from somewhere behind her 
face, as though behind an effigy or a painted screen: "I'll ask 
him." 

"We ghy pay you," the Negro said. 

"Pay?" Pausing, she seemed to muse upon him. "Hit aint 
near a ho-tel on the mou-tin." 

The Negro made a large gesture. "Don't make no diff unce. 
We done stayed de night in worse places den whut dis is. 
You just tell um it Marse Soshay Weddel." Then he saw that 
the woman was looking past him. He turned and saw the 
man in the worn gray cloak already halfway up the path 
from the gate. He came on and mounted the porch, remov- 
ing with his left hand the broad slouched hat bearing the 
tarnished wreath of a Confederate field officer. He had a dark 
face, with dark eyes and black hair, his face at once thick yet 
gaunt, and arrogant. He was not tall, yet he topped the Negro 
by five or six inches. The cloak was weathered, faded about 
the shoulders where the light fell strongest. The skirts were 
bedraggled, frayed, mudsplashed: the garment had been 
patched again and again, and brushed again and again; the 
nap was completely gone. 

"Goodday, madam," he said. "Have you stableroom for 
my horses and shelter for myself and my boy for the night?" 

The woman looked at him with a static, musing quality, as 
though she had seen without alarm an apparition. 

"I'll have to see," she said. 

"I shall pay," the man said. "I know the times." 

"I'll have to ask him," the woman said. She turned, then 
stopped. The older man entered the hall behind her. He was 
big, in jean clothes, with a shock of iron-gray hair and pale 
eyes. 

"I am Saucier Weddel," the man in gray said. "I am on 
my way home to Mississippi from Virginia. I am in Ten- 
nessee now?" 



748 The Middle Ground 

"You are in Tennessee," the other said. "Come in." 
Weddel turned to the Negro. "Take the horses on to the 
stable," he said. 

The Negro returned to the gate, shapeless in the oilcloth 
cape and the big overcoat, with that swaggering arrogance 
which he had assumed as soon as he saw the woman's bare 
feet and the meagre, barren interior of the cabin. He took up 
the two bridle reins and began to shout at the horses with 
needless and officious vociferation, to which the two horses 
paid no heed, as though they were long accustomed to him. 
It was as if the Negro himself paid no attention to his cries, as 
though the shouting were merely concomitant to the ac- 
tion of leading the horses out of sight of the door, like an 
effluvium by both horses and Negro accepted and relegated 
in the same instant. 



II 

THROUGH THE KITCHEN WALL the girl could hear the voices 
of the men in the room from which her father had driven her 
when the stranger approached the house. She was about 
twenty: a big girl with smooth, simple hair and big, smooth 
hands, standing barefoot in a single garment made out of 
flour sacks. She stood close to the wall, motionless, her head 
bent a little, her eyes wide and still and empty like a sleep- 
walker's, listening to her father and the guest enter the room 
beyond it. 

The kitchen was a plank leanto built against the log wall 
of the cabin proper. From between the logs beside her the 
clay chinking, dried to chalk by the heat of the stove, had 
fallen away in places. Stooping, the movement slow and lush 
and soundless as the whispering of her bare feet on the floor, 
she leaned her eye to one of these cracks. She could see a bare 
table on which sat an earthenware jug and a box of musket 



Mountain Victory 749 

cartridges stenciled U. S. Army. At the table her two broth- 
ers sat in splint chairs, though it was only the younger one, 
the boy, who looked toward the door, though she knew, 
could hear now, that the stranger was in the room. The older 
brother was taking the cartridges one by one from the box 
and crimping them and setting them upright at his hand like 
a mimic parade of troops, his back to the door where she 
knew the stranger was now standing. She breathed quietly. 
"Vatch would have shot him," she said, breathed, to herself, 
stooping. "I reckon he will yet." 

Then she heard feet again and her mother came toward 
the door to the kitchen, crossing and for a moment blotting 
the orifice. Yet she did not move, not even when her mother 
entered the kitchen. She stooped to the crack, her breathing 
regular and placid, hearing her mother clattering the stove- 
lids behind her. Then she saw the stranger for the first time 
and then she was holding her breath quietly, not even aware 
that she had ceased to breathe. She saw him standing beside 
the table in his shabby cloak, with his hat in his left hand. 
Vatch did not look up. 

"My name is Saucier Weddel," the stranger said. 

"Soshay Weddel," the girl breathed into the dry chinking, 
the crumbled and powdery wall. She could see him at full 
length, in his stained and patched and brushed cloak, with 
his head lifted a little and his face worn, almost gaunt, 
stamped with a kind of indomitable weariness and yet arro- 
gant too, like a creature from another world with other air 
to breathe and another kind of blood to warm the veins. 
"Soshay Weddel," she breathed. 

"Take some whiskey," Vatch said without moving. 

Then suddenly, as it had been with the suspended breath- 
ing, she was not listening to the words at all, as though it 
were no longer necessary for her to hear, as though curiosity 
tpo had no place in the atmosphere in which the stranger 



750 The Middle Ground 

dwelled and in which she too dwelled for the moment as 
she watched the stranger standing beside the table, looking 
at Vatch, and Vatch now turned in his chair, a cartridge in 
his hand, looking up at the stranger. She breathed quietly 
into the crack through which the voices came now without 
heat or significance out of that dark and smoldering and 
violent and childlike vanity of men: 

"I reckon you know these when you see them, then?" 

"Why not? We used them too. We never always had the 
time nor the powder to stop and make our own. So we had 
to use yours now and then. Especially during the last." 

"Maybe you would know them better if one exploded in 
your face." 

"Vatch." She now looked at her father, because he had 
spoken. Her younger brother was raised a little in his chair, 
leaning a little forward, his mouth open a little. He was sev- 
enteen. Yet still the stranger stood looking quietly down at 
Vatch, his hat clutched against his worn cloak, with on his 
face that expression arrogant and weary and a little quizzical. 

"You can show your other hand too," Vatch said. "Don't 
be afraid to leave your pistol go." 

"No," the stranger said. "I am not afraid to show it." 

"Take some whiskey, then," Vatch said, pushing the jug 
forward with a motion slighting and contemptuous. 

"I am obliged infinitely," the stranger said. "It's my stom- 
ach. For three years of war I have had to apologize to my 
stomach; now, with peace, I must apologize for it. But if I 
might have a glass for my boy? Even after four years, he 
cannot stand cold." 

"Soshay Weddel," the girl breathed into the crumbled 
dust beyond which the voices came, not yet raised yet for- 
ever irreconcilable and already doomed, the one blind vic- 
tim, the other blind executioner: 

"Or maybe behind your back you would know it better." 

"You- Vatck" 



Mountain Victory 751 

"Stop, sir. If he was in the army for as long as one year, 
he has run too, once. Perhaps oftener, if he faced the Army 
of Northern Virginia." 

"Soshay Weddel," the girl breathed, stooping. Now she 
saw Weddel, walking apparently straight toward her, a 
thick tumbler in his left hand and his hat crumpled beneath 
the same arm. 

"Not that way," Vatch said. The stranger paused and 
looked back at Vatch. "Where are you aiming to go?" 

"To take this out to my boy," the stranger said. "Out to 
the stable. I thought perhaps this door " His face was in 
profile now, worn, haughty, wasted, the eyebrows lifted 
with quizzical and arrogant interrogation. Without rising 
Vatch jerked his head back and aside. "Come away from 
that door." But the stranger did not stir. Only his head 
moved a little, as though he had merely changed the direc- 
tion of his eyes. 

"He's looking at paw," the girl breathed. "He's waiting 
for paw to tell him. He aint skeered of Vatch. I knowed it." 

"Come away from that door," Vatch said. "You damn 
nigra." 

"So it's my face and not my uniform," the stranger said. 
"And you fought four years to free us, I understand." 

Then she heard her father speak again. "Go out the front 
way and around the house, stranger," he said. 

"Soshay Weddel," the girl said. Behind her her mother 
clattered at the stove. "Soshay Weddel," she said. She did 
not say it aloud. She breathed again, deep and quiet and 
without haste. "It's like a music. It's like a singing." 

Ill 

THE NEGRO was squatting in the hallway of the barn, the 
sagging and broken stalls of which were empty save for the 
two horses. Beside him was a worn rucksack, open. He was 



752 The Middle Ground 

engaged in polishing a pair of thin dancing slippers with a 
cloth and a tin of paste, empty save for a thin rim of polish 
about the circumference of the tin. Beside him on a piece of 
plank sat one finished shoe. The upper was cracked; it had a 
crude sole nailed recently and crudely on by a clumsy hand. 

"Thank de Lawd folks cant see de bottoms of yo feets," 
the Negro said. "Thank de Lawd it's just dese hyer moun- 
tain trash. I'd even hate fo Yankees to see yo feets in dese 
things." He rubbed the shoe, squinted at it, breathed upon it, 
rubbed it again upon his squatting flank. 

"Here,' 1 Weddel said, extending the tumbler. It contained 
a liquid as colorless as water. 

The Negro stopped, the shoe and the cloth suspended. 
"Which?" he said. He looked at the glass. "Whut's dat?" 

"Drink it," Weddei said. 

"Dat's water. Whut you bringing me water fer?" 

"Take it," Weddel said. "It's not water." 

The Negro took the glass gingerly. He held it as if it con- 
tained nitroglycerin. He looked at it, blinking, bringing the 
glass slowly under his nose. He blinked. "Where'd you git 
dis hyer?" Weddel didn't answer. He had taken up the fin- 
ished slipper, looking at it. The Negro held the glass under 
his nose. "It smell kind of like it ought to," he said. "But I be 
dawg ef it look like anything. Dese folks fixing to pizen you." 
He tipped the glass and sipped gingerly, and lowered the 
glass, blinking. 

"I didn't drink any of it," Weddel said. He set the slipper 
down. 

"You better hadn't," the Negro said. "When here I done 
been fo years trying to take care of you en git you back 
home like whut Mistis tole me to do, and here you sleeping in 
folks' barns at night like a tramp, like a pater-roller nigger " 
He put the glass to his lips, tilting it and his head in a single 
jerk. He lowered the glass, empty; his eyes were closed; he 



Mountain Victory 753 

said, "Whuf!" shaking his head with a violent, shuddering 
motion. "It smells right, and it act right. But I be dawg ef it 
look right. I reckon you better let it alone, like you started 
out. When dey try to make you drink it you send um to me. 
I done already stood so much I reckon I can stand a little 
mo fer Mistis' sake." 

He took up the shoe and the cloth again. Weddel stooped 
above the rucksack. "I want my pistol," he said. 

Again the Negro ceased, the shoe and the cloth poised. 
"Whut fer?" He leaned and looked up the muddy slope 
toward the cabin. "Is dese folks Yankees?" he said in a 
whisper. 

"No," Weddel said, digging in the rucksack with his left 
hand. The Negro did not seem to hear him. 

"In Tennessee? You tole me we was in Tennessee, where 
Memphis is, even if you never tole me it was all disyer up- 
and-down land in de Memphis country. I know I never seed 
none of um when I went to Memphis wid yo paw dat time. 
But you says so. And now you telling me dem Memphis folks 
is Yankees?" 

"Where is the pistol?" Weddel said. 

"I done tole you," the Negro said. "Acting like you does. 
Letting dese folks see you come walking up de road, leading 
Caesar caze you think he tired; making me ride whilst you 
walks when I can outwalk you any day you ever lived and 
you knows it, even if I is f awty en you twenty-eight. I ghy 
tell yo maw. I ghy tell um." 

Weddel rose, in his hand a heavy cap-and-ball revolver. 
He chuckled it in his single hand, drawing the hammer back, 
letting it down again. The Negro watched him, crouched 
like an ape in the blue Union army overcoat. "You put dat 
thing back," he said. "De war done wid now. Dey tole us 
back dar at Ferginny it was done wid. You dont need no 
pistol now. You put it back, you hear me?" 



754 The Middle Ground 

"I'm going to bathe," Weddel said. "Is my shirt " 

"Bathe where? In whut? Dese folks aint never seed a 
bathtub." 

"Bathe at the well. Is my shirt ready?" 

"Whut dey is of it. ... You put dat pistol back, Marse 
Soshay. I ghy tell yo maw on you. I ghy tell um. I just wish 
Marster was here." 

"Go to the kitchen," Weddel said. "Tell them I wish to 
bathe in the well house. Ask them to draw the curtain on that 
window there." The pistol had vanished beneath the grey 
cloak. He went to the stall where the thoroughbred was. 
The horse nuzzled at him, its eyes rolling soft and wild. He 
patted its nose with his left hand. It whickered, not loud, its 
breath sweet and warm. 

IV 

THE NEGRO entered the kitchen from the rear. He had re- 
moved the oilcloth tent and he now wore a blue forage cap 
which, like the overcoat, was much too large for him, resting 
upon the top of his head in such a way that the unsupported 
brim oscillated faintly when he moved as though with a life 
of its own. He was completely invisible save for his face 
between cap and collar like a dried Dyak trophy and almost 
as small and dusted lightly over as with a thin pallor of wood 
ashes by the cold. The older woman was at the stove on 
which frying food now hissed and sputtered; she did not 
look up when the Negro entered. The girl was standing in 
the middle of the room, doing nothing at all. She looked at 
the Negro, watching him with a slow, grave, secret, unwink- 
ing gaze as he crossed the kitchen with that air of swaggering 
caricatured assurance, and upended a block of wood beside 
the stove and sat upon it. 

"If disyer is de kind of weather yawl has up here all de 



Mountain Victory 755 

time," he said, "I dont care ef de Yankees does has dis coun- 
try." He opened the overcoat, revealing his legs and feet as 
being wrapped, shapeless and huge, in some muddy and 
anonymous substance resembling fur, giving them the ap- 
pearance of two muddy beasts the size of halfgrown dogs 
lying on the floor; moving a little nearer the girl, the girl 
thought quietly Hifs fur. He taken and cut up a fur coat to 
wrap his feet in "Yes, suh," the Negro said. "Just yawl let 
me git home again, en de Yankees kin have all de rest of it." 

"Where do you-uns live?" the girl said. 

The Negro looked 'at her. "In Miss'ippi. On de Domain. 
Aint you never hyeard tell of Countymaison?" 

"Countymaison? " 

"Dat's it. His grandpappy named it Countymaison caze it's 
bigger den a county to ride over. You cant ride across it on 
a mule betwixt sunup and sundown. Dat's how come." He 
rubbed his hands slowly on his thighs. His face was now 
turned toward the stove; he snuffed loudly. Already the ashy 
overlay on his skin had disappeared, leaving his face dead 
black, wizened, his mouth a little loose, as though the muscles 
had become slack with usage, like rubber bands not the 
eating muscles, the talking ones. "I reckon we is gittin nigh 
home, after all. Leastways dat hawg meat smell like it do 
down whar folks lives." 

"Countymaison," the girl said in a rapt, bemused tone, 
looking at the Negro with her grave, unwinking regard. 
Then she turned her head and looked at the wall, her face 
perfectly serene, perfectly inscrutable, without haste, with a 
profound and absorbed deliberation. 

"Dat's it," the Negro said. "Even Yankees is heard tell of 
WeddeFs Countymaison en erbout Marster Francis Weddel. 
Maybe yawl seed um pass in de carriage dat time he went to 
Washn'ton to tell yawl's president how he aint like de way 
yawl's president wuz treating de people. He rid all de way 



756 The Middle Ground 

to Washn'ton in de carriage, wid two niggers to drive en to 
heat de bricks to kept he foots warm, en de man done gone 
on ahead wid de wagon en de fresh hawses. He carried yawl's 
president two whole dressed bears en eight sides of smoked 
deer venison. He must a passed right out dar in front yawl's 
house. I reckon yo pappy or maybe his pappy seed um pass." 
He talked on, voluble, in soporific singsong, his face begin- 
ning to glisten, to shine a little with the rich warmth, while 
the mother bent over the stove and the girl, motionless, static, 
her bare feet cupped smooth and close to the rough pun- 
cheons, her big, smooth, young body cupped soft and richly 
mammalian to the rough garment, watching the Negro 
with her ineffable and unwinking gaze, her mouth open a 
little. 

The Negro talked on, his eyes closed, his voice intermi- 
nable, boastful, his air lazily intolerant, as if he were still at 
home and there had been no war and no harsh rumors of 
freedom and of change, and he (a stableman, in the domestic 
hierarchy a man of horses) were spending the evening in the 
quarters among field hands, until the older woman dished the 
food and left the room, closing the door behind her. Efe 
opened his eyes at the sound and looked toward the door and 
then back to the girl. She was looking at the wall, at the 
closed door through which her mother had vanished. "Dont 
dey lets you eat at de table wid um?" he said. 

The girl looked at the Negro, unwinking. "Countymai- 
son," she said. "Vatch says he is a nigra too." 

"Who? Him? A nigger? Marse Soshay Weddel? Which 
un is Vatch?" The girl looked at him. "It's caze yawl aint 
never been nowhere. Ain't never seed nothing. Living up 
here on a nekkid hill whar you cant even see smoke. Him a 
nigger? I wish his maw could hear you say dat." He looked 
about the kitchen, wizened, his eyeballs rolling white, cease- 
less, this way and that. The girl watched him. 



Mountain Victory 757 

"Do the girls there wear shoes all the time?" she said. 

The Negro looked about the kitchen, "Where does yawl 
keep dat ere Tennessee spring water? Back here some- 
where?" 

"Spring water?" 

The Negro blinked slowly. "Dat ere light-drinking kahy- 



sene." 



"Kahysene?" 

"Dat ere light colored lamp oil whut yawl drinks. Aint 
you got a little of it hid back here somewhere?" 

"Oh," the girl said. "You mean corn." She went to a corner 
and lifted a loose plank in the floor, the Negro watching her, 
and drew forth another earthen jug. She filled another thick 
tumbler and gave it to the Negro and watched him jerk it 
down his throat, his eyes closed. Again he said, "Whuf!" and 
drew his back hand across his mouth. 

"Whut wuz dat you axed me?" he said. 

"Do the girls down there at Countymaison wear shoes?" 

"De ladies does. If dey didn't have none, Marse Soshay 
could sell a hun'ed niggers en buy um some . . . Which un is 
it say Marse Soshay a nigger?" 

The girl watched him. "Is he married?" 

"Who married? Marse Soshay?" The girl watched him. 
"How he have time to git married, wid us fighting de Yan- 
kees for fo years? Aint been home in fo years now where no 
ladies to marry is." He looked at the girl, his eyewhites a 
little bloodshot, his skin shining in faint and steady high- 
lights. Thawing, he seemed to have increased in size a little 
too. "Whut's it ter you, if he married or no?" 

They looked at each other. The Negro could hear her 
breathing. Then she was not looking at him at all, though 
she had not yet even blinked nor turned her head. "I dont 
reckon he'd have any time for a girl that didn't have any 
shoes." she said. She went to the wall and stooped again to the 



758 The Middle Ground 

crack. The Negro watched her. The older woman entered 
and took another dish from the stove and departed without 
having looked at either of them. 

V 

THE FOUR MEN, the three men and the boy, sat about the sup- 
per table. The broken meal lay on thick plates. The knives 
and forks were iron. On the table the jug still sat. Weddel 
was now cloakless. He was shaven, his still damp hair combed 
back. Upon his bosom the ruffles of the shirt frothed in the 
lamplight, the right sleeve, empty, pinned across his breast 
with a thin gold pin. Under the table the frail and mended 
dancing slippers rested among the brogans of the two men 
and the bare splayed feet of the boy. 

"Vatch says you are a nigra," the father said. 

Weddel was leaning a little back in his chair. "So that ex- 
plains it," he said. "I was thinking that he was just congeni- 
tally illtempered. And having to be a victor, too." 

"Are you a nigra?" the father said. 

"No," Weddel said. He was looking at the boy, his weath- 
ered and wasted face a little quizzical. Across the back of his 
neck his hair, long, had been cut roughly as though with a 
knife or perhaps a bayonet. The boy watched him in com- 
plete and rapt immobility. As if I might be an apparition he 
thought. A bant. Maybe 1 am. "No," he said. "I am not a 
Negro." 

"Who are you?" the father said. 

Weddel sat a little sideways in his chair, his hand lying on 
the table. "Do you ask guests who they are in Tennessee?" 
he said. Vatch was filling a tumbler from the jug. His face 
was lowered, his hands big and hard. His face was hard. 
Weddel looked at him. "I think I know how you feel," he 
said. "I expect I felt that way once. But it's hard to keep on 
feeling any way for four years. Even feeling at all." 



Mountain Victory 759 

Vatch said something, sudden and harsh. He clapped the 
tumbler on to the table, splashing some of the liquor out. It 
looked like water, with a violent, dynamic odor. It seemed 
to possess an inherent volatility which carried a splash of it 
across the table and on to the foam of frayed yet immaculate 
linen on Weddel's breast, striking sudden and chill through 
the cloth against his flesh. 

"Vatch! "the father said. 

Weddel did not move; his expression arrogant, quizzical, 
and weary, did not change. "He did not mean to do that," 
he said. 

"When I do," Vatch said, "it will not look like an 
accident." 

Weddel was looking at Vatch. "I think I told you once," 
he said. "My name is Saucier Weddel. I am a Mississippian. 
I live at a place named Contalmaison. My father built it and 
named it. He was a Choctaw chief named Francis Weddel, 
of whom you have probably not heard. He was the son of a 
Choctaw woman and a French emigre of New Orleans, a 
general of Napoleon's and a knight of the Legion of Honor. 
His name was Francois Vidal. My father drove to Washing- 
ton once in his carriage to remonstrate with President Jack- 
son about the Government's treatment of his people, sending 
on ahead a wagon of provender and gifts and also fresh horses 
for the carriage, in charge of the man, the native overseer, 
who was a full blood Choctaw and my father's cousin. In 
the old days The Man was the hereditary title of the head 
of our clan; but after we became Europeanised like the white 
people, we lost the title to the branch which refused to be- 
come polluted, though we kept the slaves and the land. The 
Man now lives in a house a little larger than the cabins of the 
Negroes an upper servant. It was in Washington that my 
father met and married my mother. He was killed in the 
Mexican War. My mother died two years ago, in '63, of a 
complication of pneumonia acquired while superintending 



760 The Middle Ground 

the burying of some silver on a wet night when Federal 
troops entered the county, and of unsuitable food; though 
my boy refuses to believe that she is dead. He refuses to be- 
lieve that the country would have permitted the North to 
deprive her of the imported Martinique coffee and the beaten 
biscuit which she had each Sunday noon and Wednesday 
night. He believes that the country would have risen in arms 
first. But then, he is only a Negro, member of an oppressed 
race burdened with freedom. He has a daily list of my mis- 
doings which he is going to tell her on me when we reach 
home. I went to school in France, but not very hard. Until 
two weeks ago I was a major of Mississippi infantry in the 
corps of a man named Longstreet, of whom you may have 
heard." 

"So you were a major," Vatch said. 

"That appears to be my indictment; yes." 

"I have seen a rebel major before," Vatch said. "Do you 
want me to tell you where I saw him?" 

"Tell me," Weddel said. 

"He was lying by a tree. We had to stop there and lie 
down, and he was lying by the tree, asking for water. 'Have 
you any water, friend?' he said. 'Yes. I have water,' I said. 'I 
have plenty of water.' I had to crawl; I couldn't stand up. 
I crawled over to him and I lifted him so that his head would 
be propped against the tree. I fixed his face to the front." 

"Didn't you have a bayonet?" Weddel said. "But I forgot; 
you couldn't stand up." 

"Then I crawled back. I had to crawl back a hundred 
yards, where " 

"Back?" 

"It was too close. Who can do decent shooting that close? 
I had to crawl back, and then the damned musket " 

"Damn musket?" Weddel sat a little sideways in his chair, 
his hand on the table, his face quizzical and sardonic, con- 
tained. 



Mountain Victory 761 

"I missed, the first shot. I had his face propped up and 
turned, and his eyes open watching me, and then I missed. I 
hit him in the throat and I had to shoot again because of the 
damned musket." 

"Vatch," the father said. 

Vatch's hands were on the table. His head, his face, -were 
like his father's, though without the father's deliberation. His 
face was furious, still, unpredictable. "It was that damn mus- 
ket. I had to shoot three times. Then he had three eyes, in a 
row across his face propped against the tree, all three of them 
open, like he was watching me with three eyes. I gave him 
another eye, to see better with. But I had to shoot twice be- 
cause of the damn musket." 

"You, Vatch," the father said. He stood now, his hands on 
the table, propping his gaunt body. "Dont you mind Vatch, 
stranger. The Avar is over now." 

"I dont mind him," Weddel said. His hands went to his 
bosom, disappearing into the foam of linen while he watched 
Vatch steadily with his alert, quizzical, sardonic gaze. "I 
have seen too many of him for too long a time to mind one 
of him any more." 

"Take some whiskey," Vatch said. 

"Are you just making a point?" 

"Damn the pistol," Vatch said. "Take some whiskey." 

Weddel laid his hand again on the table. But instead of 
pouring, Vatch held the jug poised over the tumbler. He was 
looking past Weddel's shoulder. Weddel turned. The girl 
was in the room, standing in the doorway with her mother 
just behind her. The mother said as if she were speaking to 
the floor under her feet: "I tried to keep her back, like you 
said. I tried to. But she is strong as a man; hardheaded like a 



man." 



"You go back," the father said. 

"Me to go back?" the mother said to the floor. 



762 The Middle Ground 

The father spoke a name; Weddel did not catch it; he did 
not even know that he had missed it. "You go back." 

The girl moved. She was not looking at any of them. She 
came to the chair on which lay WeddePs worn and mended 
cloak and opened it, revealing the four ragged slashes where 
the sable lining had been cut out as though with a knife. She 
was looking at the cloak when Vatch grasped her by the 
shoulder, but it was at Weddel that she looked. "You cut hit 
out and gave hit to that nigra to wrap his feet in," she said. 
Then the father grasped Vatch in turn. Weddel had not 
stirred, his face turned over his shoulder; beside him the boy 
was upraised out of his chair by his arms, his young, slacked 
face leaned forward into the lamp. But save for the breathing 
of Vatch and the father there was no sound in the room. 

"I am stronger than you are, still," the father said. "I am a 
better man still, or as good." 

"You wont be always," Vatch said. 

The father looked back over his shoulder at the girl. "Go 
back," he said. She turned and went back toward the hall, 
her feet silent as rubber feet. Again the father called that 
name which Weddel had not caught; again he did not catch 
it and was not aware again that he had not. She went out the 
door. The father looked at Weddel. WeddePs attitude was 
unchanged, save that once more his hand was hidden inside 
his bosom. They looked at one another the cold, Nordic 
face and the half Gallic half Mongol face thin and worn like 
a bronze casting, with eyes like those of the dead, in which 
only vision has ceased and not sight. "Take your horses, and 
go," the father said. 

VI 

IT WAS dark in the hall, and cold, with the black chill of the 
mountain April coming up through the floor about her bare 



Mountain Victory 763 

legs and her body in the single coarse garment. "He cut the 
lining outen his cloak to wrap that nigra's feet in," she said. 
"He done hit for a nigra." The door behind her opened. 
Against the lamplight a man loomed, then the door shut be- 
hind him. "Is it Vatch or paw?" she said. Then something 
struck her across the back a leather strap. "I was afeared it 
would be Vatch," she said. The blow fell again. 

"Go to bed," the father said. 

"You can whip me, but you cant whip him," she said. 

The blow fell again: a thick, flat, soft sound upon her im- 
mediate flesh beneath the coarse sacking. 

VII 

IN THE deserted kitchen the Negro sat for a moment longer 
on the upturned block beside the stove, looking at the door. 
Then he rose carefully, one hand on the wall. 

"Whuf!" he said. "Wish us had a spring on de Domain 
whut run dat. Stock would git trompled to death, sho mon." 
He blinked at the door, listening, then he moved, letting him- 
self carefully along the wall, stopping now and then to look 
toward the door and listen, his air cunning, unsteady, and 
alert. He reached the corner and lifted the loose plank, stoop- 
ing carefully, bracing himself against the wall. He lifted the 
jug out, whereupon he lost his balance and sprawled on his 
face, his face ludicrous and earnest with astonishment. He 
got up and sat flat on the floor, carefully, the jug between his 
knees, and lifted the jug and drank. He drank a long time. 

"Whuf!" he said. "On de Domain we'd give disyer stuff 
to de hawgs. But deseyer ign'unt mountain trash " He 
drank again; then with the jug poised there came into his 
face an expression of concern and then consternation. He 
set the jug down and tried to get up, sprawling above the 
jug, gaining his feet at last, stooped, swaying, drooling, with 



764 The Middle Ground 

that expression of outraged consternation on his face. Then 
he fell headlong to the floor, overturning the jug. 

VIII 

THEY STOOPED above the Negro, talking quietly to one an- 
other Weddel in his frothed shirt, the father and the boy. 

"We'll have to tote him," the father said. 

They lifted the Negro. With his single hand Weddel 
jerked the Negro's head up, shaking him. "Jubal," he said. 

The Negro struck out, clumsily, with one arm. "Le'm be," 
he muttered. "Le'm go." 

"Jubal!" Weddel said. 

The Negro thrashed, sudden and violent. "You le'm be," 
he said. "I ghy tell de Man. I ghy tell um." He ceased, mut- 
tering: "Field hands. Field niggers." 

"We'll have to tote him," the father said. 

"Yes," Weddel said. "I'm sorry for this. I should have 
warned you. But I didn't think there was another jug he 
could have gained access to." He stooped, getting his single 
hand under the Negro's shoulders. 

"Get away," the father said. "Me and Hule can do it." He 
and the boy picked the Negro up. Weddel opened the door. 
They emerged into the high black cold. Below them the 
barn loomed. They carried the Negro down the slope. "Get 
them horses out, Hule," the father said. 

"Horses?" Weddel said. "He cant ride now. He cant stay 
on a horse." 

They looked at one another, each toward the other voice, 
in the cold, the icy silence. 

"You wont go now? " the father said. 

"I am sorry. You see I cannot depart now. I will have to 
stay until daylight, until he is sober. We will go then." 



Mountain Victory 765 

"Leave him here. Leave him one horse, and you ride on. 
He is nothing but a nigra." 

"I am soriy. Not after four years." His voice was quizzical, 
whimsical almost, yet with that quality of indomitable weari- 
ness. "I've worried with him this far; I reckon I will get him 
on home." 

"I have warned you," the father said. 

"I am obliged. We will move at daylight. If Hule \vill be 
kind enough to help me get him into the loft." 

The father had stepped back. "Put that nigra down, Hule," 
he said. 

"He will freeze here," Weddel said. "I must get him into 
the loft." He hauled the Negro up and propped him against 
the wall and stooped to hunch the Negro's lax body onto his 
shoulder. The weight rose easily, though he did not under- 
stand why until the father spoke again: 

"Hule. Come away from there." 

"Yes; go," Weddel said quietly. "I can get him up the lad- 
der." He could hear the boy's breathing, fast, young, swift 
with excitement perhaps. Weddel did not pause to speculate, 
nor at the faintly hysterical tone of the boy's voice: 

"I'll help you." 

Weddel didn't object again. He slapped the Negro awake 
ind they set his feet on the ladder rungs, pushing him up- 
tvard. Halfway up he stopped; again he thrashed out at them. 
"I ghy tell um. I ghy tell de Man. I ghy tell Mistis. Field 
hands. Field niggers." 

IX 

THEY LAY side by side in the loft, beneath the cloak and the 
two saddle blankets. There was no hay. The Negro snored, 
his breath reeking and harsh, thick. Below, in its stall, the 
Thoroughbred stamped now and then. Weddel lay on his 



766 The Middle Ground 

back, his arm across his chest, the hand clutching the stub of 
the other arm. Overhead, through the cracks in the roof the 
sky showed the thick chill, black sky which would rain 
again tomorrow and on every tomorrow until they left the 
mountains. "If I leave the mountains," he said quietly, mo- 
tionless on his back beside the snoring Negro, staring up- 
ward. "I was concerned. I had thought that it was exhausted; 
that I had lost the privilege of being afraid. But I have not. 
And so I am happy. Quite happy." He lay rigid on his back 
in the cold darkness, thinking of home. "Contalmaison. Our 
lives are summed up in sounds and made significant. Victory. 
Defeat. Peace. Home. That's why we must do so much to 
invent meanings for the sounds, so damned much. Especially 
if you are unfortunate enough to be victorious: so damned 
much. It's nice to be whipped; quiet to be whipped. To be 
whipped and to lie under a broken roof, thinking of home." 
The Negro snored. "So damned much"; seeming to watch 
the words shape quietly in the darkness above his mouth. 
"What would happen, say, a man in the lobby of the Gay- 
oso, in Memphis, laughing suddenly aloud. But I am quite 
happy " Then he heard the sound. He lay utterly still then, 
his hand clutching the butt of the pistol warm beneath the 
stub of his right arm, hearing the quiet, almost infinitesimal 
sound as it mounted the ladder. But he made no move until 
he saw the dim orifice of the trap door blotted out. "Stop 
where you are," he said. 

"It's me," the voice said; the voice of the boy, again with 
that swift, breathless quality which even now Weddel did 
not pause to designate as excitement or even to remark at all. 
The boy came on his hands and knees across the dry, sibilant 
chaff which dusted the floor. "Go ahead and shoot," he said. 
On his hands and knees he loomed above Weddel with his 
panting breath. "I wish I was dead. I so wish hit. I wish we 
was both dead. I could wish like Vatch wishes. Why did you 
uns have to stop here?" 



Mountain Victory 767 

Weddel had not moved. "Why does Vatch wish I was 
dead?" 

"Because he can still hear you uns yelling. I used to sleep 
with him and he wakes up at night and once paw had to keep 
him from choking me to death before he waked up and him 
sweating, hearing you uns yelling still. Without nothing but 
unloaded guns, yelling, Vatch said, like scarecrows across a 
cornpatch, running." He was crying now, not aloud. "Damn 
you! Damn you to hell!" 

"Yes," Weddel said. "I have heard them, myself. But why 
do you wish you were dead?" 

"Because she was trying to come, herself. Only she had 
to" 

"Who? She? Your sister?" 

" had to go through the room to get out. Paw was awake. 
He said, 'If you go out that door, dont you never come back.' 
And she said, 'I dont aim to/ And Vatch was awake too and 
he said, 'Make him marry you quick because you are going 
to be a widow at daylight.' And she come back and told me. 
But I was awake too. She told me to tell you." 

"Tell me what? " Weddel said. The boy cried quietly, with 
a kind of patient and utter despair. 

"I told her if you was a nigra, and if she done that I told 
her that I" 

"What? If she did what? What does she want you to tell 
me?" 

"About the window into the attic where her and me sleep. 
There is a foot ladder I made to come back from hunting at 
night for you to get in. But I told her if you was a nigra and 
if she done that I would " 

"Now then," Weddel said sharply; "pull yourself together 
now. Dont you remember? I never even saw her but that one 
time when she came in the room and your father sent her 



out." 



"But you saw her then. And she saw you." 



768 The Middle Ground 

"No," Weddel said. 

The boy ceased to cry. He was quite still above Weddel. 
"No what?" 

"I wont do it. Climb up your ladder." 

For a while the boy seemed to muse above him, motionless, 
breathing slow and quiet now; he spoke now in a musing, 
almost dreamy tone: "I could kill you easy. You aint got but 
one arm, even if you are older. . . ." Suddenly he moved, 
with almost unbelievable quickness; Weddel's first intima- 
tion was when the boy's hard, overlarge hands took him by 
the throat. Weddel did not move. "I could kill you easy. And 
wouldn't none mind." 

"Shhhhhh," Weddel said. "Not so loud." 

"Wouldn't none care." He held Weddel's throat with 
hard, awkward restraint. Weddel could feel the choking 
and the shaking expend itself somewhere about the boy's 
forearms before it reached his hands, as though the connec- 
tion between brain and hands was incomplete. "Wouldn't 
none care. Except Vatch would be mad." 

"I have a pistol," Weddel said. 

"Then shoot me with it. Go on." 

"No." 

"No what?" 

"I told you before." 

"You swear you wont do it? Do you swear?" 

"Listen a moment," Weddel said; he spoke now with a 
sort of soothing patience, as though he spoke one-syllable 
words to a child: "I just want to go home. That's all. I have 
been away from home for four years. All I want is to go 
home. Dont you see? I want to see what I have left there, 
after four years." 

"What do you do there?" The boy's hands were loose and 
hard about Weddel's throat, his arms still, rigid. "Do you 
hunt all day, and all night too if you want, with a horse to 



Mountain Victory 769 

ride and nigras to wait on you, to shine your boots and sad- 
dle the horse, and you setting on the gallery, eating, until 
time to go hunting again?" 

"I hope so. I haven't been home in four years, you see. So 
I dont know any more." 

"Take me with you." 

"I dont know what's there, you see. There may not be 
anything there: no horses to ride and nothing to hunt. The 
Yankees were there, and my mother died right afterward, 
and I dont know what we would find there, until I can go and 



see. 

UTV 



I'll work. We'll both work. You can get married in 
Mayesfield. It's not far." 

"Married? Oh. Your ... I see. How do you know I am 
not already married?" Now the boy's hands shut on his 
throat, shaking him. "Stop it! " he said. 

"If you say you have got a wife, I will kill you," the boy 
said. 

"No," Weddel said. "I am not married." 

"And you dont aim to climb up that foot ladder?" 

"No. I never saw her but once. I might not even know her 
if I saw her again." 

"She says different. I dont believe you. You are lying." 

"No," Weddel said. 

"Is it because you are afraid to?" 

"Yes. That's it." 

"Of Vatch?" 

"Not Vatch. I'm just afraid. I think my luck has given out. 
I know that it has lasted too long; I am afraid that I shall find 
that I have forgot how to be afraid. So I cant risk it. I cant 
risk finding that I have lost touch with truth. Not like Jubal 
here. He believes that I still belong to him; he will not be- 
lieve that I have been freed. He wont even let me tell him so. 
He does not need to bother about truthu vou see." 



770 The Middle Ground 

"We would work. She might not look like the Miss'ippi 
women that wear shoes all the time. But we would learn. We 
would not shame you before them." 

"No," Weddel said. "I cannot." 

"Then you go away. Now." 

"How can I? You see that he cannot ride, cannot stay on 
a horse." The boy did not answer at once; an instant later 
Weddel could almost feel the tenseness, the utter immobility^ 
though he himself had heard no sound; he knew that the boy,, 
crouching, not breathing, was looking toward the ladder. 
"Which one is it?" Weddel whispered. 

"It's paw." 

"I'll go down. You stay here. You keep my pistol for me.' r 

X 

THE DARK AIR was high, chill, cold. In the vast invisible dark- 
ness the valley lay, the opposite cold and invisible range 
black on the black sky. Clutching the stub of his missing arm 
across his chest, he shivered slowly and steadily. 

"Go," the father said. 

"The war is over," Weddel said. "Vatch's victory is not 
my trouble." 

"Take your horses and nigra, and ride on." 

"If you mean your daughter, I never saw her but once and 
I never expect to see her again." 

"Ride on," the father said. "Take what is yours, and ride 
on." 

"I cannot." They faced one another in the darkness. "After 
four years I have bought immunity from running." 

"You have till daylight." 

"I have had less than that in Virginia for four years. And 
this is just Tennessee." But the other had turned; he dissolved 
into the black slope. Weddel entered the stable and mounted 



Mountain Victory 771 

the ladder. Motionless above the snoring Negro the boy 
squatted. 

"Leave him here," the boy said. "He aint nothing but a 
nigra. Leave him, and go." 

"No," Weddel said. 

The boy squatted above the snoring Negro. He was not 
looking at Weddel, yet there was between them, quiet and 
soundless, the copse, the sharp dry report, the abrupt wild 
thunder of upreared horse, the wisping smoke. "I can show 
you a short cut down to the valley. You will be out of the 
mountains in two hours. By daybreak you will be ten miles 
away." 

"I cant. He wants to go home too. I must get him home 
too." He stooped; with his single hand he spread the cloak 
awkwardly, covering the Negro closer with it. He heard the 
boy creep away, but he did not look. After a while he shook 
the Negro. "Jubal," he said. The Negro groaned; he turned 
heavily, sleeping again. Weddel squatted above him as the 
boy had done. "I thought that I had lost it for good," he said. 
" The peace and the quiet; the power to be afraid again." 



XI 

THE CABIN was gaunt and bleak in the thick cold dawn when 
the two horses passed out the sagging gate and into the 
churned road, the Negro on the Thoroughbred, Weddel on 
the sorrel. The Negro was shivering. He sat hunched and 
high, with updrawn knees, his face almost invisible in the 
oilcloth hood. 

"I tole you dey wuz fixing to pizen us wid dat stuff," he 
said. "I tole you. Hillbilly rednecks. En you not only let um 
pizen me, you f otch me de pizen wid yo own hand. O Lawd, 
O Lawd! If we ever does git home." 

Weddel looked back at the cabin, at the weathered, blank 



772 The Middle Ground 

house where there was no sign of any life, not even smoke. 
"She has a young man, I suppose a beau." He spoke aloud, 
musing, quizzical. "And that boy. Hule. He said to come 
within sight of a laurel copse where the road disappears, and 
take a path to the left. He said we must not pass that copse." 

"Who says which?" the Negro said. "I aint going no- 
where. I going back to dat loft en lay down." 

"All right," Weddel said. "Get down." 

"Git down?" 

"I'll need both horses. You can walk on when you are 
through sleeping." 

"I ghy tell yo maw," the Negro said. "I ghy tell um. Ghy 
tell how after four years you aim got no more sense than to 
not know a Yankee when you seed um. To stay de night wid 
Yankees en let um pizen one of Mistis' niggers. I ghy tell um." 

"I thought you were going to stay here," Weddel said. He 
was shivering too. "Yet I am not cold," he said. "I am not 
cold." 

"Stay here? Me? How in de world you ever git home 
widout me? Whut I tell Mistis when I come in widout you 
en she ax me whar you is?" 

"Come," Weddel said. He lifted the sorrel into morion. 
He looked quietly back at the house, then rode on. Behind 
him on the Thoroughbred the Negro muttered and mumbled 
to himself in woebegone singsong. The road, the long hill 
which yesterday they had toiled up, descended now. It was 
muddy, rockchurned, scarred across the barren and rocky 
land beneath the dissolving sky, jolting downward to where 
the pines and laurel began. After a while the cabin had dis- 
appeared. 

"And so I am running away," Weddel said. "When I get 
home I shall not be very proud of this. Yes, I will. It means 
that I am still alive. Still alive, since I still know fear and de- 
sire. Since life is an affirmation of the past and a promise to 



Mountain Victory 773 

the future. So I am still alive Ah." It was the laurel copse. 
About three hundred yards ahead it seemed to have sprung 
motionless and darkly secret in the air which of itself was 
mostly water. He drew rein sharply, the Negro, hunched, 
moaning, his face completely hidden, overriding him un- 
awares until the Thoroughbred stopped of its own accord. 
"But I dont see any path " Weddel said; then a figure 
emerged from the copse, running toward them. Weddel 
thrust the reins beneath his groin and withdrew his hand 
inside his cloak. Then he saw that it was the boy. He came up 
trotting. His face was white, strained, his eyes quite grave. 

"It's right yonder," he said. 

"Thank you," Weddel said. "It was kind of you to come 
and show us, though we could have found it, I imagine." 

"Yes," the boy said as though he had not heard. He had 
already taken the sorrel's bridle. "Right tother of the brush. 
You cant see hit until you are in hit." 

"In whut?" the Negro said. "I ghy tell urn. After four 
years you aint got no more sense. . . ." 

"Hush," Weddel said. He said to the boy, "I am obliged 
to you. You'll have to take that in lieu of anything better. 
And now you get on back home. We can find the path. We 
will be all right now." 

"They know the path too," the boy said. He drew the 
sorrel forward. "Come on." 

"Wait," Weddel said, drawing the sorrel up. The boy still 
tugged at the bridle, looking on ahead toward the copse. "So 
we have one guess and they have one guess. Is that it?" 

"Damn you to hell, come on!" the boy said, in a kind of 
thin frenzy. "I am sick of hit. Sick of hit." 

"Well," Weddel said. He looked about, quizzical, sardonic, 
with his gaunt, weary, wasted face. "But I must move. I cant 
stay here, not even if I had a house, a roof to live under. So 
I have to choose between three things. That's what throws a 



774 The Middle Ground 

man off that extra alternative. Just when he has come to 
realize that living consists in choosing wrongly between two 
alternatives, to have to choose among three. You go back 
home." 

The boy turned and looked up at him. "We'd work. We 
could go back to the house now, since paw and Vatch are 
. . . We could ride down the mou-tin, two on one horse and 
two on tother. We could go back to the valley and get mar- 
ried at Mayesfield. We would not shame you." 

"But she has a young man, hasn't she? Somebody that 
waits for her at church on Sunday and walks home and takes 
Sunday dinner, and maybe fights the other young men be- 
cause of her?" 

"You wont take us, then?" 

"No. You go back home." 

For a while the boy stood, holding the bridle, his face low- 
ered. Then he turned; he said quietly: "Come on, then. We 
got to hurry." 

"Wait," Weddel said; "what are you going to do?" 

"I'm going a piece with you. Come on." He dragged the 
sorrel forward, toward the roadside. 

"Here," Weddel said, "you go on back home. The war is 
over now. Vatch knows that." 

The boy did not answer. He led the sorrel into the under- 
brush. The Thoroughbred hung back. "Whoa, you Caesar!" 
the Negro said. "Wait, Marse Soshay. I aint gwine ride down 
no. . . ." 

The boy looked over his shoulder without stopping. "You 
keep back there," he said. "You keep where you are." 

The path was a faint scar, doubling and twisting among 
the brush. "I see it now," Weddel said. "You go back." 

"I'll go a piece with you," the boy said; so quietly that 
Weddel discovered that he had been holding his breath, in 
a taut, strained alertness. He breathed again, while the sorrel 



Mountain Victory 775 

jolted stiffly downward beneath him. "Nonsense," he 
thought. "He will have me playing Indian also in five min- 
utes more. I had wanted to recover the power to be afraid, 
but I seem to have outdone myself." The path widened; the 
Thoroughbred came alongside, the boy walking between 
them; again he looked at the Negro. 

"You keep back, I tell you," he said. 

"Why back?" Weddel said. He looked at the boy's wan, 
strained face; he thought swiftly, "I dont know whether I 
am playing Indian or not." He said aloud: "Why must he 
keep back?" 

The boy looked at Weddel; he stopped, pulling the sorrel 
up. "We'd work," he said. "We wouldn't shame you." 

Weddel's face was now as sober as the boy's. They looked 
at one another. "Do you think we have guessed wrong? We 
had to guess. We had to guess one out of three." 

Again it was as if the boy had not heard him. "You wont 
think hit is me? You swear hit?" 

"Yes. I swear it." He spoke quietly, watching the boy; 
they spoke now as two men or two children. "What do you 
think we ought to do?" 

"Turn back. They will be gone now. We could . . ." He 
drew back on the bridle; again the Thoroughbred came 
abreast and forged ahead. 

"You mean, it could be along here?" Weddel said. Sud- 
denly he spurred the sorrel, jerking the clinging boy for- 
ward. "Let go," he said. The boy held onto the bridle, swept 
forward until the two horses were again abreast. On the 
Thoroughbred the Negro perched, highkneed, his mouth 
still talking, flobbed down with ready speech, easy and worn 
with talk like an old shoe with walking. 

"I done tole him en tole him," the Negro said. 

"Let go!" Weddel said, spurring the sorrel, forcing its 
shoulder into the boy. "Let go!" 



776 The Middle Ground 

"You wont turn back?" the boy said. "You wont?" 

"Let go!" Weddel said. His teeth showed a little beneath 
his mustache; he lifted the sorrel bodily with the spurs. The 
boy let go of the bridle and ducked beneath the Thorough- 
bred's neck; Weddel, glancing back as the sorrel leaped, saw 
the boy surge upward and on to the Thoroughbred's back, 
shoving the Negro back along its spine until he vanished. 

"They think you will be riding the good horse," the boy 
said in a thin, panting voice; "I told them you would be 
riding . . . Down the mou-tin!" he cried as the Thorough- 
bred swept past; "the horse can make hit! Git outen the 
path! Git outen the. . . ." Weddel spurred the sorrel; almost 
abreast the two horses reached the bend where the path 
doubled back upon itself and into a matted shoulder of laurel 
and rhododendron. The boy looked back over his shoulder. 
"Keep back!" he cried. "Git outen the path!" Weddel 
rowelled the sorrel. On his face was a thin grimace of ex- 
asperation and anger almost like smiling. 

It was still on his dead face when he struck the earth, his 
foot still fast in the stirrup. The sorrel leaped at the sound 
and dragged Weddel to the path side and halted and whirled 
and snorted once, and began to graze. The Thoroughbred 
however rushed on past the curve and whirled and rushed 
back, the blanket twisted under its belly and its eyes rolling, 
springing over the boy's body where it lay in the path, the 
face wrenched sideways against a stone, the arms back- 
sprawled, openpalmed, like a woman with lifted skirts spring- 
ing across a puddle. Then it whirled and stood above Wed- 
del's body, whinnying, with tossing head, watching the 
laurel copse and the fading gout of black powder smoke as it 
faded away. 

The Negro was on his hands and knees when the two men 
emerged from the copse. One of them was running. The 
Negro watched him run forward, crying monotonously, 



Mountain Victory 777 

"The durned fool! The durned fool! The durned fool!" and 
then stop suddenly and drop the gun; squatting, the Negro 
saw him become stone still above the fallen gun, looking 
dawn at the boy's body with an expression of shock and 
amazement like he was waking from a dream. Then the 
Negro saw the other man. In the act of stopping, the second 
man swung the rifle up and began to reload it. The Negro 
did not move. On his hands and knees he watched the two 
white men, his irises rushing and wild in the bloodshot 
whites. Then he too moved and, still on hands and knees, he 
turned and scuttled to where Weddel lay beneath the sorrel 
and crouched over Weddel and looked again and watched 
the second man backing slowly away up the path, loading 
the rifle. He watched the man stop; he did not close his eyes 
nor look away. He watched the rifle elongate and then rise 
and diminish slowly and become a round spot against the 
white shape of Vatch's face like a period on a page. Crouch- 
ing, the Negro's eyes rushed wild and steady and red, like 
those of a cornered animal. 



VI BEYOND 



Beyond 

Black Music 

The Leg 

Mistral 

Divorce in Naples 
Carcassonne 



Beyond 



THE HARD ROUND ear of the stethoscope was cold and un- 
pleasant upon his naked chest; the room, big and square, 
furnished with clumsy walnut the bed where he had first 
slept alone, which had been his marriage bed, in which his 
son had been conceived and been born and lain dressed for 
the coffin the room familiar for sixty-five years, by ordi- 
nary peaceful and lonely and so peculiarly his own as to 
have the same odor which he had, seemed to be cluttered 
with people, though there were but three of them and all 
of them he knew: Lucius Peabody who should have been 
down town attending to his medical practice, and the two 
Negroes, the one who should be in the kitchen and the 
other with the lawn mower on the lawn, making some pre- 
tence toward earning the money which on Saturday night 
they would expect. 

But worst of all was the hard cold little ear of the stetho- 
scope, worse even than the outrage of his bared chest with 
its fine delicate matting of gray hair. In fact, about the 
whole business there was just one alleviating circumstance. 
"At least," he thought with fretted and sardonic humor, "I 
am spared that uproar of female connections which might 
have been my lot, which is the ordinary concomitant of oc- 
casions of marriage or divorcement. And if he will just move 

781 



782 Beyond 

his damned little toy telephone and let my niggers go back 
to work " 

And then, before he had finished the thought, Peabody 
did remove the stethoscope. And then, just as he was settling 
himself back into the pillow with a sigh of fretted relief, one 
of the Negroes, the woman, set up such a pandemonium ot 
wailing as to fetch him bolt upright in the bed, his hands to 
his ears. The Negress stood at the foot of the bed, her long 
limber black hands motionless on the footboard, her eyes 
whitely backrolled into her skull and her mouth wide open, 
while from it rolled slow billows of soprano sound as mellow 
as high-register organ tones and wall-shattering as a steamer 
siren. 

"Chlory!" he shouted. "Stop that!" She didn't stop. Ap- 
parently she could neither see nor hear. "You, Jake!" he 
shouted to the Negro man who stood beside her, his hands 
too on the footboard, his face brooding upon the bed with 
an expression darkly and profoundly enigmatic; "get her out 
of here! At once!" But Jake too did not move, and he then 
turned to Peabody in angry outrage. "Here! Loosh! Get 
these damn niggers out of here!" But Peabody also did not 
seem to hear him. The Judge watched him methodically 
folding the stethoscope into its case; glared at him for a 
moment longer while the woman's shattering noise billowed 
through the room. Then he flung the covers back and rose 
from the bed and hurried furiously from the room and from 
the house. 

At once he realized that he was still in his pajamas, so he 
buttoned his overcoat. It was of broadcloth, black, brushed, 
of an outmoded elegance, with a sable collar. "At least they 
didn't have time to hide this from me," he thought in fretted 
rage. "Now, if I just had my. . . ." He looked down at his 
feet. "Ah. I seem to have. . . ." He looked at his shoes. 
"That's fortunate, too." Then the momentary surprise faded 



Beyond 783 

too, now that outrage had space in which to disseminate 
itself. He touched his hat, then he put his hand to his lapel. 
The jasmine was there. Say what he would, curse Jake as he 
often had to do, the Negro never forgot whatever flower 
in its season. Always it would be there, fresh and recent and 
unblemished, on the morning coffee tray. The flower and 
the. . . . He clasped his ebony stick beneath his arm and 
opened the briefcase. The two fresh handkerchiefs were 
there, beside the book. He thrust one of them into his breast 
pocket and went on. After a while the noise of Chlory's 
wailing died away. 

Then for a little while it was definitely unpleasant. He 
detested crowds: the milling and aimless and patient stu- 
pidity; the concussion of life-quick flesh with his own. But 
presently, if not soon, he was free, and standing so, still a 
little ruffled, a little annoyed, he looked back with fading 
outrage and distaste at the throng as it clotted quietly 
through the entrance. With fading distaste until the distaste 
was gone, leaving his face quiet and quite intelligent, with 
a faint and long constant overtone of quizzical bemusement 
not yet tinctured with surprised speculation, not yet puz- 
zled, not yet wary. That was to come later. Hence it did 
not show in his voice, which was now merely light, quiz- 
zical, contained, "There seems to be quite a crowd of them." 

"Yes," the other said. The Judge looked at him and saw 
a young man in conventional morning dress with some 
subtle effluvium of weddings, watching the entrance with a 
strained, patient air. 

"You are expecting someone?" the Judge said. 

Now the other looked at him. u Yes. You didn't see- 
But you don't know her." 

"Know whom?" 

"My wife. That is, she is not my wife yet. But the wed- 
ding was to be at noon." 



784 Beyond 

"Something happened, did it?" 

"I had to do it." The young man looked at him, strained, 
anxious. "I was late. That's why I was driving fast. A child 
ran into the road. I was going too fast to stop. So I had to 
turn." 

"But you missed the child?" 

"Yes." The other looked at him. "You don't know her?" 

"And are you waiting here to. . . ." The judge stared at 
the other. His eyes were narrowed, his gaze was piercing, 
hard. He said suddenly, sharply, "Nonsense." 

"What? What did you say?" the other asked with his 
vague, strained, almost beseeching air. The Judge looked 
away. His frowning concentration, his reflex of angry 
astonishment, was gone. He seemed to have wiped it from 
his face by a sudden deliberate action. He was like a man 
who, not a swordsman, has practiced with a blade a little 
against a certain improbable crisis, and who suddenly finds 
himself, blade in hand, face to face with the event. He 
looked at the entrance, his face alert, musing swiftly: he 
seemed to muse upon the entering faces with a still and 
furious concentration, and quietly; quietly he looked about, 
then at the other again. The young man still watched him. 

"You're looking for your wife too, I suppose," he said. 
"I hope you find her. I hope you do." He spoke with a sort 
of quiet despair. "I suppose she is old, as you are. It must be 
hell on the one who has to watch and wait for the other 
one he or she has grown old in marriage with, because it is 
so terrible to wait and watch like me, for a girl who is a 
maiden to you. Of course I think mine is the most unbear- 
able. You see if it had only been the next day anything. 
But then if it had, I guess I could not have turned out for 
that kid. I guess I just think mine is so terrible. It can't be 
as bad as I think it is. It just can't be. I hope you find her." 

The Judge's lip lifted. "I came here to escape someone; 



Beyond 785 

not to find anyone." He looked at the other. His face was 
still broken with that grimace which might have been smil- 
ing. But his eyes were not smiling. "If I were looking for 
anybody, it would probably be my son." 

"Oh. A son. I see." 

"Yes. He would be about your age. He was ten when he 
died." 

"Look for him here." 

Now the Judge laughed outright, save for his eyes. The 
other watched him with that grave anxiety leavened now 
with quiet interested curiosity. "You mean you don't be- 
lieve?" The Judge laughed aloud. Still laughing, he produced 
a cloth sack of tobacco and rolled a slender cigarette. When 
he looked up, the other was watching the entrance again. 
The Judge ceased to laugh. 

"Have you a match?" he said. The other looked at him. 
The Judge raised the cigarette. "A match." 

The other sought in his pockets. "No." He looked at the 
Judge. "Look for him here," he said. 

"Thank you," the Judge answered. "I may avail myself 
of your advice later." He turned away. Then he paused and 
looked back. The young man was watching the entrance. 
The Judge watched him, bemused, his lip lifted. He turned 
on, then he stopped still. His face was now completely 
shocked, into complete immobility like a mask; the sensitive, 
worn mouth, the delicate nostrils, the eyes all pupil or pupil- 
less. He could not seem to move at all. Then Mothershed 
turned and saw him. For an instant Mothershed's pale eyes 
flickered, his truncated jaw, collapsing steadily with a savage, 
toothless motion, ceased. 

"Well?" Mothershed said. 

"Yes," the Judge said; "it's me." Now it was that, as the 
mesmerism left him, the shadow bewildered and wary and 
complete, touched his face. Even to himself his words 



7 86 Beyond 

sounded idiotic. "I thought that you were dea. . . ." Then he 
made a supreme and gallant effort, his voice light, quizzical, 
contained again, "Well?" 

Mothershed looked at him a squat man in a soiled and 
mismatched suit stained with grease and dirt, his soiled col- 
lar innocent of tie with a pale, lightly slumbering glare 
filled with savage outrage. "So they got you here, too, did 
they?" 

"That depends on who you mean by 'they' and what you 
mean by 'here/ " 

Mothershed made a savage, sweeping gesture with one 
arm. "Here, by God! The preachers. The Jesus shouters." 

"Ah," the Judge said. "Well, if I am where I am begin- 
ning to think I am, I don't know whether I am here or not. 
But you are not here at all, are you?" Mothershed cursed 
violently. "Yes," the Judge said, "we never thought, sitting 
in my office on those afternoons, discussing Voltaire and 
Ingersoll, that we should ever be brought to this, did we? 
You, the atheist whom the mere sight of a church spire on 
the sky could enrage; and I who have never been able to 
divorce myself from reason enough to accept even your 
pleasant and labor-saving theory of nihilism." 

"Labor-saving!" Mothershed cried. "By God, I " He 

cursed with impotent fury. The Judge might have been 
smiling save for his eyes. He sealed the cigarette again. 

"Have you a match?" 

"What?" Mothershed said. He glared at the Judge, his 
mouth open. He sought through his clothes. From out the 
savage movement, strapped beneath his armpit, there peeped 
fleetly the butt of a heavy pistol. "No," he said. "I ain't." 

"Yes," the Judge said. He twisted the cigarette, his gaze 
light, quizzical. "But you still haven't told me what you 
are doing here. I heard that you had. . . ." 

Again Mothershed cursed, prompt, outraged. "I ain't. I 



Beyond 787 

just committed suicide." He glared at the Judge. "God damn 
it, I remember raising the pistol; I remember the little cold 
ring it made against my ear; I remember when I told my 

finger on the trigger " He glared at the Judge. "I thought 

that that would be one way I could escape the preachers, 
since by the church's own token. . . ." He glared at the 
Judge, his pale gaze apoplectic and outraged. "Well, I know 
why you are here. You come here looking for that boy." 

The Judge looked down, his lip lifted, the movement 
pouched upward about his eyes. He said quietly, "No." 

Mothershed watched him, glared at him. "Looking for 
that boy. Agnosticism." He snarled it. "Won't say 'Yes' and 
won't say 'No' until you see which way the cat will jump. 
Ready to sell out to the highest bidder. By God, I'd rather 
have give up and died in sanctity, with every heaven-yelp- 
ing fool in ten miles around. . . ." 

"No," the Judge said quietly behind the still, dead gleam 
of his teeth. Then his teeth vanished quietly, though he did 
not look up. He sealed the cigarette carefully again. "There 
seem to be a lot of people here." Mothershed now began to 
watch him with speculation, tasting his savage gums, his 
pale furious glare arrested. "You have seen other familiar 
faces besides my own here, I suppose. Even those of men 
whom you know only by name, perhaps?" 

"Oh," Mothershed said. "I see. I get you now." The 
Judge seemed to be engrossed in the cigarette. "You want to 
take a whirl at them too, do you? Go ahead. I hope you will 
get a little more out of them that will stick to your guts 
than I did. Maybe you will, since you don't seem to want to 
know as much as you want something new to be uncertain 
about. Well, you can get plenty of that from any of them.' v 

"You mean you have. . . ." 

Again Mothershed cursed, harsh, savage. "Sure. IngersolL 
Paine. Every bastard one of them that I used to waste my 



788 Beyond 

time reading when I had better been sitting on the sunny- 
side of a log." 

"Ah," the Judge said. "Ingersoll. Is he " 

"Sure. On a bench just inside the park yonder. And 
maybe on the same bench you'll find the one that wrote the 
little women books. If he ain't there, he ought to be." 

So the Judge sat forward, elbows on knees, the unlighted 
cigarette in his fingers. "So you too are reconciled," he 
said. The man who Mothershed said was Ingersoll looked 
at his profile quietly. "To this place." 

"Ah," the other said. He made a brief, short gesture. 
"Reconciled." 

The Judge did not look up. "You accept it? You acqui- 
esce?" He seemed to be absorbed in the cigarette. "If 1 could 
just see Him, talk to Him." The cigarette turned slowly in 
his fingers. "Perhaps I was seeking Him. Perhaps I was seek- 
ing Him all the time I was reading your books, and Voltaire 
and Montesquieu. Perhaps I was." The cigarette turned 
slowly. "I have believed in you. In your sincerity. I said, if 
Truth is to be found by man, this man will be among those 
who find it. At one time I was in the throes of that suffer- 
ing from a still green hurt which causes even an intelligent 
man to cast about for anything, any straw I had a foolish 
conceit: you will be the first to laugh at it as I myself did 
later. I thought, perhaps there is a hereafter, a way station 
into nothingness perhaps, where for an instant lesser men 
might speak face to face with men like you whom they 
could believe; could hear from such a man's own lips the 
words: 'There is hope,' or: 'There is nothing.' I said to my- 
self, in such case it will not be Him whom I shall seek; it will 
be Ingersoll or Paine or Voltaire." He watched the cigarette. 
"Give me your word now. Say either of these to me. I will 
believe." 



Beyond 789 

The other looked at the Judge for a time. Then he said, 
"Why? Believe why?" 

The paper about the cigarette had come loose. The Judge 
twisted it carefully back, handling the cigarette carefully. 
"You see, I had a son. He was the last of my name and race. 
After my wife died we lived alone, two men in the house. 
It had been a good name, you see. I wanted him to be manly, 
worthy of it. He had a pony which he rode all the time. 
I have a photograph of them which I use as a bookmark. 
Often, looking at the picture or watching them unbe- 
knownst as they passed the library window, I would think 
What hopes ride yonder; of the pony I would think What 
burden do you blindly bear, dumb brute. One day they 
telephoned me at my office. He had been found dragging 
from the stirrup. Whether the pony had kicked him or he 
had struck his head in falling, I never knew." 

He laid the cigarette carefully on the bench beside him 
and opened the briefcase. He took out a book. "Voltaire's 
Philosophical Dictionary" he said. "I always carry a book 
with me. I am a great reader. It happens that my life is a 
solitary one, owing to the fact that I am the last of my fam- 
ily, and perhaps to the fact that I am a Republican office- 
holder in a Democratic stronghold. I am a Federal judge, 
from a Mississippi district. My wife's father was a Repub- 
lican." He added quickly, "I believe the tenets of the Repub- 
lican Party to be best for the country. You will not believe 
it, but for the last fifteen years my one intellectual com- 
panion has been a rabid atheist, almost an illiterate, who not 
only scorns all logic and science, but who has a distinct body 
odor as well. Sometimes I have thought, sitting with him in 
my office on a summer afternoon a damp one that if a 
restoration of faith could remove his prejudice against bath- 
ing, I should be justified in going to that length myself 



790 Beyond 

even." He took a photograph from the book and extended 
it. "This was my son." 

The other looked at the picture without moving, without 
offering to take it. From the brown and fading cardboard a 
boy of ten, erect upon the pony, looked back at them with 
a grave and tranquil hauteur. "He rode practically all the 
time. Even to church (I attended church regularly then. I 
still do, at times, even now) . We had to take an extra groom 
along in the carriage to. . . ." He looked at the picture, mus- 
ing. "After his mother died I never married again. My own 
mother was sickly, an invalid. I could cajole her. In the ab- 
sence of my aunts I could browbeat her into letting me go 
barefoot in the garden, with two house servants on watch to 
signal the approach of my aunts. I would return to the 
house, my manhood triumphant, vindicated, until I entered 
the room where she waited for me. Then I would know that 
for every grain of dust which pleasured my feet, she would 
pay with a second of her life. And we would sit in the dusk 
like two children, she holding my hand and crying quietly, 
until my aunts entered with the lamp. 'Now, Sophia. Crying 
again. What have you let him bulldoze you into doing this 
time?' She died when I was fourteen; I was twenty-eight 
before I asserted myself and took the wife of my choice; I 
was thirty-seven when my son was born." He looked at the 
photograph, his eyes pouched, netted by two delicate ham- 
mocks of myriad lines as fine as etching. "He rode all the 
time. Hence the picture of the two of them, since they were 
inseparable. I have used this picture as a bookmark in the 
printed volumes where his and my ancestry can be followed 
for ten generations in our American annals, so that as the 
pages progressed it would be as though with my own eyes 
I watched him ride in the flesh down the long road which 
his blood and bone had traveled before it became his." He 
held the picture. With his other hand he took up the 



Beyond 791 

rette. The paper had come loose: he held it raised a little and 
then arrested so, as if he did not dare raise it farther. "And 
you can give me your word. I will believe." 

"Go seek your son," the other said. "Go seek him." 

Now the Judge did not move at all. Holding the picture 
and the dissolving cigarette, he sat in a complete immobility. 
He seemed to sit in a kind of terrible and unbreathing sus- 
pension. "And find him? And find him? " The other did not 
answer. Then the Judge turned and looked at him, and then 
the cigarette dropped quietly into dissolution as the tobacco 
rained down upon his neat, gleaming shoe. "Is that your 
word? I will believe, I tell you." The other sat, shapeless, 
gray, sedentary, almost nondescript, looking down. "Come. 
You cannot stop with that. You cannot." 

Along the path before them people passed constantly. A 
woman passed, carrying a child and a basket, a young 
woman in a plain, worn, brushed cape. She turned upon 
the man who Mothershed had said was Ingersoll a plain, 
bright, pleasant face and spoke to him in a pleasant, tranquil 
voice. Then she looked at the Judge, pleasantly, a full look 
without boldness or diffidence, and went on. "Come. You 
cannot. You cannot." Then his face went completely blank. 
In the midst of speaking his face emptied; he repeated "can- 
not. Cannot" in a tone of musing consternation. "Cannot," 
he said. "You mean, you cannot give me any word? That 
you do not know? That you, yourself, do not know? You, 
Robert Ingersoll? Robert Ingersoll?" The other did not 
move. "Is Robert Ingersoll telling me that for twenty years I 
have leaned upon a reed no stronger than myself?" 

Still the other did not look up. "You saw that young 
woman who just passed, carrying a child. Follow her. Look 
into her face." 

"A young woman. With a. . . ." The Judge looked at the 
other. "Ah. I see. Yes. I will look at the child and I shall 



79 2 Beyond 

see scars. Then I am to look into the woman's face. Is that 
it?" The other didn't answer. "That is your answer? your 
final word?" The other did not move. The Judge's lip lifted. 
The movement pouched upward about his eyes as though 
despair, grief, had flared up for a final instant like a dying 
flame, leaving upon his face its ultimate and fading gleam 
in a faint grimace of dead teeth. He rose and put the photo- 
graph back into the briefcase. "And this is the man who 
says that he was once Robert Ingersoll." Above his teeth his 
face mused in that expression which could have been smiling 
save for the eyes. "It is not proof that I sought. I, of all men, 
know that proof is but a fallacy invented by man to justify 
to himself and his fellows his own crass lust and folly. It 
was not proof that I sought." With the stick and the brief- 
case clasped beneath his arm he rolled another slender ciga- 
rette. "I don't know who you are, but I don't believe you 
are Robert Ingersoll. Perhaps I could not know it even if 
you were. Anyway, there is a certain integral consistency 
which, whether it be right or wrong, a man must cherish 
because it alone will ever permit him to die. So what I have 
been, I am; what I am, I shall be until that instant comes 
when I am not. And then I shall have never been. How does 
it go? Non fui. Sum. Fui. Non sum" 

With the unlighted cigarette in his fingers he thought at 
first that he would pass on. But instead he paused and looked 
down at the child. It sat in the path at the woman's feet, 
surrounded by tiny leaden effigies of men, some erect and 
some prone. The overturned and now empty basket lay at 
one side. Then the Judge saw that the effigies were Roman 
soldiers in various stages of dismemberment some headless, 
some armless and legless scattered about, lying profoundly 
on their faces or staring up with martial and battered in- 
scrutability from the mild and inscrutable dust. On the exact 
center of each of the child's insteps was a small scar. There 



Beyond 793 

was a third scar in the palm of its exposed hand, and as the 
Judge looked down with quiet and quizzical bemusement, 
the child swept flat the few remaining figures and he saw the 
fourth scar. The child began to cry. 

"Shhhhhhhhh," the woman said. She glanced up at the 
Judge, then she knelt and set the soldiers up. The child 
cried steadily, with a streaked and dirty face, strong, unhur- 
ried, passionless, without tears. "Look!" the woman said, 
"See? Here! Here's Pilate too! Look!" The child ceased. 
Tearless, it sat in the dust, looking at the soldiers with an 
expression as inscrutable as theirs, suspended, aldermanic, 
and reserved. She swept the soldiers flat. "There!" she cried 
in a fond, bright voice, "see?" For a moment longer the 
child sat. Then it began to cry. She took it up and sat on the 
bench, rocking it back and forth, glancing up at the Judge. 
"Now, now," she said. "Now, now." 

"Is he sick?" the Judge said. 

"Oh, no. He's just tired of his toys, as children will get." 
She rocked the child with an air fond and unconcerned. 
"Now, now. The gentleman is watching you." 

The child cried steadily. "Hasn't he other toys?" the 
Judge said. 

"Oh, yes. So many that I don't dare walk about the house 
in the dark. But he likes his soldiers the best. An old gentle- 
man who has lived here a long time, they say, and is quite 
wealthy, gave them to him. An old gentleman with a white 
mustache and that kind of popping eyes that old people have 
who eat too much; I tell him so. He has a footman to carry 
his umbrella and overcoat and steamer rug, and he sits here 
with us for more than an hour, sometimes, talking and 
breathing hard. He always has candy or something." She 
looked down at the child, her face brooding and serene. It 
cried steadily. Quizzical, bemused, the Judge stood, looking 
quietly down at the child's scarred, dirty feet. The woman 



794 Beyond 

glanced up and followed his look. "You are looking at his 
scars and wondering how he got them, aren't you? The 
other children did it one day when they were playing. Of 
course they didn't know they were going to hurt him. I 
imagine they were as surprised as he was. You know how 
children are when they get too quiet." 

"Yes," the Judge said. "I had a son too." 

"You have? Why don't you bring him here? I'm sure we 
would be glad to have him play with our soldiers too." 

The Judge's teeth glinted quietly. "I'm afraid he's a little 
too big for toys." He took the photograph from the brief- 
case. "This was my son." 

The woman took the picture. The child cried steady and 
strong. "Why, it's Howard. Why, we see him every day. He 
rides past here every day. Sometimes he stops and lets us 
ride too. I walk beside to hold him on," she added, glancing 
up. She showed the picture to the child. "Look! See Howard 
on his pony? See?" Without ceasing to cry, the child con- 
templated the picture, its face streaked with tears and dirt, 
its expression detached, suspended, as though it were living 
two distinct and separate lives at one time. She returned the 
picture. "I suppose you are looking for him." 

"Ah," the Judge said behind his momentary teeth. He 
replaced the picture carefully in the briefcase, the unlighted 
cigarette in his fingers. 

The woman moved on the bench, gathering her skirts in 
with invitation. "Won't you sit down? You will be sure to 
see him pass here." 

"Ah," the Judge said again. He looked at her, quizzical, 
with the blurred eyes of the old. "It's like this, you see. He 
always rides the same pony, you say?" 

"Why, yes." She looked at him with grave and tranquil 
surprise. 

"And how old would you say the pony is?" 



Beyond 795 

"Why, I. ... It looks just the right size for him." 

"A young pony, you would say then? " 

"Why . . . yes. Yes." She watched him, her eyes wide. 

"Ah," the Judge said again behind his faint still teeth. He 
closed the briefcase carefully. From his pocket he took a 
half dollar. "Perhaps he is tired of the soldiers too. Perhaps 
with this. . . ." 

"Thank you," she said. She did not look again at the coin. 
"Your face is so sad. There: when you think you are smiling 
it is sadder than ever. Aren't you well?" She glanced down 
at his extended hand. She did not offer to take the coin. 
"He'd just lose it, you see. And it's so pretty and bright. 
When he is older, and can take care of small playthings. . . . 
He's so little now, you see." 

"I see," the Judge said. He put the coin back into his 
pocket. "Well, I think I shall" 

"You wait here with us. He always passes here. You'll 
find him quicker that way." 

"Ah," the Judge said. "On the pony, the same pony. You 
see, by that token, the pony would have to be thirty years 
old. That pony died at eighteen, six years unridden, in my 
lot. That was twelve years ago. So I had better get on." 

And again it was quite unpleasant. It should have been 
doubly so, what with the narrow entrance and the fact that, 
while the other time he was moving with the crowd, this 
time he must fight his way inch by inch against it. "But at 
least I know where I am going," he thought, beneath his 
crushed hat, his stick and briefcase dragging at his arms; 
"which I did not seem to know before." But he was free at 
last, and looking up at the clock on the courthouse, as he 
never failed to do on descending his office stairs, he saw that 
he had a full hour before supper would be ready, before 
the neighbors woald be ready to mark his clocklike passing. 

"I shall have time to go the cemetery," he thought, and 



796 Beyond 

looking down at the raw and recent excavation, he swore 
with fretful annoyance, for some of the savage clods had 
fallen or been thrown upon the marble slab beside it. "Damn 
that Pettigrew," he said. "He should have seen to this. I 
told him I wanted the two of them as close as possible, but 
at least I thought that he. . . ." Kneeling, he tried to remove 
the earth which had fallen upon the slab. But it was beyond 
his strength to do more than clear away that which partially 
obscured the lettering: Howard Allison 11. April -j, 7^05. 
August 22, 1913, and the quietly cryptic Gothic lettering at 
the foot: Auf Wiedersehen, Little Boy. He continued to 
smooth, to stroke the letters after the earth was gone, his 
face bemused, quiet, as he spoke to the man who Mother- 
shed had said was Ingersoll, "You see, if I could believe that 
I shall see and touch him again, I shall not have lost him. 
And if I have not lost him, I shall never have had a son. 
Because I am I through bereavement and because of it. I do 
not know what I was nor what I shall be. But because of 
death, I know that I am. And that is all the immortality of 
which intellect is capable and flesh should desire. Anything 
else is for peasants, clods, who could never have loved a son 
well enough to have lost him." His face broke, myriad, 
quizzical, while his hand moved lightly upon the quiet letter- 
ing. "No. I do not require that. To lie beside him will be 
sufficient for me. There will be a wall of dust between us: 
that is true, and he is already dust these twenty years. But 
some day I shall be dust too. And " he spoke now firmly, 
quietly, with a kind of triumph: "who is he who will affirm 
that there must be a web of flesh and bone to hold the shape 
of love?" 

Now it was late. "Probably they are setting their clocks 
back at this very moment," he thought, pacing along the 
street toward his home. Already he should have been hearing 
the lawn mower, and then in the instant of exasperation at 



Beyond 797 

Jake, he remarked the line of motor cars before his gate and 
a sudden haste came upon him. But not so much but what, 
looking at the vehicle at the head of the line, he cursed again. 
"Damn that Pettigrew! I told him, in the presence of wit- 
nesses when I signed my will, that I would not be hauled 
feet first through Jefferson at forty miles an hour. That if he 
couldn't find me a decent pair of horses. ... I am a good mind 
to come back and haunt him, as Jake would have me do." 

But the haste, the urgency, was upon him. He hurried 
round to the back door (he remarked that the lawn was 
freshly and neatly trimmed, as though done that day) and 
entered. Then he could smell the flowers faintly and hear the 
voice; he had just time to slip out of his overcoat and pajamas 
and leave them hanging neatly in the closet, and cross the hall 
into the odor of cut flowers and the drone of the voice, and 
slip into his clothes. They had been recently pressed, and his 
face had been shaved too. Nevertheless they were his own, 
and he fitted himself to the olden and familiar embrace 
which no iron could change, with the same lascivious eager- 
ness with which he shaped his limbs to the bedclothes on a 
winter night. 

"Ah/' he said to the man who Mothershed had said was 
Ingersoll, "this is best, after all. An old man is never at home 
save in his own garments: his own old thinking and beliefs; 
old hands and feet, elbow, knee, shoulder which he knows 
will fit." 

Now the light vanished with a mute, faint, decorous hol- 
low sound which drove for a fading instant down upon him 
the dreadful, macabre smell of slain flowers; at the same time 
he became aware that the droning voice had ceased. "In my 
own house too," he thought, waiting for the smell of the 
flowers to fade; "yet I did not once think to notice who was 
speaking, nor when he ceased." Then he heard or felt the 
decorous scuffing of feet about him, and he lay in the close 



798 Beyond 

dark, his hands folded upon his breast as he slept, as the old 
sleep, waiting for the moment. It came. He said quietly 
aloud, quizzical, humorous, peaceful, as he did each night 
in his bed in his lonely and peaceful room when a last full 
exhalation had emptied his body of waking and he seemecj 
for less than an instant to look about him from the portal of 
sleep, "Gentlemen of the Jury, you may proceed." 



Black Music 



THIS is about Wilfred Midgleston, fortune's favorite, chosen 
of the gods. For fifty-six years, a clotting of the old gutful 
compulsions and circumscriptions of clocks and bells, he met 
walking the walking image of a small, snuffy, nondescript 
man whom neither man nor woman had ever turned to look 
at twice, in the monotonous shopwindows of monotonous 
hard streets. Then his apotheosis soared glaring, and to him 
at least not brief, across the unfathomed sky above his lost 
earth like that of Elijah of old. 

I found him in Rincon, which is not large; less large even 
than one swaybacked tanker looming above the steel docks 
of the Universal Oil Company and longer than the palm- 
and abode-lined street paved with dust marked by splayed 
naked feet where the violent shade lies by day and the violent 
big stars by night. 

"He came from the States," they told me. "Been here 
twenty-five years. He hasn't changed at all since the day he 
arrived, except that the clothes he came in have wore out 
and he hasn't learned more than ten words of Spanish." That 
was the only way you could tell that he was an old man, that 
he was getting along: he hadn't learned to speak hardly a 
word of the language of the people with whom he had lived 
twenty-five years and among whom it appeared that he 
intended to die and be buried. Appeared: he had no job: a 

799 



8oo Beyond 

mild, hopelessly mild man who looked like a book-keeper 
in a George Ade fable dressed as a tramp for a Presbyterian 
social charade in 1890, and quite happy. 

Quite happy and quite poor. "He's either poor, or he's 
putting up an awful front. But they can't touch him now. 
We told him that a long time ago, when he first come here. 
We said, 'Why don't you go on and spend it, enjoy it? 
They've probably forgot all about it by now.' Because if I 
went to the trouble and risk of stealing and then the hard- 
ship of having to live the rest of my life in a hole like this, 
I'd sure enjoy what I went to the trouble to get." 

"Enjoy what?" I said. 

"The money. The money he stole and had to come down 
here. What else do you reckon he would come down here 
and stay twenty-five years for? just to look at the country?" 

"He doesn't act and look very rich," I said. 

"That's a fact. But a fellow like that. His face. I don't 
guess he'd have judgment enough to steal good. And not 
judgment enough to keep it, after he got it stole. I guess 
you are right. I guess all he got out of it was the running 
away and the blame. While somebody back there where he 
run from is spending the money and singing loud in the choir 
twice a week." 

"Is that what happens?" I said. 

"You're damned right it is. Some damn fellow that's too 
rich to afford to be caught stealing sets back and leaves a 
durn fool that never saw twenty-five hundred dollars before 
in his life at one time, pull his chestnuts for him. Twenty- 
five hundred seems a hell of a lot when somebody else owns 
it. But when you have got to pick up overnight and run a 
thousand miles, paying all your expenses, how long do you 
think twenty-five hundred will last?" 

"How long did it last?" I said. 

"Just about two years* by God. And then there I " He 



Black Music 80 1 

stopped. He glared at me, who had paid for the coffee and 
the bread which rested upon the table between us. He glared 
at me. "Who do you think you are, anyway? Wm. J. 
Burns?" 

"I don't think so. I meant no offense. I just was curious 
to know how long his twenty-five hundred dollars lasted 
him." 

"Who said he had twenty-five hundred dollars? I was just 
citing an example. He never had nothing, not even twenty- 
five hundred cents. Or if he did, he hid it and it's stayed hid 
ever since. He come here sponging on us white men, and 
when we got tired of it he took to sponging on these Spigs. 
And a white man has got pretty low when he's got so stingy 
with his stealings that he will live with Spiggotties before 
he'll dig up his own money and live like a white man." 

"Maybe he never stole any money," I said. 

"What's he doing down here, then?" 

"I'm down here." 

"I don't know you ain't run, either." 

"That's so," I said. "You don't know." 

"Sure I don't. Because that's your business. Every man 
has got his own private affairs, and no man respects them 
quicker than I do. But I know that a man, a white man, has 
got to have durn good reason. . . . Maybe he ain't got it now. 
But you can't tell me a white man would come down here to 
live and die without no reason." 

"And you consider that stealing money is the only 
reason?" 

He looked at me, with disgust and a little contempt. "Did 
you bring a nurse with you? Because you ought to have, 
until you learn enough about human nature to travel alone. 
Because human nature, I don't care who he is nor how loud 
he sings in church, will steal whenever he thinks he can get 
away with it. If you ain't learned that yet, you better go 



802 Beyond 

back home and stay there where your folks can take care 
of you." 

But I was watching Midgleston across the street. He was 
standing beside a clump of naked children playing in the 
shady dust: a small, snuffy man in a pair of dirty drill 
trousers which had not been made for him. "Whatever it is," 
I said, "it doesn't seem to worry him." 

"Oh. Him. He ain't got sense enough to know he needs 
to worry about nothing." 

Quite poor and quite happy. His turn to have coffee and 
bread with me came at last. No: that's wrong. I at last 
succeeded in evading his other down-at-heel compatriots 
like my first informant; men a little soiled and usually un- 
shaven, who were unavoidable in the cantinas and coffee 
shops, loud, violent, maintaining the superiority of the white 
race and their own sense of injustice and of outrage among 
the grave white teeth, the dark, courteous, fatal, speculative 
alien faces, and had Midgleston to breakfast with me. I had 
to invite him and then insist. He was on hand at the ap- 
pointed hour, in the same dirty trousers, but his shirt was 
now white and whole and ironed, and he had shaved. He 
accepted the meal without servility, without diffidence, 
without eagerness. Yet when he raised the handleless bowl 
I watched his hands tremble so that for a time he could not 
make junction with his lips. He saw me watching his hands 
and he looked at my face for the first time and I saw that his 
eyes were the eyes of an old man. He said, with just a trace 
of apology for his clumsiness: "I ain't et nothing to speak 
of in a day or so." 

"Haven't eaten in two days?" I said. 

"This hot climate. A fellow don't need so much. Feels 
better for not eating so much. That was the hardest trouble 
I had when I first come here. I was always a right hearty 
eater back home." 



Black Music 803 

"Oh," I said. I had meat brought then, he protesting. But 
he ate the meat, ate all of it. "Just look at me," he said. "I 
ain't et this much breakfast in twenty-five years. But when 
a fellow gets along, old habits are hard to break. No, sir. Not 
since I left home have I et this much for breakfast." 

"Do you plan to go back home?" I said. 

"I guess not; no. This suits me here. I can live simple here. 
Not all cluttered up with things. My own boss (I used to be 
an architect's draughtsman) all day long. No. I don't guess 
I'll go back." He looked at me. His face was intent, watch- 
ful, like that of a child about to tell something, divulge 
itself. "You wouldn't guess where I sleep in a hundred 
years." 

"No. I don't expect I could. Where do you sleep?" 

"I sleep in that attic over that cantina yonder. The house 
belongs to the Company, and Mrs. Widrington, Mr. Wid- 
rington's wife, the manager's wife, she lets me sleep in the 
attic. It's high and quiet, except for a few rats. But when in 
Rome, you got to act like a Roman, I say. Only I wouldn't 
name this country Rome; I'd name it Ratville. But that ain't 
it." He watched me. "You'd never guess it in the world." 

"No," I said. "I'd never guess it." 

He watched me. "It's my bed." 

"Your bed?" 

"I told you you'd never guess it." 

"No," I said. "I give up now." 

"My bed is a roll of tarred roofing paper." 

"A roll of what?" 

"Tarred roofing paper." His face was bright, peaceful; 
his voice quiet, full of gleeful quiet. "At night I just unroll 
it and go to bed and the next a. m. I just roll it back up and 
lean it in the corner. And then my room is all cleaned up 
for the day. Ain't that fine? No sheets, no laundry, no noth- 



804 Beyond 

ing. Just roll up my whole bed like an umbrella and carry 
it under my arm when I want to move." 

"Oh," I said. "You have no family, then." 

"Not with me. No." 

"You have a family back home, then?" 

He was quite quiet. He did not feign to be occupied with 
something on the table. Neither did his eyes go blank, 
though he mused peacefully for a moment. "Yes. I have a 
wife back home. Likely this climate wouldn't suit her. She 
wouldn't like it here. But she is all right. I always kept my 
insurance paid up; I carried a right smart more than you 
would figure a architect's draughtsman on a seventy-five- 
dollar salary would keep up. If I told you the amount, you 
would be surprised. She helped me to save; she is a good 
woman. So she's got that. She earned it. And besides, I don't 
need money." 

"So you don't plan to go back home." 

"No," he said. He watched me; again his expression was 
that of a child about to tell on itself. "You see, I done some- 
thing." 

"Oh. I see." 

He talked quietly: "It ain't what you think. Not what 
them others " he jerked his head, a brief embracing gesture 
"think. I never stole any money. Like I always told Mar- 
tha she is my wife; Mrs. Midgleston money is too easy 
to earn to risk the bother of trying to steal it. All you got 
to do is work. 'Have we ever suffered for it?' I said to her. 
'Of course, we don't live like some. But some is born for one 
thing and some is born for another thing. And the fellow 
that is born a tadpole, when he tries to be a salmon all he is 
going to be is a sucker.' That's what I would tell her. And 
she done her part and we got along right well; if I told you 
how much life insurance I carried, you would be surprised. 
No; she ain't suffered any. Don't you think that." 



Black Music 805 

"No," I said. 

"But then I done something. Yes, sir." 

"Did what? Can you tell?" 

"Something. Something that ain't in the lot and plan for 
mortal human man to do." 

"What was it you did?" 

He looked at me. "I ain't afraid to tell. I ain't never been 
afraid to tell. It was just that these folks " again he jerked 
his head slightly "wouldn't have understood. Wouldn't 
have knowed what I was talking about. But you will. You'll 
know." He watched my face. "At one time in my life I was 
a farn." 

"A farn?" 

"Farn. Don't you remember in the old books where they 
would drink the red grape wine, how now and then them 
rich Roman and Greek senators would up and decide to tear 
up a old grape vineyard or a wood away off somewheres 
the gods used, and build a summer house to hold their frolics 
in where the police wouldn't hear them, and how the gods 
wouldn't hear them, and how the gods wouldn't like it about 
them married women running around nekkid, and so the 
woods god named named" 

"Pan," I said. 

"That's it. Pan. And he would send them little fellows 
that was half a goat to scare them out " 

"Oh," I said. "A faun." 

"That's it. A farn. That's what I was once. I was raised 
religious; I have never used tobacco or liquor; and I don't 
think now that I am going to hell. But the Bible says that 
them little men were myths. But I know they ain't, and so 
I have been something outside the lot and plan for mortal 
human man to be. Because for one day in my life I was a 
farn." 



806 Beyond 

II 

IN THE OFFICE where Midgleston was a draughtsman they 
would discuss the place and Mrs. Van Dyming's unique 
designs upon it while they were manufacturing the plans, 
the blue prints. The tract consisted of a meadow, a southern 
hillside where grapes grew, and a woodland. "Good land, 
they said. But wouldn't anybody live on it." 

"Why not?" I said. 

"Because things happened on it. They told how a long 
time ago a New England fellow settled on it and cleaned up 
the grape vines to market the grapes. Going to make jelly 
or something. He made a good crop, but when time came 
to gather them, he couldn't gather them." 

"Why couldn't he gather them?" 

"Because his leg was broke. He had some goats, and a old 
ram that he couldn't keep out of the grape lot. He tried 
every way he knew, but he couldn't keep the ram out. And 
when the man went in to gather the grapes to make jelly, 
the ram ran over him and knocked him down and broke 
his leg. So the next spring the New England fellow moved 
away. 

"And they told about another man, a I-talian lived the 
other side of the woods. He would gather the grapes and 
make wine out of them, and he built up a good wine trade. 
After a while his trade got so good that he had more trade 
than he did wine. So he began to doctor the wine up with 
water and alcohol, and he was getting rich. At first he used 
a horse and wagon to bring the grapes home on his private 
road through the woods, but he got rich and he bought a 
truck, and he doctored the wine a little more and he got 
richer and he bought a bigger truck. And one night a storm 
come up while he was away from home, gathering the 
grapes, and he didn't get home that night. The next a. m. 



Black Music 807 

his wife found him. That big truck had skidded off the road 
and turned over and he was dead under it." 

"I don't see how that reflected on the place," I said. 

"All right. I'm just telling it. The neighbor folks thought 
different, anyway. But maybe that was because they were 
not anything but country folks. Anyway, none of them 
would live on it, and so Mr. Van Dyming bought it cheap. 
For Mrs. Van Dyming. To play with. Even before we had 
the plans finished, she would take a special trainload of them 
down there to look at it, and not even a cabin on the place 
then, not nothing but the woods and that meadow growed 
up in grass tall as a man, and that hillside where them grapes 
grew tangled. But she would stand there, with them other 
rich Park Avenue folks, showing them how here would be 
the community house built to look like the Coliseum and 
the community garage yonder made to look like it was a 
Acropolis, and how the grape vine would be grubbed up 
entire and the hillside terraced to make a outdoors theatre 
where they could act in one another's plays; and how the 
meadow would be a lake with one of them Roman barges 
towed back and forth on it by a gas engine, with mattresses 
and things for them to lay down on while they et." 

"What did Mr. Van Dyming say about all this?" 

"I don't reckon he said anything. He was married to her, 
you know. He just says, one time, 'Now, Mattie ' and she 
turns on him, right there in the office, before us all, and 
says, 'Don't you call me Mattie.' " He was quiet for a time. 
Then he said: "She wasn't born on Park Avenue. Nor West- 
chester neither. She was born in Poughkeepsie. Her name 
was Lumpkin. 

"But you wouldn't know it, now. When her picture 
would be in the paper with all them Van Dyming diamonds, 
it wouldn't say how Mrs. Carleton Van Dyming used to be 
Miss Mathilda Lumpkin of Poughkeepsie. No, sir. Even a 



8o8 Beyond 

newspaper wouldn't dared say that to her. And I reckon Mr. 
Van Dyming never either, unless he forgot like the day in 
the office. So she says, 'Don't you call me Mattie' and he 
hushed and he just stood there a little man; he looked kind 
of like me, they said tapping one of them little highprice 
cigars on his glove, with his face looking like he had thought 
about smiling a little and then he decided it wasn't even any 
use in that. 

"They built the house first. It was right nice; Mr. Van 
Dyming planned it. I guess maybe he said more than just 
Mattie that time. And I guess that maybe Mrs. Van Dyming 
never said, 'Don't you call me Mattie' that time. Maybe he 
promised her he wouldn't interfere with the rest of it. Any- 
way, the house was right nice. It was on the hill, kind of in 
the edge of the woods. It was logs. But it wasn't too much 
logs. It belonged there, fitted. Logs where logs ought to be, 
and good city bricks and planks where logs ought not to be. 
It was there. Belonged there. It was all right. Not to make 
anybody mad. Can you see what I mean?" 

"Yes. I think I can see what you mean." 

"But the rest of it he never interfered with; her and her 
Acropolises and all." He looked at me quite intently. "Some- 
times I thought. . . ." 

"What? Thought what?" 

"I told you him and me were the same size, looked kind 
of alike." He watched me. "Like we could have talked, for 
all of him and his Park Avenue clothes and his banks and his 
railroads, and me a seventy-five a week draughtsman living 
in Brooklyn, and not young neither. Like I could have said 
to him what was in my mind at any time, and he could have 
said to me what was in his mind at any time, and we would 
have understood one another. That's why sometimes I 
thought. . . ." He looked at me, intently, not groping exactly. 
"Sometimes men have more sense than women. They know 



Black Music 809 

what to leave be, and women don't always know that. He 
don't need to be religious in the right sense or religious in 
the wrong sense. Nor religious at all." He looked at me, 
intently. After a while he said, in a decisive tone, a tone of 
decisive irrevocation: "This will seem silly to you." 

"No. Of course not. Of course it won't." 

He looked at me. Then he looked away. "No. It will just 
sound silly. Just take up your time." 

"No. I swear it won't. I want to hear it. I am not a man 
who believes that people have learned everything." He 
watched me. "It has taken a million years to make what is, 
they tell us," I said. "And a man can be made and worn out 
and buried in threescore and ten. So how can a man be 
expected to know even enough to doubt?" 

"That's right," he said. "That's sure right." 

"What was it you sometimes thought?" 

"Sometimes I thought that, if it hadn't been me, they 
would have used him. Used Mr. Van Dyming like they 
used me." 

"They?" We looked at one another, quite sober, quite 
quiet. 

"Yes. The ones that used that ram on that New England 
fellow, and that storm on that I-talian." 

"Oh. Would have used Mr. Van Dyming in your place, 
if you had not been there at the time. How did they use 
you?" 

"That's what I am going to tell. How I was chosen and 
used. I did not know that I had been chosen. But I was 
chosen to do something beyond the lot and plan for mortal 
human man. It was the day that Mr. Carter (he was the boss, 
the architect) got the hurryup message from Mrs. Van 
Dyming. I think I told you the house was already built, and 
there was a big party of them down there where they could 
watch the workmen building the Coliseums and the Acropo- 



8 io Beyond 

lises. So the hurryup call came. She wanted the plans for the 
theatre, the one that was to be on the hillside where the 
grapes grew. She was going to build it first, so the company 
could set and watch them building the Acropolises and 
Coliseums. She had already begun to grub up the grape vines, 
and Mr. Carter put the theatre prints in a portfolio and give 
me the weekend off to take them down there to her." 

"Where was the place?" 

"I don't know. It was in the mountains, the quiet moun- 
tains where never many lived. It was a kind of green air, 
chilly too, and a wind. When it blew through them pines it 
sounded kind of like a organ, only it didn't sound tame like 
a organ. Not tame; that's how it sounded. But I don't know 
where it was. Mr. Carter had the ticket all ready and he said 
it would be somebody to meet me when the train stopped. 

"So I telephoned Martha and I went home to get ready. 
When I got home, she had my Sunday suit all pressed and 
my shoes shined. I didn't see any use in that, since I was just 
going to take the plans and come back. But Martha said how 
I had told her it was company there. 'And you are going to 
look as nice as any of them,' she says. Tor all they are rich 
and get into the papers. You're just as good as they are.' 
That was the last thing she said when I got on the train, in 
my Sunday suit, with the portfolio: 'You're just as good as 
they are, even if they do get into the papers.' And then it 
started." 

"What started? The train?" 

"No. It. The train had been running already a good while; 
we were out in the country now. I didn't know then that 
I had been chosen. I was just setting there in the train, with 
the portfolio on my knees where I could take care of it. 
Even when I went back to the ice water I didn't know that 
I had been chosen. I carried the portfolio with me and I was 
standing there, looking out the window and drinking out of 



Black Music 8 1 1 

the little paper cup. There was a bank running along by the 
train then, with a white fence on it, and I could see animals 
inside the fence, but the train was going too fast to tell what 
kind of animals they were. 

"So I had filled the cup again and I was drinking, looking 
out at the bank and the fence and the animals inside the 
fence, when all of a sudden it felt like I had been thrown 
off the earth. I could see the bank and the fence go whirling 
away. And then I saw it. And just as I saw it, it was like it 
had kind of exploded inside my head. Do you know what it 
was I saw?" 

"What was it you saw?" 

He watched me. "I saw a face. In the air, looking at me 
across that white fence on top of the bank. It was not a 
man's face, because it had horns, and it was not a goat's 
face because it had a beard and it was looking at me with 
eyes like a man and its mouth was open like it was saying 
something to me when it exploded inside my head." 

"Yes. And then what? What did you do next?" 

"You are saying 'He saw a goat inside that fence.' I know. 
But I didn't ask you to believe. Remember that. Because I 
am twenty-five years past bothering if folks believe me or 
not. That's enough for me. And I guess that's all anything 
amounts to." 

"Yes," I said. "What did you do then?" 

"Then I was laying down, with my face all wet and my 
mouth and throat feeling like it was on fire. The man was 
just taking the bottle away from my mouth (there were two 
men there, and the porter and the conductor) and I tried to 
sit up. 'That's whiskey in that bottle,' I said. 

" 'Why, sure not, doc,' the man said. 'You know I wouldn't 
be giving whiskey to a man like you. Anybody could tell 
by looking at you that you never took a drink in your life. 
Did you?' I told him I hadn't. 'Sure you haven't,' he said. 'A 



8iz Beyond 

man could tell by the way it took that curve to throw you 
down that you belonged to the ladies' temperance. You sure 
took a bust on the head, though. How do you feel now? 
Here, take another little shot of this tonic.' 

" 'I think that's whiskey,' I said. 

"And was it whiskey?" 

"I dont know. I have forgotten. Maybe I knew then. 
Maybe I knew what it was when I took another dose of it. 
But that didn't matter, because it had already started then." 

"The whiskey had already started?" 

"No. It. It was stronger than whiskey. Like it was drinking 
out of the bottle and not me. Because the men held the 
bottle up and looked at it and said, 'You sure drink it like it 
ain't whiskey, anyway. You'll sure know soon if it is or not, 
won't you?' 

"When the train stopped where the ticket said, it was all 
green, the light was, and the mountains. The wagon was 
there, and the two men when they helped me down from 
the train and handed me the portfolio, and I stood there and 
I said, 'Let her rip.' That's what I said: 'Let her rip'; and the 
two men looking at me like you are looking at me." 

"How looking at you?" 

"Yes. But you dont have to believe. And I told them to 
wait while I got the whistle " 

"Whistle?" 

"There was a store there, too. The store and the depot, 
and then the mountains and the green cold without any sun, 
and the dust kind of pale looking where the wagon was 
standing. Then we " 

"But the whistle," I said. 

"I bought it in the store. It was a tin one, with holes in 
it. I couldn't seem to get the hang of it. So I threw the 
portfolio into the wagon and I said, 'Let her rip.' That was 
what I said. One of them took the portfolio out of the wagon 



Black Music 813 

and gave it back to me and said, 'Say, doc, ain't this valuable?' 
and I took it and threw it back into the wagon and I said, 
'Let her rip.' 

"We all rode on the seat together, me in the middle. We 
sung. It was cold, and we went along the river, singing, and 
came to the mill and stopped. While one of them went inside 
the mill I began to take off my clothes " 

"Take off your clothes?" 

"Yes. My Sunday suit. Taking them off and throwing 
them right down in the dust, by gummy." 

"Wasn't it cold?" 

"Yes It was cold. Yes. When I took off my clothes I 
could feel the cold on me. Then the one came back from the 
mill with a jug and we drank out of the jug " 

"What was in the jug?" 

"I dont know. I dont remember. It wasn't whiskey. I 
could tell by the way it looked. It was clear like water." 

"Couldn't you tell by the smell?" 

"I dont smell, you see. I dont know what they call it. But 
ever since I was a child, I couldn't smell some things. They 
say that's why I have stayed down here for twenty-five 
years. 

"So we drank and I went to the bridge rail. And just as I 
jumped I could see myself in the water. And I knew that it 
had happened then. Because my body was a human man's 
body. But my face was the same face that had gone off 
inside my head back there on the train, the face that had 
horns and a beard. 

"When I got back into the wagon we drank again out of 
the jug and we sung, only after a while I put on my under- 
clothes and my pants like they wanted me to, and then we 
went on, singing. 

"When we came in sight of the house I got out of the 
wagon. 'You dont want to get out here,' they said. 'We are 



8 14 Beyond 

in the pasture where they keep that bull chained up.' But I 
got out of the wagon, with my Sunday coat and vest and the 
portfolio, and the tin flute." 

Ill 

HE CEASED. He looked at me, quite grave, quite quiet. 

"Yes," I said. "Yes. Then what?" 

He watched me. "I never asked you to believe nothing, did 
I? I will have to say that for you." His hand was inside his 
bosom. "Well, you had some pretty hard going, so far. But 
now I will take the strain off of you." 

From his bosom he drew out a canvas wallet. It was 
roughly sewn by a clumsy hand and soiled with much usage. 
He opened it. But before he drew out the contents he looked 
at me again. "Do you ever make allowances?" 

"Allowances?" 

"For folks. For what folks think they see. Because nothing 
ever looks the same to two different people. Never looks the 
same to one person, depending on which side of it he looks 
at it from." 

"Oh," I said. "Allowances. Yes. Yes." 

From the wallet he drew a folded sheet of newspaper. 
The page was yellow with age, the broken seams glued care- 
fully with strips of soiled cloth. He opened it carefully, 
gingerly, and turned it and laid it on the table before me. 
"Dont try to pick it up," he said. "It's kind of old now, and 
it's the only copy I have. Read it." 

I looked at it: the fading ink, the blurred page dated 
twenty-five years ago: 

MANIAC AT LARGE IN VIRGINIA 
MOUNTAINS 

PROMINENT NEW YORK SOCIETY WOMAN 
ATTACKED IN OWN GARDEN 



Black Music 815 

Mrs. Carleton Van Dyming Of New York And 

Newport Attacked By Half Nude Madman And 

Maddened Bull In Garden Of Her Summer Lodge. 

Maniac Escapes. Mrs. Van Dyming Prostrate 

It went on from there, with pictures and diagrams, to tell 
how Mrs. Van Dyming, who was expecting a man from the 
office of her New York architect, was called from the dinner 
table to meet, as she supposed, the architect's man. The story 
continued in Mrs. Van Dyming's own words: 

I went to the library, where I had directed that the 
architect's man be brought, but there was no one there. 
I was about to ring for the footman when it occurred 
to me to go to the front door, since it is a local custom 
among these country people to come to the front and 
refuse to advance further or to retreat until the master 
or the mistress of the house appears. I went to the door. 
There was no one there. 

I stepped out onto the porch. The light was on, but 
at first I could see no one. I started to re-enter the 
house but the footman had told me distinctly that the 
wagon had returned from the village, and I thought that 
the man had perhaps gone on to the edge of the lawn 
where he could see the theatre site, where the workmen 
had that day begun to prepare the ground by digging 
up the old grape vines. So I went in that direction. I had 
almost reached the end of the lawn when something 
caused me to turn. I saw, in relief between me and the 
lighted porch, a man bent over and hopping on one leg, 
who to my horror I realised to be in the act of removing 
his trousers. 

I screamed for my husband. When I did so, the man 
freed his other leg and turned and came toward me run- 
ning, clutching a knife (I could see the light from the 
porch gleaming on the long blade) in one hand, and a 
flat, square object in the other. I turned then and ran 
screaming toward the woods. 



816 Beyond 

I had lost all sense of direction. I simply ran for my 
life. I found that I was inside the old vineyard, among 
the grape vines, running directly away from the house. 
I could hear the man running behind me and suddenly 
I heard him begin to make a strange noise. It sounded 
like a child trying to blow upon a penny whistle, then 
I realised that it was the sound of his breath whistling 
past the knifeblade clinched between his teeth. 

Suddenly something overtook and passed me, making 
a tremendous uproar in the shrubbery. It rushed so 
near me that I could see its glaring eyes and the shape 
of a huge beast with horns, which I recognised a mo- 
ment later as Carleton's Mr. Van Dyming's prize 
Durham bull; an animal so dangerous that Mr. Dyming 
is forced to keep it locked up. It was now free and it 
rushed past and on ahead, cutting off my advance, while 
the madman with the knife cut off my retreat. I was at 
bay; I stopped with my back to a tree, screaming for 
help. 

"How did the bull get out?" I said. 

He was watching my face while I read, like I might have 
been a teacher grading his school paper. "When I was a boy, 
I used to take subscriptions to the Police Gazette, for pre- 
miums. One of the premiums was a little machine guaranteed 
to open any lock. I dont use it anymore, but I still carry it in 
my pocket, like a charm or something, I guess. Anyway, I 
had it that night." He looked down at the paper on the table. 
"I guess folks tell what they believe they saw. So you have 
to believe what they think they believe. But that paper dont 
tell how she kicked off her slippers (I nigh broke my neck 
over one of them) so she could run better, and how I could 
hear her going wump-wump-wump inside like a dray horse, 
and how when she would begin to slow up a little I would let 
out another toot on the whistle and off she would go again. 

"I couldn't even keep up with her, carrying that portfolio 



Black Music 817 

and trying to blow on that whistle too; seemed like I never 
would get the hang of it, somehow. But maybe that was 
because I had to start trying so quick, before I had time to 
kind of practice up, and running all the time too. So I threw 
the portfolio away and then I caught up with her where she 
was standing with her back against the tree, and that bull 
running round and round the tree, not bothering her, just 
running around the tree, making a right smart of fuss, and 
her leaning there whispering 'Carleton. Carleton' like she 
was afraid she would wake him up." 
The account continued: 

I stood against the tree, believing that each circle which 
the bull made, it would discover my presence. That was 
why I ceased to scream. Then the man came up where 
I could see him plainly for the first time. He stopped 
before me; for one both horrid and joyful moment I 
thought he was Mr. Van Dyming. "Carleton!" I said. 

He didn't answer. He was stooped over again; then I 
saw that he was engaged with the knife in his hand. 
"Carleton!" I cried. 

" 'Dang if I can get the hang of it, somehow,' he kind 
of muttered, busy with the murderous knife. 

"Carleton!" I cried. "Are you mad?" 

He looked up then. I saw that it was not my husband, 
that I was at the mercy of a madman, a maniac, and a 
maddened bull. I saw the man raise the knife to his lips 
and blow again upon it that fearful shriek. Then I 
fainted. 

IV 

AND THAT WAS ALL. The account merely went on to say how 
the madman had vanished, leaving no trace, and that Mrs. 
Van Dyming was under the care of her physician, with a 
special train waiting to transport her and her household, 



8i8 Beyond 

lock, stock, and barrel, back to New York; and that Mr. Van 
Dyming in a brief interview had informed the press that his 
plans about the improvement of the place had been definitely 
rescinded and that the place was now for sale. 

I folded the paper as carefully as he would have. "Oh," I 
said. "And so that's all." 

"Yes. I waked up about daylight the next morning, in the 
woods. I didn't know when I went to sleep nor where I was 
at first. I couldn't remember at first what I had done. But 
that aint strange. I guess a man couldn't lose a day out of his 
life and not know it. Do you think so?" 

"Yes," I said. "That's what I think too." 

"Because I know I aint as evil to God as I guess I look to 
a lot of folks. And I guess that demons and such and even the 
devil himself aint quite as evil to God as lots of folks that 
claim to know a right smart about His business would make 
you believe. Dont you think that's right?" The wallet lay on 
the table, open. But he did not at once return the newspaper 
to it. 

Then he quit looking at me; at once his face became diffi- 
dent, childlike again. He put his hand into the wallet; again 
he did not withdraw it at once. 

"That aint exactly all," he said, his hand inside the wallet, 
his eyes downcast, and his face: that mild, peaceful, non- 
descript face across which a mild moustache straggled. "I 
was a powerful reader, when I was a boy. Do you read 
much?" 

"Yes. A good deal." 

But he was not listening. "I would read about pirates and 
cowboys, and I would be the head pirate or cowboy me, a 
durn little tyke that never saw the ocean except at Coney 
Island or a tree except in Washington Square day in and out. 
But I read them, believing like every boy, that some day . . . 
that living wouldn't play a trick on him like getting him 
alive and then. . . . When I went home that morning to get 



Black Music 819 

ready to take the train, Martha says, * You're just as good as 
any of them Van Dymings, for all they get into the papers. 
If all the folks that deserved it got into the papers, Park 
Avenue wouldn't hold them, or even Brooklyn,' she says." 
He drew his hand from the wallet. This time it was only a 
clipping, one column wide, which he handed me, yellow and 
faded too, and not long: 

MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE 

FOUL PLAY SUSPECTED 

Wilfred Middleton, New York Architect, Disap- 
pears From Millionaire's Country House 

POSSE SEEKS BODY OF ARCHITECT BELIEVED SLAIN BY 
MADMAN IN VIRGINIA MOUNTAINS 

May Be Coupled With Mysterious Attack 
On Mrs. Van Dyming 

Mountain Neighborhood In State Of Terror 

, Va. April 8, Wilfred Middleton, 56, 

architect, of New York City, mysteriously disappeared 
sometime on April 6th, while en route to the country 
house of Mr. Carleton Van Dyming near here. He had 
in his possession some valuable drawings which were 
found this morning near the Van Dyming estate, thus 
furnishing the first clue. Chief of Police Elmer Harris 
has taken charge of the case, and is now awaiting the 
arrival of a squad of New York detectives, when he 
promises a speedy solution if it is in the power of skilled 
criminologists to do so. 

MOST BAFFLING IN ALL HIS EXPERIENCE 

"When I solve this disappearance," Chief Harris is 
quoted, "I will also solve the attack on Mrs. Van Dym- 
ing on the same date." 



82O Beyond 

Middleton leaves a wife, Mrs. Martha Middleton, 
St., Brooklyn. 

He was watching my face. "Only it's one mistake in it," 
he said. 

"Yes/' I said. "They got your name wrong." 

"I was wondering if you'd see that. But that's not the mis- 
take. . . ." He had in his hand a second clipping which he 
now extended. It was like the other two; yellow, faint. I 
looked at it, the fading, peaceful print through which, like a 
thin, rotting net, the old violence had somehow escaped, 
leaving less than the dead gesture fallen to quiet dust. "Read 
this one. Only that's not the mistake I was thinking about. 
But then, they couldn't have known at that time. . . ." 

I was reading, not listening to him. This was a reprinted 
letter, an 'agony column' letter: 

Neiv Orleans, La. 
April 10, .... 

To the Editor, New York Times 
New York, N. Y. 
Dear Sir 

In your issue of April 8, this year you got the name of 
the party wrong. The name is Midgleston not Middle- 
ton. Would thank you to correct this error in local and 
metropolitan columns as the press a weapon of good & 
evil into every American home. And a power of that 
'weight cannot afford mistakes even about people as 
good as any man or 'woman even if they dont get into 
the papers every day. 

Thanking you again) beg to remain 

A Friend 

"Oh," I said. "I see. You corrected it." 

"Yes. But that's not the mistake. I just did that for her. 



Black Music 821 

You know how women are. Like as not she would rather not 
see it in the papers at all than to see it spelled wrong/* 

"She?" 

"My wife. Martha. The mistake was, if she got them or 
not." 

"I dont Maybe you'd better tell me." 

"That's what I am doing. I got two of the first one, the 
one about the disappearance, but I waited until the letter 
come out. Then I put them both into a piece of paper with 
A Friend on it, and put them into a envelope and mailed 
them to her. But I dont know if she got them or not. That 
was the mistake." 

"The mistake?" 

"Yes. She moved. She moved to Park Avenue when the 
insurance was paid. I saw that in a paper after I come down 
here. It told about how Mrs. Martha Midgleston of Park 
Avenue was married to a young fellow he used to be asso- 
ciated with the Maison Payot on Fifth Avenue. It didn't say 
when she moved, so I dont know if she got them or not." 

"Oh," I said. He was putting the clippings carefully back 
into the canvas wallet. 

"Yes, sir. Women are like that. It dont cost a man much 
to humor them now and then. Because they deserve it; they 
have a hard time. But it wasn't me. I didn't mind how they 
spelled it. What's a name to a man that's done and been some- 
thing outside the lot and plan for mortal human man to do 
and be?" 



The Leg 



THE BOAT it was a yawl boat with a patched weathered 
sail made two reaches below us while I sat with the sculls 
poised, watching her over my shoulder, and George clung 
to the pile, spouting Milton at Everbe Corinthia. When it 
made the final tack I looked back at George. But he was 
now but well into Comus' second speech, his crooked face 
raised, and the afternoon bright on his close ruddy head. 

"Give way, George," I said. But he held us stationary at 
the pile, his glazed hat lifted, spouting his fine and cadenced 
folly as though the lock, the Thames, time and all, belonged 
to him, while Sabrina (or Hebe or Chloe or whatever name 
he happened to be calling Corinthia at the time) with her 
dairy-maid's complexion and her hair like mead poured in 
sunlight stood above us in one of her endless succession of 
neat print dresses, her hand on the lever and one eye on 
George and the other on the yawl, saying "Yes, milord" 
dutifully whenever George paused for breath. 

The yawl luffed and stood away; the helmsman shouted 
for the lock. 

"Let go, George," I said. But he clung to the pile in his 
fine and incongruous oblivion. Everbe Corinthia stood above 
us, her hand on the lever, bridling a little and beginning to 
reveal a certain concern, and looking from her to the yawl 
and back again I thought how much time she and I had 

823 



824 Beyond 

both spent thus since that day three years ago when, cow- 
eyed and bridling, she had opened the lock for us for the first 
time, with George holding us stationary while he apostro- 
phised her in the metaphor of Keats and Spenser. 

Again the yawl's crew shouted at us, the yawl aback and 
in stays. "Let go, you fool!" I said, digging the sculls. "Lock, 
Corinthia!" 

George looked at me. Corinthia was now watching the 
yawl with both eyes. "What, Davy?" George said. "Must 
even thou help Circe's droves into the sea? Pull, then, O 
Super-Gadarene! " 

And he shoved us off. I had not meant to pull away. And 
even if I had, I could still have counteracted the movement 
if Everbe Corinthia hadn't opened the lock. But open it she 
did, and looked once back to us and sat flat on the earth, 
crisp fresh dress and all. The skiff shot away under me; I 
had a fleeting picture of George still clinging with one arm 
around the pile, his knees drawn up to his chin and the hat in 
his lifted hand and of a long running shadow carrying the 
shadow of a boat-hook falling across the lock. Then I was 
too busy steering. I shot through the gates, carrying with me 
that picture of George, the glazed hat still gallantly aloft 
like the mastheaded pennant of a man-of-war, vanishing 
beneath the surface. Then I was floating quietly in slack 
water while the round eyes of two men stared quietly down 
at me from the yawl. 

"YerVe lost yer mate, sir," one of them said in a civil 
voice. Then they had drawn me alongside with a boat-hook 
and standing up in the skiff, I saw George. He was standing 
in the towpath now, and Simon, Everbe Corinthia's father, 
and another man he was the one with the boat-hook, 
whose shadow I had seen across the lock were there too. 
But I saw only George with his ugly crooked face and his 
round head now dark in the sunlight. One of the watermen 



The Leg 825 

was still talking. "Steady, sir. Lend 'im a 'and, Sam'l. There. 
'E'll do now. Give 'im a turn, seeing 'is mate. . . ." 

"You fool, you damned fool!" I said. George stooped be- 
side me, wringing his sopping flannels, while Simon and the 
second man Simon with his iron-gray face and his iron-gray 
whisker that made him look like nothing so much as an aged 
bull peering surlily and stupidly across a winter hedgerow, 
and the second man, younger, with a ruddy capable face, 
in a hard, boardlike, town-made suit watched us. Corinthia 
sat on the ground, weeping hopelessly and quietly. "You 
damned fool. Oh, you damned fool." 

"Oxford young gentlemen," Simon said in a harsh dis- 
gusted voice. "Oxford young gentlemen." 

"Eh, well," George said, "I daresay I haven't damaged 
your lock over a farthing's worth." He rose, and saw 
Corinthia. "What, Circe!" he said, "tears over the accom- 
plishment of your appointed destiny?" He went to her, 
trailing a thread of water across the packed earth, and took 
her arm. It moved willing enough, but she herself sat flat 
on the ground, looking up at him with streaming hopeless 
eyes. Her mouth was open a little and she sat in an attitude 
of patient despair, weeping tears of crystal purity. Simon 
watched them, the boat-hook he had taken it from the 
second man, who was now busy at the lock mechanism, and 
I knew that he was the brother who worked in London, of 
whom Corinthia had once told us clutched in his big 
knotty fist. The yawl was now in the lock, the two faces 
watching us across the parapet like two severed heads in a 
quiet row upon the footway. "Come, now," George said. 
"You'll soil your dress sitting there." 

"Up, lass," Simon said, in that harsh voice of his which at 
the same time was without ill-nature, as though harshness 
were merely the medium through which he spoke. Corinthia 



8 26 Beyond 

rose obediently, still weeping, and went on toward the neat 
little dove-cote of a house in which they lived. The sunlight 
was slanting level across it and upon George's ridiculous 
figure. He was watching me. 

"Well, Davy," he said, "if I didn't know better, I'd say 
from your expression that you are envying me." 

"Am I?" I said. "You fool. You ghastly lunatic." 

Simon had gone to the lock. The two quiet heads rose 
slowly, as though they were being thrust gradually upward 
from out the earth, and Simon now stooped with the boat- 
hook over the lock. He rose, with the limp anonymity of 
George's once gallant hat on the end of the boat-hook, and 
extended it. George took it as gravely. "Thanks," he said. 
He dug into his pocket and gave Simon a coin. 'Tor wear 
and tear on the boat-hook," he said. "And perhaps a bit of 
balm for your justifiable disappointment, eh, Simon?" 
Simon grunted and turned back to the lock. The brother 
was still watching us. "And I am obliged to you," George 
said. "Hope I'll never have to return the favor in kind." The 
brother said something, short and grave, in a slow pleasant 
voice. George looked at me again. "Well, Davy." 

"Come on. Let's go." 

"Right you are. Where's the skiff?" Then I was staring 
at him again, and for a moment he stared at me. Then he 
shouted, a long ringing laugh, while the two heads in the 
yawl watched us from beyond Simon's granite-like and 
contemptuous back. I could almost hear Simon thinking 
Oxford young gentlemen. "Davy, have you lost the skiff?" 

"She's tied up below a bit, sir," the civil voice in the yawl 
said. "The gentleman walked out of 'er like she were a keb, 
without looking back." 

The June afternoon slanted across my shoulder, full 
upon George's face. He would not take my jacket. "I'll pull 



The Leg 827 

down and keep warm," he said. The once-glazed hat lay 
between his feet. 

"Why don't you throw that thing out?" I said. He pulled 
steadily, looking at me. The sun was full in his eyes, striking 
the yellow flecks in them into fleeting, mica-like sparks. 
"That hat," I said. "What do you want with it?" 

"Oh; that. Cast away the symbol of my soul?" He un- 
shipped one scull and picked up the hat and turned and 
cocked it on the stem, where it hung with a kind of gallant 
and dissolute jauntiness. "The symbol of my soul rescued 
from the deep by " 

"Hauled out of a place it had no business being whatever, 
by a public servant who did not want his public charge 
cluttered up." 

"At least you admit the symbology," he said. "And that 
the empire rescued it. So it is worth something to the empire. 
Too much for me to throw it away. That which you have 
saved from death or disaster will be forever dear to you, 
Davy; you cannot ignore it. Besides, it will not let you. 
What is it you Americans say?" 

"We say, bunk. Why not use the river for a while? It's 
paid for." 

He looked at me. "Ah. That is ... Well, anyway, it's 
American, isn't it. That's something." 

But he got out into the current again. A barge was coming 
up, in tow. We got outside her and watched her pass, empty 
of any sign of life, with a solemn implacability like a huge 
barren catafalque, the broad-rumped horses, followed by a 
boy in a patched coat and carrying a peeled goad, plodding 
stolidly along the path. We dropped slowly astern. Over her 
freeboard a motionless face with a dead pipe in its teeth 
contemplated us with eyes empty of any thought. 

"If I could have chosen," George said, "I'd like to have 
been pulled out by that chap yonder. Can't you see him 



828 Beyond 

picking up a boat-hook without haste and fishing you out 
without even shifting the pipe?" 

"You should have chosen your place better, then. But it 
seems to me you're in no position to complain/' 

"But Simon showed annoyance. Not surprise nor con- 
cern: just annoyance. I don't like to be hauled back into 
life by an annoyed man with a boat-hook." 

"You could have said so at the time. Simon didn't have 
to save you. He could have shut the gates until he got 
another head of water, and flushed you right out of his 
bailiwick without touching you, and saved himself trouble 
and ingratitude. Besides Corinthia's tears." 

"Ay; tears. Corinthia will at least cherish a tenderness for 
me from now on." 

"Yes; but if you'd only not got out at all. Or having not 
got in at all. Falling into that filthy lock just to complete a 
gesture. I think " 

"Do not think, my good David. When I had the choice 
of holding on to the skiff and being haled safely and meekly 
away, or of giving the lie to the stupid small gods at the 
small price of being temporarily submerged in this " he 
let go one oar and dipped his hand in the water, then he 
flung it outward in dripping, burlesque magniloquence. "O 
Thames!" he said. "Thou mighty sewer of an empire!" 

"Steer the boat," I said. "I lived in America long enough to 
have learned something of England's pride." 

"And so you consider a bath in this filthy old sewer that 
has flushed this land since long before He who made it had 
any need to invent God ... a rock about which man and 
all his bawling clamor seethes away to sluttishness. . . ." 

We were twenty-one then; we talked like that, tramping 
about that peaceful land where in green petrification the old 
splendid bloody deeds, the spirits of the blundering coura- 
geous men, slumbered in every stone and tree. For that was 



The Leg 829 

1914, and in the parks bands played Valse Septembre, and 
girls and young men drifted in punts on the moonlit river 
and sang Mister Moon and There's a Bit of Heaven, and 
George and I sat in a window in Christ Church while the 
curtains whispered in the twilight, and talked of courage 
and honor and Napier and love and Ben Jonson and death. 
The next year was 1915, and the bands played God Save the 
King, and the rest of the young men and some not so 
young sang Mademoiselle of Armentieres in the mud, and 
George was dead. 

He had gone out in October, a subaltern in the regiment 
of which his people were hereditary colonels. Ten months 
later I saw him sitting with an orderly behind a ruined 
chimney on the edge of Givenchy. He had a telephone 
strapped to his ears and he was eating something which he 
waved at me as we ran past and ducked into the cellar which 
we sought. 

II 

I TOLD HIM to wait until they got done giving me the ether; 
there were so many of them moving back and forth that I 
was afraid someone would brush against him and find him 
there. "And then you'll have to go back," I said. 

"I'll be careful," George said. 

"Because you'll have to do something for me," I said. 
"You'll have to." 

"All right. I will. What is it?" 

"Wait until they go away, then I can tell you. You'll 
have to do it, because I can't. Promise you will." 

"All right. I promise." So we waited until they got done 
and had moved down to my leg. Then George came nearer. 
"What is it?" he said. 



830 Beyond 

"It's my leg/' 1 said. "I want you to be sure it's dead. 
They may cut it off in a hurry and forget about it." 

"All right. I'll see about it." 

"I couldn't have that, you know. That wouldn't do at 
all. They might bury it and it couldn't lie quiet. And then 
it would be lost and we couldn't find it to do anything." 

"All right. I'll watch." He looked at me. "Only I don't 
have to go back." 

"You don't? You don't have to go back at all?" 

"I'm out of it. You aren't out of it yet. You'll have to 
go back." 

"I'm not?" I said. . . . "Then it will be harder to find 
it than ever. So you see about it. ... And you don't have 
to go back. You're lucky, aren't you?" 

"Yes. I'm lucky. I always was lucky. Give the lie to the 
stupid small gods at the mere price of being temporarily 
submerged in " 

"There were tears," I said. "She sat flat on the earth 
to weep them." 

"Ay; tears," he said. "The flowing of all men's tears 
under the sky. Horror and scorn and hate and fear and 
indignation, and the world seething away to sluttishness 
while you look on." 

"No; she sat flat in a green afternoon and wept for the 
symbol of your soul." 

"Not for the symbol, but because the empire saved it, 
hoarded it. She wept for wisdom." 

"But there were tears. . . . And you'll see to it? You'll 
not go away?" 

"Ay," George said; "tears." 

In the hospital it was better. It was a long room full of 
constant movement, and I didn't have to be afraid all the 
time that they would find him and send him away, though 



The Leg 837 

now and then it did happen a sister or an orderly coming 
into the middle of our talk, with ubiquitous hands and 
cheerful aseptic voices: "Now, now. He's not going. Yes, 
yes; he'll come back. Lie still, now." 

So I would have to lie there, surrounding, enclosing that 
gaping sensation below my thigh where the nerve- and 
muscle-ends twitched and jerked, until he returned. 

"Can't you find it?" I said. "Have you looked good?" 

"Yes. I've looked everywhere. I went back out there 
and looked, and I looked here. It must be all right They 
must have killed it." 

"But they didn't. I told you they were going to forget 
it." 

"How do you know they forgot it?" 

"I know. I can feel it. It jeers at me. It's not dead." 

"But if it just jeers at you." 

"I know. But that won't do. Don't you see that won't do?" 

"All right. I'll look again." 

"You must. You must find it. I don't like this." 

So he looked again. He came back and sat down and he 
looked at me. His eyes were bright and intent. 

"It's nothing to feel bad about," I said. "You'll find it 
some day. It's all right; just a leg. It hasn't even another leg 
to walk with." Still he didn't say anything, just looking 
at me. "Where are you living now?" 

"Up there," he said. 

I looked at him for a while. "Oh," I said. "At Oxford?" 

"Yes." 

"Oh," I said "Why didn't you go home?" 

"I don't know." 

He still looked at me. "Is it nice there now? It must be. 
Are there still punts on the river? Do they still sing in the 
punts like they did that summer, the men and girls, I mean?" 
He looked at me, wide, intent, a little soberly. 



832 Beyond 

"You left me last night," he said. 

"Did I?" 

"You jumped into the skiff and pulled away. So I came 
back here." 

"Did I? Where was I going?" 

"I don't know. You hurried away, up-river. You could 
have told me, if you wanted to be alone. You didn't need 
to run." 

"I shan't again." We looked at one another. We spoke 
quietly now. "So you must find it now." 

"Yes. Can you tell what it is doing?" 

"I don't know. That's it." 

"Does it feel like it's doing something you don't want 
it to?" 

"I don't know. So you find it. You find it quick. Find it 
and fix it so it can get dead." 

But he couldn't find it. We talked about it quietly, be- 
tween silences, watching one another. "Can't you tell any- 
thing about where it is?" he said. I was sitting up now, 
practicing accustoming myself to the wood-and-leather one. 
The gap was still there, but we had now established a sort of 
sullen armistice. "Maybe that's what it was 'waiting for," he 
said. "Maybe now . . ." 

"Maybe so. I hope so. But they shouldn't have forgot to 
Have I run away any more since that night?" 

"I don't know." 

"You don't know?" He was watching me with his bright, 
intent, fading eyes. "George," I said. "Wait, George!" But 
he was gone. 

I didn't see him again for a long time. I was at the 
Observers' School it doesn't require two legs to operate a 
machine gun and a wireless key and to orient maps from the 
gunner's piano stool of an R.E. or an F.E. then, and I had 
almost finished the course. So my days were pretty well 



The Leg 833 

filled, what with work and with that certitude of the young 
which so arbitrarily distinguishes between verities and illu- 
sions, establishing with such assurance that line between 
truth and delirium which sages knit their brows over. And 
[ny nights were filled too, with the nerve- and muscle-ends 
chafed now by an immediate cause: the wood-and-leather 
leg. But the gap was still there, and sometimes at night, 
isolated by invisibility, it would become filled with the im- 
mensity of darkness and silence despite me. Then, on the 
poised brink of sleep, I would believe that he had found it 
at last and seen that it was dead, and that some day he would 
return and tell me about it. Then I had the dream. 

Suddenly I knew that I was about to come upon it. I 
could feel in the darkness the dark walls of the corridor and 
the invisible corner, and I knew that it was just around the 
corner. I could smell a rank, animal odor. It was an odor 
which I had never smelled before, but I knew it at once, 
blown suddenly down the corridor from the old fetid caves 
where experience began. I felt dread and disgust and deter- 
mination, as when you sense suddenly a snake beside a garden 
path. And then I was awake, rigid, sweating; the darkness 
flowed with a long rushing sigh. I lay with the fading odor 
in my nostrils while my sweat cooled, staring up into the 
darkness, not daring to close my eyes. I lay on my back, 
curled about the gaping hole like a doughnut, while the odor 
faded. At last it was gone, and George was looking at me. 

"What is it, Davy?" he said. "Can't you say what it is?" 

"It's nothing." I could taste sweat on my lips. "It isn't 
anything. I won't again. I swear I shan't any more." 

He was looking at me. "You said you had to come back to 
town. And then I saw you on the river. You saw me and hid, 
Davy. Pulled up under the bank, in the shadow. There was 
a girl with you." He watched me, his eyes bright and grave. 



834 Beyond 

"Was there a moon?" I said. 

"Yes. There was a moon." 

"Oh God, oh God," I said. "I won't again, George! You 
must find it. You must!" 

"Ah, Davy," he said. His face began to fade. 

"I won't! I won't again!" I said. "George! George!" 

A match flared; a face sprang out of the darkness above 
me. "Wake up," it said. I lay staring at it, sweating. The 
match burned down, the face fell back into darkness, from 
which the voice came bodiless: "All right now?" 

"Yes, thanks. Dreaming. Sorry I waked you." 

For the next few nights I didn't dare let go into sleep 
again. But I was young, my body was getting strong again 
and I was out of doors all day; one night sleep overtook me 
unawares, and I waked next morning to find that I had 
eluded it, whatever it was. I found a sort of peace. The days 
passed; I had learned the guns and the wireless and the maps, 
and most of all, to not observe what should not be observed. 
My thigh was almost reconciled to the new member, and, 
freed now of the outcast's doings, I could give all my time 
to seeking George. But I did not find him; somewhere in 
the mazy corridor where the mother of dreams dwells I had 
lost them both. 

So I did not remark him at first even when he stood beside 
me in the corridor just beyond the corner of which It waited. 
The sulphur reek was all about me; I felt horror and dread 
and something unspeakable: delight. I believe I felt what 
women in labor feel. And then George was there, looking 
steadily down at me. He had always sat beside my head, 
so we could talk, but now he stood beyond the foot of the 
bed, looking down at me and I knew that this was farewell. 

"Don't go, George!" I said. "I shan't again. I shan't any 
more, George!" But his steady, grave gaze faded slowly,.. 



The Leg 835 

implacable, sorrowful, but without reproach. "Go, then!" 
I said. My teeth felt dry against my lip like sandpaper. "Go, 
then!" 

And that was the last of it. He never came back, nor the 
dream. I knew it would not, as a sick man who wakes with 
his body spent and peaceful and weak knows that the illness 
will not return. I knew it was gone; I knew that when I 
realized that I thought of it only with pity. Poor devil, I 
would think. Poor devil. 

But it took George with it. Sometimes, when dark and 
isolation had robbed me of myself, I would think that per- 
haps in killing it he had lost his own life: the dead dying 
in order to slay the dead. I sought him now and then in the 
corridors of sleep, but without success; I spent a week with 
his people in Devon, in a rambling house where his crooked 
ugly face and his round ruddy head and his belief that 
Marlowe was a better lyric poet than Shakespeare and 
Thomas Campion than either, and that breath was not a 
bauble given a man for his own pleasuring, eluded me behind 
every stick and stone. But I never saw him again. 

Ill 

THE PADRE had driven up from Poperinghe in the dark, in 
the side car of a motorcycle. He sat beyond the table, talk- 
ing of Jotham Rust, Everbe Corinthia's brother and Simon's 
son, whom I had seen three times in my life. Yesterday I 
saw Jotham for the third and last time, arraigned before 
a court martial for desertion: the scarecrow of that 
once sturdy figure with its ruddy, capable face, who had 
pulled George out of the lock with a boat-hook that after- 
noon three years ago, charged now for his life, offering 
no extenuation nor explanation, expecting and asking no 
clemency* 



836 Beyond 

"He does not want clemency," the padre said. The padre 
was a fine, honest man, incumbent of a modest living in the 
Midlands somewhere, who had brought the kind and honest 
stupidity of his convictions into the last place on earth where 
there was room for them. "He does not want to live." His 
face was musing and dejected, shocked and bewildered. 
"There comes a time in the life of every man when the 
world turns its dark side to him and every man's shadow is 
his mortal enemy. Then he must turn to God, or perish. 
Yet he ... I cannot seem ..." His eyes held that burly 
bewilderment of oxen; above his stock his shaven chin de- 
jected, but not vanquished yet. "And you say you know of 
no reason why he should have attacked you?" 

"I never saw the man but twice before," I said. "One time 
was night before last, the other was . . . two three years 
ago, when I passed through his father's lock in a skiff while 
I was at Oxford. He was there when his sister let us through. 
And if you hadn't told me his sister's name, I wouldn't have 
remembered him then." 

He brooded. "The father is dead, too." 

"What? Dead? Old Simon dead?" 

"Yes. He died shortly after the the other. Rust says he 
left his father after the sister's funeral, talking with the 
sexton in Abingdon churchyard, and a week later he was 
notified in London that his father was dead. He says the 
sexton told him his father had been giving directions about 
his own funeral. The sexton said that every day Simon 
would come up to see him about it, made all the arrange- 
ments, and that the sexton joked him a little about it, because 
he was such a hale old chap, thinking that he was just off 
balance for the time with the freshness of his grief. And 
then, a week later, he was dead." 

"Old Simon dead," I said. "Corinthia, then Simon, and 



The Leg 837 

now Jotham." The candle flame stood steady and unwaver- 
ing on the table. 

"Was that her name?" he said. "Everbe Corinthia?" He 
sat in the lone chair, puzzlement, bewilderment in the very 
shape of his shadow on the wall behind him. The light fell 
on one side of his face, the major's crown on that shoulder 
glinting dully. I rose from the cot, the harness of the leg 
creaking with explosive loudness, and leaned over his shoul- 
der and took a cigarette from my magneto case tobacco-box, 
and fumbled a match in my single hand. He glanced up. 

"Permit me," he said. He took the box and struck a match. 
"You're fortunate to have escaped with just that." He indi- 
cated my sling. 

"Yes, sir. If it hadn't been for my leg, I'd have got the 
knife in my ribs instead of my arm." 

"Your leg?" 

"I keep it propped on a chair beside the bed, so I can 
reach it easily. He stumbled over it and waked me. Other- 
wise he'd have stuck me like a pig." 

"Oh," he said. He dropped the match and brooded again 
with his stubborn bewilderment. "And yet, his is not the 
face of an assassin in the dark. There is a forthrightness in it, 
a a what shall I say? a sense of social responsibility, in- 
tegrity, that . . . And you say that you I beg your pardon; 
I do not doubt your word; it is only that Yet the girl is 
indubitably dead; it was he who discovered her and was with 
her until she died and saw her buried. He heard the man 
laugh once, in the dark." 

"But you cannot slash a stranger's arm simply because 
you heard a laugh in the dark, sir. The poor devil is crazy 
with his own misfortunes." 

"Perhaps so," the padre said. "He told me that he has 
other proof, something incontrovertible; what, he would not 
tell me." 



838 Beyond 

"Then let him produce it. If I were in his place now . . ." 

He brooded, his hands clasped on the table. "There is a 
justice in the natural course of events. . . . My dear sir, are 
you accusing Providence of a horrible and meaningless prac- 
tical joke? No, no; to him who has sinned, that sin will come 
home to him. Otherwise . . . God is at least a gentleman. 
Forgive me: I am not You understand how this comes 
home to me, in this unfortunate time when we already have 
so much to reproach ourselves with. We are responsible for 
this." He touched the small metal cross on his tunic, then 
he swept his arm in a circular gesture that shaped in the 
quiet room between us the still and sinister darkness in which 
the fine and resounding words men mouthed so glibly were 
the vampire's teeth with which the vampire fed. "The voice 
of God waking His servants from the sloth into which they 
have sunk. . . ." 

"What, padre?" I said. "Is the damn thing making a dis- 
senter of you too?" 

He mused again, his face heavy in the candle light. "That 
the face of a willful shedder of blood, of an assassin in the 
dark? No, no; you cannot tell me that." 

I didn't try. I didn't tell him either my belief that only 
necessity, the need for expedition and silence, had reduced 
Jotham to employing a knife, an instrument of any kind; 
that what he wanted was my throat under his hands. 

He had gone home on his leave, to that neat little dove- 
cote beside the lock, and at once he found something 
strained in its atmosphere and out of tune. That was last 
summer, about the time I was completing my course at the 
Observers' School. 

Simon appeared to be oblivious of the undercurrent, but 
Jotham had not been home long before he discovered that 
every evening about dusk Corinthia quitted the house for an 
hour or so, and something in her manner, or maybe in the 



The Leg 839 

taut atmosphere of the house itself, caused him to question 
her. She was evasive, blazed suddenly out at him in anger 
which was completely unlike her at all, then became passive 
and docile. Then he realized that the passiveness was secre- 
tive, the docility dissimulation; one evening he surprised her 
slipping away. He drove her back to the house, where she 
took refuge in her room and locked the door, and from a 
window he thought he caught a glimpse of the man disap- 
pearing beyond a field. He pursued, but found no one. For 
an hour after dusk he lay in a nearby coppice, watching the 
house, then he returned. Corinthia's door was still locked 
and old Simon filled the house with his peaceful snoring. 

Later something waked him. He sat up in bed, then sprang 
to the floor and went to the window. There was a moon 
and by its light he saw something white flitting along the 
towpath. He pursued and overtook Corinthia, who turned 
like a vicious small animal at the edge of the coppice where 
he had lain in hiding. Beyond the towpath a punt lay at the 
bank. It was empty. He grasped Corinthia's arm. She raged 
at him; it could not have been very pretty. Then she col- 
lapsed as suddenly and from the tangled darkness of the 
coppice behind them a man's laugh came, a jeering sound 
that echoed once across the moonlit river and ceased. 
Corinthia now crouched on the ground, watching him, her 
face like a mask in the moonlight. He rushed into the cop- 
pice and beat it thoroughly, finding nothing. When he 
emerged the punt was gone. He ran down to the water, 
looking this way and that. While he stood there the laugh 
came again, from the shadows beneath the other shore. 

He returned to Corinthia. She sat as he had left her, her 
loosened hair about her face, looking out across the river. 
He spoke to her, but she did not reply. He lifted her to her 
feet. She came docilely and they returned to the cottage. 
He tried to talk to her again, but she moved stonily beside 



840 Beyond 

him, her loosened hair about her cold face. He saw her to 
her room and locked the door himself and took the key 
back to bed with him. Simon had not awakened. The next 
morning she was gone, the door still locked. 

He told Simon then and all that day they sought her, 
assisted by the neighbors. Neither of them wished to notify 
the police, but at dusk that day a constable appeared with 
his notebook, and they dragged the lock, without finding 
anything. The next morning, just after dawn, Jotham found 
her lying in the towpath before the door. She was uncon- 
scious, but showed no physical injury. They brought her 
into the house and applied their spartan, homely remedies, 
and after a time she revived, screaming. She screamed all 
that day until sunset. She lay on her back screaming, her 
eyes wide open and perfectly empty, until her voice left 
her and her screaming was only a ghost of screaming, mak- 
ing no sound. At sunset she died. 

He had now been absent from his battalion for a hundred 
and twelve days. God knows how he did it; he must have 
lived like a beast, hidden, eating when he could, lurking in 
the shadow with every man's hand against him, as he sought 
through the entire B.E.F. for a man whose laugh he had 
heard one time, knowing that the one thing he could surely 
count on finding would be his own death, and to be foiled 
on the verge of success by an artificial leg propped on a 
chair in the dark. 

How much later it was I don't know. The candle was 
lighted again, but the man who had awakened me was bend- 
ing over the cot, between me and the light. But despite the 
light, it was a little too much like that night before last; I 
came out of sleep upstanding this time, with my automatic. 
"As you were," I said. "You'll not " Then he moved back 
and 1 recognized the padre. He stood beside the table, the 
light falling on one side of his face and chest. I sat up and 



The Leg 841 

put the pistol down. "What is it, padre? Do they want me 
again?" 

"He wants nothing," the padre said. "Man cannot injure 
him further now." He stood there, a portly figure that 
should have been pacing benignantly in a shovel hat in green 
lanes between summer fields. Then he thrust his hand into 
his tunic and produced a flat object and laid it on the table. 
"I found this among Jotham Rust's effects which he gave me 
to destroy, an hour ago," he said. He looked at me, then he 
turned and went to the door, and turned again and looked 
at me. 

"Is he I thought it was to be at dawn." 

"Yes," he said. "I must hurry back." He was either look- 
ing at me or not. The flame stood steady above the candle. 
Then he opened the door. "May God have mercy on your 
soul," he said, and went out. 

I sat in the covers and heard him blunder on in the dark- 
ness, then I heard the motorcycle splutter into life and die 
away. I swung my foot to the floor and rose, holding on to 
the chair on which the artificial leg rested. It was chilly; it 
was as though I could feel the toes even of the absent leg 
curling away from the floor, so I braced my hip on the chair 
and reached the flat object from the table and returned to 
bed and drew the blanket about my shoulders. My wrist 
watch said three o'clock. 

It was a photograph, a cheap thing such as itinerant pho 
tographers turn out at fairs. It was dated at Abingdon in 
June of the summer just past. At that time I was lying in 
the hospital talking to George, and I sat quite still in the 
blankets, looking at the photograph, because it was my own 
face that looked back at me. It had a quality that was not 
mine: a quality vicious and outrageous and unappalled, and 
beneath it was written in a bold sprawling hand like that of 
a child: "To Everbe Corinthia" followed by an unprintable 



842 Beyond 

phrase, yet it was my own face, and I sat holding the picture 
quietly in my hand while the candle flame stood high and 
steady above the wick and on the wall my huddled shadow 
held the motionless photograph. In slow and gradual dimin- 
ishment of cold tears the candle appeared to sink, as though 
burying itself in its own grief. But even before this came 
about, it began to pale and fade until only the tranquil husk 
of the small flame stood unwinded as a feather above the 
wax, leaving upon the wall the motionless husk of my 
shadow. Then I saw that the window was gray, and that was 
all. It would be dawn at Pop too, but it must have been some 
time, and the padre must have got back in time. 

I told him to find it and kill it. The dawn was cold; on 
these mornings the butt of the leg felt as though it were 
made of ice. I told him to. I told him. 



Mistral 



i 

IT WAS THE LAST of the Milanese brandy. I drank, and passed 
the bottle to Don, who lifted the flask until the liquor 
slanted yellowly in the narrow slot in the leather jacket, 
and while he held it so the soldier came up the path, his 
tunic open at the throat, pushing the bicycle. He was a 
young man, with a bold lean face. He gave us a surly good 
day and looked at the flask a moment as he passed. We 
watched him disappear beyond the crest, mounting the bi- 
cycle as he went out of sight. 

Don took a mouthful, then he poured the rest out. Ic 
splattered on the parched earth, pocking it for a fading mo- 
ment. He shook the flask to the ultimate drop. "Salut," he 
said, returning the flask. "Thanks, O gods. My Lord, if I 
thought I'd have to go to bed with any more of that in my 
stomach." 

"It's too bad, the way you have to drink it," I said. "Just 
have to drink it." I stowed the flask away and we went on, 
crossing the crest. The path began to descend, still in 
shadow. The air was vivid, filled with sun which held a 
quality beyond that of mere light and heat, and a sourceless 
goat bell somewhere beyond the next turn of the path, dis- 
tant and unimpeded. 

843 



844 Beyond 

"I hate to see you lugging the stuff along day after day," 
Don said. "That's the reason I do. You couldn't drink it, 
and you wouldn't throw it away." 

"Throw it away? It cost ten lire. What did I buy it for?" 

"God knows," Don said. Against the sun-filled valley the 
trees were like the bars of a grate, the path a gap in the bars, 
the valley blue and sunny. The goat bell was somewhere 
ahead. A fainter path turned off at right angles, steeper than 
the broad one which we were following. "He went that 
way," Don said. 

"Who did?" I said. Don was pointing to the faint mark 
of bicycle tires where they had turned into the fainter path. 

"See." 

"This one must not have been steep enough for him," I 
said. 

"He must have been in a hurry." 

"He sure was, after he made that turn." 

"Maybe there's a haystack at the bottom." 

"Or he could run on across the valley and up the other 
mountain and then run back down that one and up this one 
again until his momentum gave out." 

"Or until he starved to death," Don said. 

"That's right," I said. "Did you ever hear of a man starv- 
ing to death on a bicycle?" 

"No," Don said. "Did you?" 

"No," I said. We descended. The path turned, and then 
we came upon the goat bell. It was on a laden mule cropping 
with delicate tinkling jerks at the pathside near a stone 
shrine. Beside the shrine sat a man in corduroy and a woman 
in a bright shawl, a covered basket beside her. They watched 
us as we approached. 

"Good day, signor," Don said. "Is it far?" 

"Good day, signori," the woman said. The man looked 
at us. He had blue eyes with dissolving irises, as if they had 



Mistral 845 

been soaked in water for a long time. The woman touched 
his arm, then she made swift play with her fingers before 
his face. He said, in a dry metallic voice like a cicada's: 

"Good day, signori." 

"He doesn't hear any more," the woman said. "No, it is 
not far. From yonder you will see the roofs." 

"Good," Don said. "We are fatigued. Might one rest here, 
signora?" 

"Rest, signori," the woman said. We slipped our packs 
and sat down. The sun slanted upon the shrine, upon the 
serene, weathered figure in the niche and upon two bunches 
of dried mountain asters lying there. The woman was mak- 
ing play with her fingers before the man's face. Her other 
hand in repose upon the basket beside her was gnarled and 
rough. Motionless, it had that rigid quality of unaccustomed 
idleness, not restful so much as quite spent, dead. It looked 
like an artificial hand attached to the edge of the shawl, as 
if she had donned it with the shawl for conventional com- 
plement. The other hand, the one with which she talked to 
the man, was swift and supple as a prestidigitator's. 

The man looked at us. "You walk, signori," he said in his 
light, cadenceless voice. 

"Si," we said. Don took out the cigarettes. The man lifted 
his hand in a slight, deprecatory gesture. Don insisted. The 
man bowed formally, sitting, and fumbled at the pack. The 
woman took the cigarette from the pack and put it into his 
hand. He bowed again as he accepted a light. "From 
Milano," Don said. "It is far." 

"It is far," the woman said. Her fingers rippled briefly. 
"He has been there," she said. 

"I was there, signori," the man said. He held the cigarette 
carefully between thumb and forefinger. "One takes care to 
escape the carriages." 

"Yes." Don said. "Those without horses." 



846 Beyond 

"Without horses," the woman said. "There are many. 
Even here in the mountains we hear of it." 

"Many," Don said. "Always whoosh. Whoosh. Whoosh." 

"Si," the woman said. "Even here I have seen it." Her 
hand rippled in the sunlight. The man looked at us quietly, 
smoking. "It was not like that when he was there, you see," 
she said. 

"I am there long time ago, signori," he said. "It is far." 
He spoke in the same tone she had used, the same tone of 
grave and courteous explanation. 

"It is far," Don said. We smoked. The mule cropped with 
delicate, jerking tinkles of the bell. "But we can rest yon- 
der," Don said, extending his hand toward the valley swim- 
ming blue and sunny beyond the precipice where the path 
turned. "A bowl of soup, wine, a bed?" 

The woman watched us across that serene and topless 
rampart of the deaf, the cigarette smoking close between 
thumb and finger. The woman's hand flickered before his 
face. "Si," he said; "si. With the priest: why not? The priest 
will take them in." He said something else, too swift for 
me. The woman removed the checked cloth which covered 
the basket, and took out a wineskin. Don and I bowed and 
drank in turn, the man returning the bows. 

"Is it far to the priest's?" Don said. 

The woman's hand flickered with unbelievable rapidity. 
Her other hand, lying upon the basket, might have belonged 
to another body. "Let them wait for him there, then," the 
man said. He looked at us. "There is a funeral today. You 
will find him at the church. Drink, signori." 

We drank in decorous turn, the three of us. The wine 
was harsh and sharp and potent. The mule cropped, its small 
bell tinkling, its shadow long in the slanting sun, across the 
path. "Who is it that's dead, signora?" Don said. 

"He was to have married the priest's ward after this 



Mistral 847 

harvest," the woman said; "the banns were read and all. A 
rich man, and not old. But two days ago, he died." 

The man watched her lips. "Tchk. He owned land, a 
house: so do I. It is nothing." 

"He was rich," the woman said. "Because he was both 
young and fortunate, my man is jealous of him." 

"But not now," the man said. "Eh, signori?" 

"To live is good," Don said. He said, e hello. 

"It is good," the man said; he also said, bello. 

"He was to have married the priest's niece, you say," Don 
said. 

"She is no kin to him," the woman said. "The priest just 
raised her. She was six when he took her, without people, 
kin, of any sort. The mother was workhouse-bred. She lived 
in a hut on the mountain yonder. It was not known who the 
father was, although the priest tried for a long while to 
persuade one of them to marry her for the child's " 

"One of which?" Don said. 

"One of those who might have been the father, signor. 
But it was never known which one it was, until in 1916. 
He was a young man, a laborer; the next day we learned 
that the mother had gone too, to the war also, for she was 
never seen again by those who knew her until one of our 
boys came home after Caporetto, where the father had been 
killed, and told how the mother had been seen in a house in 
Milano that was not a good house. So the priest went and 
got the child. She was six then, brown and lean as a lizard. 
She was hidden on the mountain when the priest got there; 
the house was empty. The priest pursued her among the 
rocks and captured her like a beast: she was half naked and 
without shoes and it winter time." 

"So the priest kept her," Don said. "Stout fellow." 

"She had no people, no roof, no crust to call hers save 
what the priest gave her. But you would not know it. Al- 



848 Beyond 

ways with a red or a green dress for Sundays and feast days, 
even at fourteen and fifteen, when a girl should be learning 
modesty and industry, to be a crown to her husband. The 
priest had told that she would be for the church, and we 
wondered when he would make her put such away for the 
greater glory of God. But at fourteen and fifteen she was 
already the brightest and loudest and most tireless in the 
dances, and the young men already beginning to look after 
her, even after it had been arranged oetween her and him 
who is dead yonder." 

"The priest changed his mind about the church and got 
her a husband instead," Don said. 

"He found for her the best catch in this parish, signor. 
Young, and rich, with a new suit each year from the Milano 
tailor. Then the harvest came, and what do you think, 
signori? she would not marry him." 

"I thought you said the wedding was not to be until after 
this harvest," Don said. "You mean, the wedding had already 
been put off a year before this harvest?" 

"It had been put off for three years. It was made three 
years ago, to be after that harvest. It was made in the same 
week that Giulio Farinzale was called to the army. I remem- 
ber how we were all surprised, because none had thought his 
number would come up so soon, even though he was a 
bachelor and without ties save an uncle and aunt." 

"Is that so?" Don said. "Governments surprise everybody 
now and then. How did he get out of it?" 

"He did not get out of it." 

"Oh. That's why the wedding was put off, was it?" 

The woman looked at Don for a minute. "Giulio was not 
the fiance's name." 

"Oh, I see. Who was Giulio?" 

The woman did not answer at once. She sat with her 
head bent a little. The man had been watching their lips 



Mistral 849 

when they spoke. "Go on," he said; "tell them. They are 
men: they can listen to women's tittle-tattle with the ears 
alone. They cackle, signori; give them a breathing spell, and 
they cackle like geese, Drink." 

"He was the one she used to meet by the river in the 
evenings; he was younger still: that was why we were sur- 
prised that his number should be called so soon. Before we 
had thought she was old enough for such, she was meeting 
him. And hiding it from the priest as skillfully as any grown 
woman could " For an instant the man's washed eyes 
glinted at us, quizzical. 

"She was meeting this Giulio all the while she was engaged 
to the other one?" Don said. 

"No. The engagement was later. We had net thought her 
old enough for such yet. When we heard about it, we said 
how an anonymous child is like a letter in the post office: 
the envelope might look like any other envelope, but when 
you open it . , . And the holy can be fooled by sin as quickly 
as you or I, signori. Quicker, because they are holy." 

"Did he ever find it out?" Don said. 

"Yes. It was not long after. She would slip out of the 
house at dusk; she was seen, and the priest was seen, hidden 
in the garden to watch the house: a servant of the holy 
God forced to play watchdog for the world to see. It was 
not good, signori." 

"And then the young man got called suddenly to the 
army," Don said. "Is that right?" 

"It was quite sudden; we were all surprised. Then we 
thought that it was the hand of God, and that now the 
priest would send her to the convent. Then in that same 
week we learned that it was arranged between her and him 
who is dead yonder, to be after the harvest, and we said it 
was the hand of God that would confer upon her a husband 
beyond her deserts in order to protect His servant. For the 



850 Beyond 

holy are susceptible to evil, even as you and I, signori; they 
too are helpless before sin without God's aid." 

"Tchk, tchk," the man said. "It was nothing. The priest 
looked at her, too," he said. "For a man is a man, even under 
a cassock. Eh, signori?" 

"You would say so," the woman said. "You without 
grace." 

"And the priest looked at her, too," Don said. 

"It was his trial, his punishment, for having been too 
lenient with her. And the punishment was not over: the 
harvest came, and we heard that the wedding was put off 
for a year: what do you think of that, signori? that a girl, 
come from what she had come from, to be given the chance 
which the priest had given her to save her from herself, 
from her blood . . . We heard how they quarreled, she and 
the priest, of how she defied him, slipping out of the house 
after dark and going to the dances where her fiance might 
see her or hear of it at any time." 

"Was the priest still looking at her?" Don said. 

"It was his punishment, his expiation. So the next harvest 
came, and it was put off again, to be after the next harvest; 
the banns were not even begun. She defied him to that extent, 
signori, she, a pauper, and we all saying, 'When will her 
fiance hear of it, learn that she is no good, when there are 
daughters of good houses who had learned modesty and 
seemliness?' " 

"You have unmarried daughters, signora?" Don said. 

"Si. One. Two have I married, one still in my house. A 
good girl, signori, if I do say it." 

"Tchk, woman," the man said. 

"That is readily believed," Don said. "So the young man 
had gone to the army, and the wedding was put off for an- 
other year." 

"And another year, signori. And then a third year. Then 



Mistral 851 

it was to be after this harvest; within a month it was to have 
been. The banns were read; the priest read them himself in 
the church, the third time last Sunday, with him there in his 
new Milano suit and she beside him in the shawl he had given 
her it cost a hundred lire and a golden chain, for he gave 
her gifts suitable for a queen rather than for one who could 
not name her own father, and we believed that at last the 
priest had served his expiation out and that the evil had been 
lifted from his house at last, since the soldier's time would 
also be up this fall. And now the fiance is dead." 

"Was he very sick?" Don said. 

"It was very sudden. A hale man; one you would have said 
would live a long time. One day he was well, the second day 
he was quite sick. The third day he was dead. Perhaps you 
can hear the bell, with listening, since you have young ears." 
The opposite mountains were in shadow. Between, the valley 
lay invisible still. In the sunny silence the mule's bell tinkled 
in random jerks. "For it is in God's hands," the woman said. 
"Who will say that his life is his own?" 

"Who will say?" Don said. He did not look at me. He said 
in English: "Give me a cigarette." 

"You've got them." 

"No, I haven't." 

"Yes, you have. In your pants pocket." 

He took out the cigarettes. He continued to speak in Eng- 
lish. "And he died suddenly. And he got engaged suddenly. 
And at the same time, Giulio got drafted suddenly. It would 
have surprised you. Everything was sudden except some- 
body's eagerness for the wedding to be. There didn't seem to 
be any hurry about that, did there?" 

"I don't know. I no spika." 

"In fact, they seemed to stop being sudden altogether until 
about time for Giulio to come home again. Then it began to 
be sudden again. And so I think I'll ask if priests serve on the 



852 Beyond 

draft boards in Italy." The old man watched his lips, his 
washed gaze grave and intent. "And if this path is the main 
path down the mountain, and that bicycle turned off into that 
narrow one back there, what do you think of that, signori?" 

"I think it was fine. Only a little sharp to the throat. Maybe 
we can get something down there to take away the taste." 

The man was watching our lips; the woman's head was 
bent again; her stiff hand smoothed the checked cover upon 
the basket. "You will find him at the church, signori," the 
man said. 

"Yes," Don said. "At the church." 

We drank again. The man accepted another cigarette with 
that formal and unfailing politeness, conferring upon the 
action something finely ceremonious yet not incongruous. 
The woman put the wineskin back into the basket and cov- 
ered it again. We rose and took up our packs. 

"You talk swiftly with the hand, signora," Don said. 

"He reads the lips too. The other we made lying in the 
bed in the dark. The old do not sleep so much. The old lie in 
bed and talk. It is not like that with you yet." 

"It is so. You have made the padrone many children, 
signora?" 

"Si. Seven. But we are old now. We lie in bed and talk." 



II 

BEFORE WE REACHED the village the bell had begun to toll. 
From the gaunt steeple of the church the measured notes 
seemed to blow free as from a winter branch, along the wind. 
The wind began as soon as the sun went down. We watched 
the sun touch the mountains, whereupon the sky lost its pale, 
vivid blueness and took on a faintly greenish cast, like glass, 
against which the recent crest, where the shrine faded with 
the dried handful of flowers beneath the fading crucifix, 
stood black and sharp. Then the wind began: a steady mov- 



Mistral 853 

ing wall of air full of invisible particles of something. Before 
it the branches leaned without a quiver, as before the pres- 
sure of an invisible hand, and in it our blood began to cool at 
once, even before we had stopped walking where the path 
became a cobbled street. 

The bell still tolled. "Funny hour for a funeral," I said. 
"You'd think he would have kept a long time at this altitude. 
No need to be hurried into the ground like this." 

"He got in with a fast gang," Don said. The church was 
invisible from here, shut off by a wall. We stood before a 
gate, looking into a court enclosed by three walls and roofed 
by a vine on a raftered trellis. It contained a wooden table 
and two backless benches. We stood at the gate, looking into 
the court, when Don said. "So this is Uncle's house." 

"Uncle?" 

"He was without ties save an uncle and aunt," Don said. 
"Yonder, by the door." The door was at the bottom of the 
court. There was a fire beyond it, and beside the door a bi- 
cycle leaned against the wall. "The bicycle, unconscious," 
Don said. 

"Is that a bicycle?" 

"Sure. That's a bicycle." It was an old-style machine, with 
high back-swept handlebars like gazelle horns. We looked 
at it. 

"The other path is the back entrance," I said. "The family 
entrance." We heard the bell, looking into the court. 

"Maybe the wind doesn't blow in there," Don said. "Be- 
sides, there's no hurry. We couldn't see him anyway, until 
it's over." 

"These places are hotels sometimes." We entered. Then 
we saw the soldier. When we approached the table he came 
to the door and stood against the firelight, looking at us. He 
wore a white shirt now. But we could tell him by his legs. 
Then he went back into the house. 

"So Malbrouckis home," Don said. 



854 Beyond 

"Maybe he came back for the funeral." We listened to the 
bell. The twilight was thicker inside. Overhead the leaves 
streamed rigid on the wind, stippled black upon the livid 
translucent sky. The strokes of the bell sounded as though 
they too were leaves flattening away upon an inviolable vine 
in the wind. 

"How did he know there was going to be one?" Don said. 

"Maybe the priest wrote him a letter." 

"Maybe so," Don said. The firelight looked good beyond 
the door. Then a woman stood in it, looking at us. "Good 
day, padrona," Don said. "Might one have a mouthful of 
wine here?" She looked at us, motionless against the firelight. 
She was tall. She stood tall and motionless against the fire- 
light, not touching the door. The bell tolled. "She used to be 
a soldier too," Don said. "She was a sergeant." 

"Maybe she was the colonel who ordered Malbrouck to 
go home." 

"No. He wasn't moving fast enough when he passed us up 
yonder, for it to have been her." Then the woman spoke: 

"It is so, signori. Rest yourselves." She went back into the 
house. We slipped our packs and sat down. We looked at the 
bicycle. 

"Cavalry," Don said. "Wonder why he came the back 
way." 

"All right," I said. 

"All right what?" 

"All right. Wonder." 

"Is that a joke?" 

"Sure. That's a joke. It's because we are old. We lie in the 
draft. That's a joke too." 

"Tell me something that's not a joke." 

"All right." 

"Did you hear the same thing I think I heard up there?" 

"No spika. I love Italy. I love Mussolini." The woman 



Mistral 855 

brought the wine. She set it on the table and was turning 
away. "Ask her," I said. "Why don't you?" 

"All right. I will. You have military in the house, 
signora?" 

The woman looked at him. "It is nothing, signor. It is my 
nephew returned." 

"Finished, signora?" 

"Finished, signor." 

"Accept our felicitations. He has doubtless many friends 
who will rejoice at his return." She was thin, not old, with 
cold eyes, looking down at Don with brusque attention, wait- 
ing. "You have a funeral in the village today." She said noth- 
ing at all. She just stood there, waiting for Don to get done 
talking. "He will be mourned," Don said. 

"Let us hope so," she said. She made to go on; Don asked 
her about lodgings. There were none, she answered with 
immediate finality. Then we realized that the bell had ceased. 
We could hear the steady whisper of the wind in the leaves 
overhead. 

"We were told that the priest " Don said. 

"Yes? You were told that the priest." 

"That we might perhaps find lodgings there." 

"Then you would do well to see the priest, signor." She 
returned to the house. She strode with the long stride of a 
man into the firelight, and disappeared. When I looked at 
Don, he looked away and reached for the wine. 

"Why didn't you ask her some more?" I said. "Why did 
you quit so soon?" 

"She was in a hurry. Her nephew is just home from the 
army, she said. He came in this afternoon. She wants to be 
with him, since he is without ties." 

"Maybe she's afraid he'll be drafted." 

"Is that a joke too?" 

"It wouldn't be to me." He filled the glasses. "Call her 



856 Beyond 

back. Tell her you heard that her nephew is to marry the 
priest's ward. Tell her we want to give them a present. A 
stomach pump. That's not a joke, either." 

"I know it's not." He filled his glass carefully. "Which 
had you rather do, or stay at the priest's tonight?" 

"Salut," I said. 

"Salut." We drank. The leaves made a dry, wild, con- 
tinuous sound. "Wish it was still summer." 

"It would be pretty cold tonight, even in a barn." 

"Yes. Glad we don't have to sleep in a barn tonight." 

"It wouldn't be so bad, after we got the hay warm and got 
to sleep." 

"We don't have to, though. We can get a good sleep and 
get an early start in the morning." 

I filled the glasses. "I wonder how far it is to the next 
village." 

"Too far." We drank. "I wish it were summer. Don't 
you?" 

"Yes." I emptied the bottle into the glasses. "Have some 
wine." We raised our glasses. We looked at one another. The 
particles in the wind seemed to drive through the clothing, 
through the flesh, against the bones, penetrating the brick 
and plaster of the walls to reach us. "Salut." 

"We said that before," Don said. 

"All right. Salut, then." 

"Salut." 

We were young: Don, twenty-three; I, twenty-two. And 
age is so much a part of, so inextricable from, the place where 
you were born or bred. So that away from home, some dis- 
tance away space or time or experience away you are al- 
ways both older and eternally younger than yourself, at the 
same time. 

We stood in the black wind and watched the funeral 
priest, coffin, a meager clump of mourners pass, their gar- 



Mistral 857 

ments, and particularly the priest's rusty black, ballooning 
ahead of them, giving an illusion of unseemly haste, as though 
they were outstripping themselves across the harsh green twi- 
light (the air was like having to drink iced lemonade in the 
winter time) and into the church. "We'll be out of the wind 
too," Don said. 

"There's an hour of light yet." 

"Sure; we might even reach the crest by dark." He looked 
at me. Then I looked away. The red tiles of the roofs were 
black, too, now. "We'll be out of the wind." Then the bell 
began to toll again. "We don't know anything. There's prob- 
ably not anything. Anyway, we don't know it. We don't have 
to know it. Let's get out of the wind." It was one of those 
stark, square, stone churches, built by those harsh iron counts 
and bishops of Lombardy. It was built old; time had not even 
mellowed it, could not ever mellow it, not all of time could 
have. They might have built the mountains too and invented 
the twilight in a dungeon underground, in the black ground. 
And beside the door the bicycle leaned. We looked at it 
quietly as we entered the church and we said quietly, at the 
same time: 

"Beaver." 

"He's one of the pallbearers," Don said. "That's why he 
came home." The bell tolled. We passed through the chancel 
and stopped at the back of the church. We were out of the 
wind now, save for the chill eddies of it that licked in at our 
backs. We could hear it outside, ripping the slow strokes of 
the bell half -born out of the belfry, so that by the time we 
heard them, they seemed to have come back as echoes from a 
far distance. The nave, groined upward into the gloom, 
dwarfed the meager clot of bowed figures. Beyond them, 
above the steady candles, the Host rose, soaring into sootlike 
shadows like festooned cobwebs, with a quality sorrowful 
and triumphant, like wings. There was no organ, no music, 



858 Beyond 

no human sound at all at first. They just knelt there among 
the dwarfing gloom and the cold, serene, faint light of the 
candles. They might have all been dead. "It'll be dark long 
before they can get done," Don whispered. 

"Maybe it's because of the harvest," I whispered. "They 
probably have to work all day. The living can't wait on the 
dead, you know." 

"But, if he was as rich as they told us he was, it seems 
like . . ." 

"Who buries the rich? Do the rich do it, or do the poor 
doit?" 

"The poor do it," Don whispered. Then the priest was 
there, above the bowed heads. We had not seen him at first, 
but now he was there, shapeless, blurring out of the shadows 
below the candles, his face like a smudge, a thumb print, 
upon the gloom where the Host rose in a series of dissolving 
gleams like a waterfall; his voice filled the church, slow, 
steady, like wings beating against the cold stone, upon the 
resonance of wind in which the windless candles stood as 
though painted. "And so he looked at her," Don whispered. 
"He had to sit across the table from her, say, and watch her. 
Watch her eating the food that made her change from noth- 
ing and become everything, knowing she had no food of her 
own and that it was his food that was doing it, and not for 
him changing. You know: girls: they are not anything, then 
they are everything. You watch them become everything 
before your eyes. No, not eyes: it's the same in the dark. You 
know it before they do; it's not their becoming everything 
that you dread: it's their finding it out after you have long 
known it: you die too many times. And that's not right. Not 
fair. I hope I'll never have a daughter." 

"That's incest," I whispered. 

"I never said it wasn't. I said it was like fire. Like watching 
the fire lean up and away rushing." 



Mistral 859 

"You must either watch a fire, or burn up in it. Or not be 
there at all. Which would you choose?" 

"I don't know. If it was a girl, I'd rather burn up in it." 

"Than to not be there at all, even?" 

"Yes." Because we were young. And the young seem to 
be impervious to anything except trifles. We can invest tri- 
fles with a tragic profundity, which is the world. Because, 
after all, there's nothing particularly profound about reality. 
Because when you reach reality, along about forty or fifty or 
sixty, you find it to be only six feet deep and eighteen feet 
square. 

Then it was over. Outside again, the wind blew steadily 
down from the black hills, hollowing out the green glass bowl 
of the sky. We watched them file out of the church and carry 
the coffin into the churchyard. Four of them carried iron 
lanterns and in the dusk they clotted quietly antic about the 
grave while the wind leaned steadily upon them and upon 
the lantern flames, and blew fine dust into the grave as 
though all nature were quick to hide it. Then they were done. 
The lanterns bobbed into motion, approaching, and we 
watched the priest. He crossed the churchyard toward the 
presbytery at a scuttling gait, blown along in his gusty black. 
The soldier was in mufti now. He came out of the throng, 
striding also with that long-limbed thrust like his aunt. He 
looked briefly at us with his bold surly face and got on the 
bike and rode away. "He was one of the pallbearers," Don 
said. "And what do you think of that, signori?" 

"No spika," I said. "I love Italy. I love Mussolini." 

"You said that before." 

"All right. Salut, then." 

Don looked at me. His face was quite sober. "Salut," he 
said. Then he looked toward the presbytery, hitching his 
pack forward. The door of the presbytery was closed. 

"Don," I said. He stopped, looking at me. The mountains 



860 Beyond 

had lost all perspective; they appeared to lean in toward us. 
It was like being at the bottom of a dead volcano filled with 
that lost savage green wind dead in its own motion and full 
of its own driving and unsleeping dust. We looked at one 
another. 

"All right, damn it," Don said. "You say what to do next, 
then." We looked at one another. After a while the wind 
would sound like sleep, maybe. If you were warm and close 
between walls, maybe. 

"All right," I said. 

"Why can't you mean, all right? Damn it, we've got to do 
something. This is October; it's not summer. And we don't 
know anything. We haven't heard anything. We don't speak 
Italian. We love Italy." 

"I said, all right," I said. The presbytery was of stone too, 
bleak in a rank garden. We were halfway up the flagged 
path when a casement beneath the eaves opened and some- 
body in white looked down at us and closed the shutter again. 
It was done all in one movement. Again we said together, 
quietly: 

"Beaver." But it was too dark to see much, and the case- 
ment was closed again. It had not taken ten seconds. 

"Only we should have said, Beaverette," Don said. 

"That's right. Is that a joke?" 

"Yes. That's a joke." A wooden-faced peasant woman 
opened the door. She held a candle, the flame leaning inward 
from the wind. The hall behind her was dark; a stale, chill 
smell came out of it. She stood there, the harsh planes of her 
face in sharp relief, her eyes two caverns in which two little 
flames glittered, looking at us. 

"Go on," I said. "Tell her something." 

"We were told that his reverence, signora," Don said, 
"that we might " The candle leaned and recovered. She 
raised the other hand and sheltered it, blocking the door with 



Mistral 86 1 

her body. "We are travelers, en promenade; we were told 
supper and a bed . . ." 

When we followed her down the hall we carried with us 
in our ears the long rush of the recent wind, like in a sea shell. 
There was no light save the candle which she carried. So 
that, behind her, we walked in gloom out of which the ser- 
rated shadow of a stair on one wall reared dimly into the 
passing candle and dissolved in mounting serrations, carrying 
the eye with it up the wall where there was not any light. 
"Pretty soon it'll be too dark to see anything from that win- 
dow," Don said. 

"Maybe she won't have to, by then." 

"Maybe so." The woman opened a door; we entered a 
lighted room. It contained a table on which sat a candle in an 
iron candlestick, a carafe of wine, a long loaf, a metal box 
with a slotted cover. The table was set for two. We slung our 
packs into the corner and watched her set another place and 
fetch another chair from the hall. But that made only three 
places and we watched her take up her candle and go out by 
a second door. Then Don looked at me. "Maybe we'll see 
her, after all." 

"How do you know he doesn't eat?" 

"When? Don't you know where he'll be?" I looked at him. 
"He'll have to stay out there in the garden." 

"How do you know?" 

"The soldier was at the church. He must have seen him. 
Must have heard " We looked at the door, but it was the 
woman. She had three bowls. "Soup, signora?" Don said. 

"Si. Soup." 

"Good. We have come far." She set the bowls on the 
table. "From Milano." She looked briefly over her shoulder 
at Don. 

"You'd better have stayed there," she said. And she went 
out. Don and I looked at one another. My ears were still full 
of wind. 



862 Beyond 

"So he is in the garden/' Don said. 

"How do you know he is?" 

After a while Don quit looking at me. "I don't know." 

"No. You don't know. And I don't know. We don't want 
to know. Do we?" 

"No. No spika." 

"I mean, sure enough." 

"That's what I mean," Don said. The whisper in our ears 
seemed to fill the room with wind. Then we realized that it 
was the wind that we heard, the wind itself we heard, even 
though the single window was shuttered tight. It was as 
though the quiet room were isolated on the ultimate peak of 
space, hollowed murmurous out of chaos and the long dark 
fury of time. It seemed strange that the candle flame should 
stand so steady above the wick. 

Ill 

So WE DID NOT see him until we were in the house. Until then 
he had been only a shabby shapeless figure, on the small size, 
scuttling through the blowing dusk at the head of the funeral, 
and a voice. It was as though neither of them was any part 
of the other: the figure in blowing black, and the voice beat- 
ing up the still air above the candles, detached and dispas- 
sionate, tireless and spent and forlorn. 

There was something precipitate about the way he en- 
tered, like a diver taking a full breath in the act of diving. He 
did not look at us and he was already speaking, greeting us 
and excusing his tardiness in one breath, in a low rapid voice. 
Still, without having ceased to speak or having looked at us, 
he motioned toward the other chairs and seated himself and 
bowed his head over his plate and began a Latin grace with- 
out a break in his voice; again his voice seemed to rush slow 
and effortless just above the sound of the wind, like in the 



Mistral 863 

church. It went on for some time; so that after a while I 
raised my head. Don was watching me, his eyebrows arched 
a little; we looked toward the priest and saw his hands writh- 
ing slowly on either side of his plate. Then the woman spoke 
a sharp word behind me; I had not heard her enter: a gaunt 
woman, not tall, with a pale, mahogany-colored face that 
might have been any age between twenty-five and sixty. The 
priest stopped. He looked at us for the first time, out of weak, 
rushing eyes. They were brown and irisless, like those of an 
old dog. Looking at us, it was as though he had driven them 
up with whips and held them so, in cringing and rushing 
desperation. "I forget," he said. "There come times " 
Again the woman snapped a word at him, setting a tureen on 
the table, the shadow of her arm falling across his face and 
remaining there: but we had already looked away. The long 
wind rushed past the stone eaves; the candle flame stood 
steady as a sharpened pencil in the still sound of the wind. 
We heard her filling the bowls, yet she still stood for a time, 
the priest's face in the shadow of her arm; she seemed to be 
holding us all so until the moment whatever it was had 
passed. She went out. Don and I began to eat. We did not 
look toward him. When he spoke at last, it was in a tone of 
level, polite uninterest. "You have come far, signori?" 

"From Milano," we both said. 

"Before that, Firenze," Don said. The priest's head was 
bent over his bowl. He ate rapidly. Without looking up he 
gestured toward the loaf. I pushed it along to him. He broke 
the end off and went on eating. 

"Ah," he said. "Firenze. That is a city. More what do 
you say? spirituel than our Milano." He ate hurriedly, 
without finesse. His robe was turned back over a flannel 
undershirt, the sleeves were. His spoon clattered; at once the 
woman entered with a platter of broccoli. She removed the 
bowls. He reached his hand. She handed him the carafe and 



864 Beyond 

he filled the glasses without looking up and lifted his with a 
brief phrase. But he had only feinted to drink; he was watch- 
ing my face when I looked at him. I looked away; I heard 
him clattering at the dish and Don was looking at me too. 
Then the woman's shoulder came between us and the priest. 
"There come times " he said. He clattered at the dish. 
When the woman spoke to him in that shrill, rapid patois he 
thrust his chair back and for an instant we saw his driven eyes 
across her arm. "There come times " he said, raising his 
voice. Then she drowned the rest of it, getting completely 
between us and Don and I stopped looking and heard them 
leave the room. The steps ceased. Then we could hear only 
the wind. 

"It was the burial service," Don said. Don was a Catholic. 
"That grace was." 

"Yes," I said. "I didn't know that." 

"Yes. It was the burial service. He got mixed up." 

"Sure," I said. "That's it. What do we do now?" Our packs 
lay in the corner. Two packs can look as human, as utterly 
human and spent, as two shoes. We were watching the door 
when the woman entered. But she wasn't going to stop. She 
didn't look at us. 

"What shall we do now, signora?" Don said. 

"Eat." She did not stop. Then we could hear the wind 
again. 

"Have some wine," Don said. He raised the carafe, then 
he held it poised above my glass, and we listened. The voice 
was beyond the wall, maybe two walls, in a sustained rush of 
indistinguishable words. He was not talking to anyone there: 
you could tell that. In whatever place he was, he was alone: 
you could tell that. Or maybe it was the wind. Maybe in any 
natural exaggerated situation wind, rain, drouth man is 
always alone. It went on for longer than a minute while Don 
held the carafe above my glass. Then he poured. We began 



Mistral 865 

to eat. The voice was muffled and sustained, like a machine 
might have been making it. 

"If it were just summer," I said. 

"Have some wine." He poured. We held our poised glasses. 
It sounded just like a machine. You could tell that he was 
alone. Anybody could have. "That's the trouble," Don said. 
"Because there's not anybody there. Not anybody in the 
house." 

"The woman." 

"So are we." He looked at me. 

"Oh," I said. 

"Sure. What better chance could she have wanted, have 
asked for? He was in here at least five minutes. And he just 
back from the army after three years. The first day he is 
home, and then afternoon and then twilight and then dark- 
ness. You saw her there. Didn't you see her up there?" 

"He locked the door. You know he locked it." 

"This house belongs to God: you can't have a lock on it. 
You didn't know that." 

"That's right. I forgot you're a Catholic. You know things. 
You know a lot, don't you?" 

"No. I don't know anything. I no spika too. I love Italy 
too." The woman entered. She didn't bring anything this 
time. She came to the table and stood there, her gaunt face 
above the candle, looking down at us. 

"Look, then," she said. "Will you go away?" 

"Go away?" Don said. "Not stop here tonight?" She 
looked down at us, her hand lying on the table. "Where 
could we stop? Who would take us in? One cannot sleep on 
the mountain in October, signora." 

"Yes," she said. She was not looking at us now. Through 
the walls we listened to the voice and to the wind. 

"What is this, anyway?" Don said. "What goes on here, 
signora?" 

She looked at him gravely, speculatively, as if he were a 



866 Beyond 

child. "You are seeing the hand of God, signorino," she said. 
"Pray God that you are too young to remember it." Then 
she was gone. And after a while the voice ceased, cut short 
off like a thread. And then there was just the wind. 

"As soon as we get out of the wind, it won't be so bad," 
I said. 

"Have some wine." Don raised the carafe. It was less than 
half full. 

"We'd better not drink any more." 

"No." He filled the glasses. We drank. Then we stopped. 
It began again, abruptly, in full stride, as though silence were 
the thread this time. We drank. "We might as well finish the 
broccoli, too." 

"I don't want any more." 

"Have some wine then." 

"You've already had more than I have." 

"All right." He filled my glass. I drank it. "Now, have 



some wine." 



"We ought not to drink it all." 

He raised the carafe. "Two more glasses left. No use in 
leaving that." 

"There aren't two glasses left." 

"Bet you a lira." 

"All right. But let me pour." 

"All right." He gave me the carafe. I filled my glass and 
reached toward his. "Listen," he said. For about a minute 
now the voice had been rising and falling, like a wheel run- 
ning down. This time it didn't rise again; there was only the 
long sound of the wind left. "Pour it," Don said. I poured. 
The wine mounted three quarters. It began to dribble away. 
"Tilt it up." I did so. A single drop hung for a moment, then 
fell into the glass. "Owe you a lira," Don said. 

The coins rang loud in the slotted box. When he took it 
up from the table and shook it, it made no sound. He took 



Mistral 867 

the coins from his pocket and dropped them through the slot. 
He shook it again. "Doesn't sound like quite enough. Cough 
up." I dropped some coins through the slot; he shook the box 
again. "Sounds all right now." He looked at me across the 
table, his empty glass bottom-up before him. "How about a 
little wine?" 

When we rose I took my pack from the corner. It was on 
the bottom. I had to tumble Don's aside. He watched me. 
"What are you going to do with that?" he said. "Take it out 
for a walk? " 

"I don't know," I said. Past the cold invisible eaves the 
long wind steadily sighed. Upon the candle the flame stood 
like the balanced feather on the long white nose of a clown. 

The hall was dark; there was no sound in it. There was 
nothing in it save the cold smell of sunless plaster and silence 
and the smell of living, of where people have, and will have, 
lived. We carried our packs low and close against our legs 
like we had stolen them. We went on to the door and opened 
it, entering the black wind again. It had scoured the sky clear 
and clean, hollowing it out of the last of light, the last of 
twilight. We were halfway to the gate when we saw him. 
He was walking swiftly back and forth beside the wall. His 
head was bare, his robes ballooning about him. When he saw 
us he did not stop. He didn't hurry, either. He just turned 
and went back beside the wall and turned again, walking fast. 
We waited at the gate. We thanked him for the food, he 
motionless in his whipping robes, his head bent and averted a 
little, as a deaf man listens. When Don knelt at his feet he 
started back as though Don had offered to strike him. Then 
I felt like a Catholic too and I knelt too and he made the sign 
hurriedly above us, upon the black-and-green wind and dusk, 
like he would have made it in water. When we passed out 
the jrate and looked back we could still see, against the sky 



868 Beyond 

and the blank and lightless house, his head rushing back and 
forth like a midget running along the top of the wall. 

IV 

THE CAFE was on the lee side of the street; we sat out of the 
wind. But we could see gusts and eddies of trash swirl along 
the gutter, and an occasional tongue of it licked chill across 
our legs, and we could hear the steady rushing of it in the 
high twilight among the roofs. On the curb two musicians 
from the hills a fiddler and a piper sat, playing a wild and 
skirling tune. Now and then they stopped to drink, then 
they resumed the same tune. It was without beginning and 
seemingly without end, the wild unmusic of it swirling along 
the wind with a quality at once martial and sad. The waiter 
fetched us brandy and coffee, his dirty apron streaming sud- 
denly and revealing beneath it a second one of green baize 
and rigid as oxidized copper. At the other table five young 
men sat, drinking and ringing separately small coins onto the 
waiter's tray, which he appeared to count by the timbre of 
the concussion before tilting them into his waistcoat in one 
motion, and a long-flanked young peasant woman stopped to 
hear the music, a child riding her hip. She set the child down 
and it scuttled under the table where the young men sat, 
they withdrawing their legs to permit it, while the woman 
was not looking. She was looking at the musicians, her face 
round and tranquil, her mouth open a little. 

"Let's have some wine," Don said. 

"All right," I said. "I like Italy," I said. We had another 
brandy. The woman was trying to cajole the child from 
under the table. One of the young men extracted it and gave 
it back to her. People stopped in the street to hear the music, 
and a high two-wheeled cart, full of fagots and drawn by a 
woman and a diminutive mule, passed without stopping, and 



Mistral 869 

then the girl came up the street in her white dress, and I 
didn't feel like a Catholic any more. She was all in white, 
coatless, walking slender and supple. I didn't feel like any- 
thing any more, watching her white dress swift in the twi- 
light, carrying her somewhere or she carrying it somewhere: 
anyway, it was going too, moving when she moved and be- 
cause she moved, losing her when she would be lost because 
it moved when she moved and went with her to the instant 
of loss. I remember how, when I learned about Thaw and 
White and Evelyn Nesbitt, how I cried. I cried because 
Evelyn, who was a word, was beautiful and lost or I would 
never have heard of her. Because she had to be lost for me to 
find her and I had to find her to lose her. And when I learned 
that she was old enough to have a grown daughter or son or 
something, I cried, because I had lost myself then and I could 
never again be hurt by loss. So I watched the white dress, 
thinking, She'll be as near me in a second as she'll ever be and 
then she'll go on away in her white dress forevermore, in the 
twilight forevermore. Then I felt Don watching her too and 
then we watched the soldier spring down from the bike. 
They came together and stopped and for a while they stood 
there in the street, among the people, facing one another but 
not touching. Maybe they were not even talking, and it 
didn't matter how long; it didn't matter about time. Then 
Don was nudging me. 

"The other table," he said. The five young men had all 
turned; their heads were together, now and then a hand, an 
arm, secret, gesticulant, their faces all one way. They leaned 
back, without turning their faces, and the waiter stood, tray 
on hip a squat, sardonic figure older than Grandfather Lust 
himself looking also. At last they turned and went on up the 
street together in the direction from which he had come, he 
leading the bicycle. Just before they passed from sight they 
stopped and faced one another again among the people, the 



870 Beyond 

heads, without touching at all. Then they went on. "Let's 
have some wine," Don said. 

The waiter set the brandies on the table, his apron like a 
momentary board on the wind. "You have military in town," 
Don said. 

"That's right," the waiter said. "One." 

"Well, one is enough," Don said. The waiter looked up 
the street. But they were gone now, with her white dress 
shaping her stride, her girl-white, not for us. 

"Too many, some say." He looked much more like a monk 
than the priest did, with his long thin nose and his bald head. 
He looked like a devastated hawk. "You're stopping at the 
priest's, eh? " 

"You have no hotel," Don said. 

The waiter made change from his waistcoat, ringing the 
coins deliberately upon the table. "What for? Who would 
stop here, without he walked? Nobody walks except you 
English." 

"We're Americans." 

"Well." He raised his shoulders faintly. "That's your af- 
fair." He was not looking at us exactly; not at Don, that is. 
"Did you try Cavalcanti's?" 

"A wineshop at the edge of town? The soldier's aunt, isn't 
it? Yes. But she said " 

The waiter was watching him now. "She didn't send you 
to the priest?" 

"No." 

"Ah," the waiter said. His apron streamed suddenly. He 
fought it down and scoured the top of the table with it. 
"Americans, eh?" 

"Yes," Don said. "Why wouldn't she tell us where to go?" 

The waiter scoured the table. "That Cavalcanti. She's not 
of this parish." 

"Not?" 



Mistral 87 1 

"Not since three years. The padrone belongs to that one 
beyond the mountain." He named a village which we had 
passed in the forenoon. 

"I see," Don said. "They aren't natives." 

"Oh, they were born here. Until three years ago they be- 
longed to this parish." 

"But three years ago they changed." 

"They changed." He found another spot on the table. He 
removed it with the apron. Then he examined the apron. 
"There are changes and changes; some further than others." 

"The padrona changed further than across the mountain, 
did she?" 

"The padrona belongs to no parish at all." He looked at us. 
"Like me." 

"Like you?" 

"Did you try to talk to her about the church?" He 
watched Don. "Stop there tomorrow and mention the church 
to her." 

"And that happened three years ago," Don said. "That 
was a year of changes for them." 

"You said it. The nephew to the army, the padrone across 
the mountain, the padrona . . . All in one week, too. Stop 
there tomorrow and ask her." 

"What do they think here about all these changes?" 

"What changes?" 

"These recent changes." 

"How recent?" He looked at Don. "There's no law against 
changes." 

"No. Not when they're done like the law says. Sometimes 
the law has a look, just to see if they were changed right. 
Isn't that so?" 

The waiter had assumed an attitude of sloven negligence, 
save his eyes, his long face. It was too big for him, his face 
was. "How did you know he was a policeman?" 



872 Beyond 

"Policeman?" 

"You said soldier; I knew you meant policeman and just 
didn't speak the language good. But you'll pick it up with 
practice." He looked at Don. "So you made him too, did 
you? Came in here this afternoon; said he was a shoe-drum- 
mer. But I made him." 

"Here already," Don said. "I wonder why he didn't stop 
the . . . before they . . ." 

"How do you know he's a policeman?" I said. 

The waiter looked at me. "I don't care whether he is or 
not, buddy. Which had you rather do? think a man is a cop 
and find he's not, or think he's not a cop, and find he is?" 

"You're right," Don said. "So that's what they say here." 

"They say plenty. Always have and always will. Like any 
other town." 

"What do you say?" Don said. 

"I don't say. You don't either." 

"No." 

"It's no skin off of my back. If they want to drink, I serve 
them; if they want to talk, I listen. That keeps me as busy as 
I want to be all day." 

"You're right," Don said. "It didn't happen to you." 

The waiter looked up the street; it was almost full dark. 
He appeared not to have heard. "Who sent for the cop, I 
wonder?" Don said. 

"When a man's got jack, he'll find plenty of folks to help 
him make trouble for folks even after he's dead," the waiter 
said. Then he looked at us. "I?" he said. He leaned; he slapped 
his chest lightly. He looked quickly at the other table, then 
he leaned down and hissed: "I am atheist, like in America," 
and stood back and looked at us. "In America, all are atheists. 
We know." He stood there in his dirty apron, with his long, 
weary, dissolute face while we rose in turn and shook hands 
with him gravely, the five young men turning to look. He 



Mistral 873 

flipped his other hand at us, low against his flank. "Rest, rest," 
he hissed. He looked over his shoulder at the young men. 
"Sit down," he whispered. He jerked his head toward the 
doorway behind us, where the padrona sat behind the bar. 
"I've got to eat, see?" He scuttled away and returned with 
two more brandies, carrying them with his former sloven, 
precarious skill, as if he had passed no word with us save to 
take the order. "It's on me," he said. "Put it down." 

"Now, what?" Don said. The music had ceased; from 
across the street we watched the fiddler, fiddle under arm, 
standing before the table where the young men sat, his other 
hand and the clutched hat gesticulant. The young woman 
was already going up the street, the child riding her hip again, 
its head nodding to a somnolent rhythm, like a man on an 
elephant. "Now, what?" 

"I don't care." 

"Oh, come on." 

"No." 

"There's no detective here. He never saw one. He 
wouldn't know a detective. There aren't any detectives in 
Italy: can you imagine an official Italian in plain clothes for 
a uniform?" 

"No." 

"She'll show us where the bed is, and in the morning 
early" 

"No. You can, if you want to. But I'm not." 

He looked at me. Then he swung his pack onto his shoul- 
der. "Good night. See you in the morning. At the cafe 
yonder." 

"All right." He did not look back. Then he turned the 
corner. I stood in the wind. Anyway, I had the coat. It was 
a shooting coat of Harris tweed; we had paid eleven guineas 
for it, wearing it day about while the other wore the sweater. 



874 Beyond 

In the Tyrol last summer Don held us up three days while 
he was trying to make the girl who sold beer at the inn. He 
wore the coat for three successive days, swapping me a week, 
to be paid on demand. On the third day the girl's sweetheart 
came back. He was as big as a silo, with a green feather in his 
hat. We watched him pick her over the bar with one hand. 
I believe she could have done Don the same way: all yellow 
and pink and white she was, like a big orchard. Or like look- 
ing out across a snowfield in the early sunlight. She could 
have done it at almost any hour for three days too, by just 
reaching out her hand. Don gained four pounds while we 
were there. 



V 

THEN I CAME into the full sweep of the wind. The houses 
were all dark, yet there was still a little light low on the 
ground, as though the wind held it there flattened to the 
earth and it had been unable to rise and escape. The walls 
ceased at the beginning of the bridge; the river looked like 
steel. I thought I had already come into the full sweep of the 
wind, but I hadn't. The bridge was of stone, balustrades and 
roadway and all, and I squatted beneath the lee of the 
weather rail. I could hear the wind above and beneath, com- 
ing down the river in a long sweeping hum, like through 
wires. I squatted there, waiting. It wasn't very long. 

He didn't see me at first, until I rose. "Did you think to 
have the flask filled?" he said. 

"I forgot. I intended to. Damn the luck. Let's go back " 

"I got a bottle. Which way now?" 

"I don't care. Out of the wind. I don't care." We crossed 
the bridge. Our feet made no sound on the stones, because 
the wind blew it away. It flattened the water, scoured it; it 
looked just like steel. It had a sheen, holding light like the 



Mistral 875 

land between it and the wind, reflecting enough to see by. 
But it swept all sound away before it was made almost, so 
that when we reached the other side and entered the cut 
where the road began to mount, it was several moments be- 
fore we could hear anything except our ears; then we heard. 
It was a smothered whimpering sound that seemed to come 
out of the air overhead. We stopped. "It's a child," Don said. 
"A baby." 

"No: an animal. An animal of some sort." We looked at 
one another in the pale darkness, listening. 

"It's up there, anyway," Don said. We climbed up out of 
the cut. There was a low stone wall enclosing a field, the field 
a little luminous yet, dissolving into the darkness. Just this 
side of the darkness, about a hundred yards away, a copse 
stood black, blobbed shapeless on the gloom. The wind 
rushed up across the field and we leaned on the wall, listen- 
ing into it, looking at the copse. But the sound was nearer 
than that, and after a moment we saw the priest. He was 
lying on his face just inside the wall, his robes over his head, 
the black blur of his gown moving faintly and steadily, either 
because of the wind or because he was moving under them, 
And whatever the sound meant that he was making, it was 
not meant to be listened to, for his voice ceased when we 
made a noise. But he didn't look up, and the faint shuddering 
of his gown didn't stop. Shuddering, writhing, twisting from 
side to side something. Then Don touched me. We went 
on beside the wall. "Get down easier here," he said quietly. 
The pale road rose gradually beneath us as the hill flattened. 
The copse was a black blob. "Only I didn't see the bicycle." 

"Then go back to Cavalcanti's," I said. "Where in hell do 
you expect to see it?" 

"They would have hidden it. I forgot. Of course they 
would have hidden it." 

"Go on," I said. "Don't talk so goddamn much." 



876 Beyond 

"Unless they thought he would be busy with us and 
wouldn't " he ceased and stopped. I jolted into him and 
then I saw it too, the handlebars rising from beyond the wall 
like the horns of a hidden antelope. Against the gloom the 
blob of the copse seemed to pulse and fade, as though it 
breathed, lived. For we were young, and night, darkness, is 
terrible to young people, even icy driving blackness like this. 
Young people should be so constituted that with sunset they 
would enter a coma state, by slumber shut safe from the 
darkness, the secret nostalgic sense of frustration and of ob- 
jectless and unappeasable desire. 

"Get down, damn you," I said. With his high hunched 
pack, his tight sweater, he was ludicrous; he looked like a 
clown; he was terrible and ugly and sad all at once, since he 
was ludicrous and, without the coat, he would be so cold. 
And so was I: ugly and terrible and sad. "This damn wind. 
This damn wind." We regained the road. We were sheltered 
for the moment, and he took out the bottle and we drank. It 
was fiery stuff. "Talk about my Milan brandy," I said. "That 
damn wind. That damn wind. That damn wind." 

"Give me a cigarette." 

"You've got them." 

"I gave them to you." 

"You're a goddamn liar. You didn't." He found them in 
his pocket. But I didn't wait, 

"Don't you want one? Better light it here, while we 
are ..." I didn't wait. The road rose, became flush with the 
field. After a while I heard him just behind me, and we 
entered the wind. I could see past my shoulder his cigarette 
shredding away in fiery streamers upon the unimpeded rush 
of the mistral, that black chill wind full of dust like sparks 
of ice. 



Divorce in Naples 



i 

WE WERE SITTING at a table inside: Monckton and the 
bosun and Carl and George and me and the women, the 
three women of that abject glittering kind that seamen know 
or that know seamen. We were talking English and they 
were not talking at all. By that means they could speak 
constantly to us above and below the sound of our voices 
in a tongue older than recorded speech and time too. Older 
than the thirty-four days of sea time which we had but com- 
pleted, anyway. Now and then they spoke to one another 
in Italian. The women in Italian, the men in English, as if 
language might be the sex difference, the functioning of the 
vocal cords the inner biding until the dark pairing time. 
The men in English, the women in Italian: a decorum as of 
two parallel streams separated by a levee for a little while. 

We were talking about Carl, to George. 

"Why did you bring him here, then?" the bosun said. 

"Yes," Monckton said. "I sure wouldn't bring my wife to 
a place like this." 

George cursed Monckton: not with a word or even a 
sentence; a paragraph. He was a Greek, big and black, a full 
head taller than Carl; his eyebrows looked like two crows 
in overlapping flight. He cursed us all with immediate thor- 
oughness and in well-nigh faultless classic Anglo-Saxon, who 

877 



878 Beyond 

at other times functioned in the vocabulary of an eight-year- 
old by-blow of a vaudeville comedian and a horse, say. 

"Yes, sir," the bosun said. He was smoking an Italian 
cigar and drinking ginger beer; the same tumbler of which, 
incidentally, he had been engaged with for about two hours 
and which now must have been about the temperature of a 
ship's showerbath. "I sure wouldn't bring my girl to a dive 
like this, even if he did wear pants." 

Carl meanwhile had not stirred. He sat serene among us, 
with his round yellow head and his round eyes, looking like 
a sophisticated baby against the noise and the glitter, with 
his glass of thin Italian beer and the women murmuring to 
one another and watching us and then Carl with that biding 
and inscrutable foreknowledge which they do not appear to 
know that they possess. "Einnocente" one said; again they 
murmured, contemplating Carl with musing, secret looks. 
"He may have fooled you already," the bosun said. "He 
may have slipped through a porthole on you any time these 
three years." 

George glared at the bosun, his mouth open for cursing. 
But he didn't curse. Instead he looked at Carl, his mouth 
still open. His mouth closed slowly. We all looked at Carl. 
Beneath our eyes he raised his glass and drank with con- 
tained deliberation. 

"Are you still pure?" George said. "I mean, sho enough." 

Beneath our fourteen eyes Carl emptied the glass of thin, 
bitter, three per cent beer. "I been to sea three years," he 
said. "All over Europe." 

George glared at him, his face baffled and outraged. He 
had just shaved; his close blue jowls lay flat and hard as a 
prizefighter's or a pirate's, up to the black explosion of his 
hair. He was our second cook. "You damn lying little 
bastard," he said. 

The bosun raised his glass of ginger beer with an exact 



Divorce in Naples 879 

replica of Carl's drinking. Steadily and deliberately, his body 
thrown a little back and his head tilted, he poured the ginger 
beer over his right shoulder at the exact speed of swallowing, 
still with that air of Carl's, that grave and cosmopolitan 
swagger. He set the glass down, and rose. "Come on," he 
said to Monckton and mej "let's go. Might as well be board 
ship if we're going to spend the evening in one place.'' 

Monckton and I rose. He was smoking a short pipe. One 
of the women was his, another the bosun's. The third one 
had a lot of gold teeth. She could have been thirty, but 
maybe she wasn't. We left her with George and Carl. When 
I looked back from the door, the waiter was just fetching 
them some more beer. 



II 

THEY CAME into the ship together at Galveston, George 
carrying a portable victrola and a small parcel wrapped in 
paper bearing the imprint of a well-known ten-cent store, 
and Carl carrying two bulging imitation leather bags that 
looked like they might weigh forty pounds apiece. George 
appropriated two berths, one above the other like a Pullman 
section, cursing Carl in a harsh, concatenant voice a little 
overburred with v j s and r's and ordering him about like a 
nigger, while Carl stowed their effects away with the meticu- 
lousness of an old maid, producing from one of the bags a 
stack of freshly laundered drill serving jackets that must 
have numbered a dozen. For the next thirty-four days (he 
was the messboy) he wore a fresh one for each meal in the 
saloon, and there were always two or three recently washed 
ones drying under the poop awning. And for thirty-four 
evenings, after the galley was closed, we watched the two 
of them in pants and undershirts, dancing to the victrola on 
the after well deck above a hold full of Texas cotton and 



88o Beyond 

Georgia resin. They had only one record for the machine 
and it had a crack in it, and each time the needle clucked 
George would stamp on the deck. I don't think that either 
one of them was aware that he did it. 

It was George who told us about Carl. Carl was eighteen, 
from Philadelphia. They both called it Philly; George in a 
proprietorial tone, as if he had created Philadelphia in order 
to produce Carl, though it later appeared that George had 
not discovered Carl until Carl had been to sea for a year 
already. And Carl himself told some of it: a fourth or fifth 
child of a first generation of Scandinavian-American ship- 
wrights, brought up in one of an identical series of small 
frame houses a good trolley ride from salt water, by a 
mother or an older sister: this whom, at the age of fifteen 
and weighing perhaps a little less than a hundred pounds, 
some ancestor long knocking his quiet bones together at the 
bottom of the sea (or perhaps havened by accident in dry 
earth and become restive with ease and quiet) had sent 
back to the old dream and the old unrest three or maybe 
four generations late. 

"I was a kid, then," Carl told us, who had yet to experi- 
ence or need a shave. "I thought about everything but going 
to sea. I thought once I'd be a ballplayer or maybe a prize 
fighter. They had pictures of them on the walls, see, when 
Sis would send me down to the corner after the old man on 
a Saturday night. Jeez, I'd stand outside on the street and 
watch them go in, and I could see their legs under the door 
and hear them and smell the sawdust and see the pictures of 
them on the walls through the smoke. I was a kid then, see. 
I hadn't been nowheres then." 

We asked George how he had ever got a berth, even as 
a messman, standing even now about four inches over five 
feet and with yet a face that should have followed mon- 



Divorce m Naples 88 1 

strances up church aisles, if not looked down from one of 
the colored windows themselves. 

"Why shouldn't he have come to sea?" George said. 
" Ain't this a free country? Even if he ain't nothing but a 
damn mess." He looked at us, black, serious. "He's a virgin, 
see? Do you know what that means?" He told us what it 
meant. Someone had evidently told him what it meant not 
so long ago, told him what he used to be himself, if he could 
remember that far back, and he thought that perhaps we 
didn't know the man, or maybe he thought it was a new 
word they had just invented. So he told us what it meant. 
It was in the first night watch and we were on the poop 
after supper, two days out of Gibraltar, listening to Monck- 
ton talking about cauliflower. Carl was taking a shower (he 
always took a bath after he had cleared the saloon after 
supper. George, who only cooked, never bathed until we 
were in port and the petite cleared) and George told us what 
it meant. 

Then he began to curse. He cursed for a long time. 

"Well, George," the bosun said, "suppose you were one, 
then? What would you do?" 

"What would I do?" George said. "What wouldn't I do?" 
He cursed for some time, steadily. "It's like the first cigarette 
in the morning," he said. "By noon, when you remember 
how it tasted, how you felt when you was waiting for the 
match to get to the end of it, and when that first drag " 
He cursed, long, impersonal, like a chant. 

Monckton watched him: not listened: watched, nursing 
his pipe. "Why, George," he said, "you're by way of being 
almost a poet." 

There was a swipe, some West India Docks crum; I for- 
get his name. "Call that lobbing the tongue?" he said. "You 
should hear a Lymus mate laying into a fo'c'sle of bloody 
Portygee ginneys." 



882 Beyond 

"Monckton wasn't talking about the language," the bosun 
said. "Any man can swear." He looked at George. "You're 
not the first man that ever wished that, George. That's 
something that has to be was because you don't know you 
are when you are." Then he paraphrased unwitting and with 
unprintable aptness Byron's epigram about women's mouths. 
"But what are you saving him for? What good will it do 
you when he stops being?" 

George cursed, looking from face to face, baffled and 
outraged. 

"Maybe Carl will let George hold his hand at the time," 
Monckton said. He reached a match from his pocket. "Now, 
you take Brussels sprouts " 

"You might get the Old Man to quarantine him when we 
reach Naples," the bosun said. 

George cursed. 

"Now, you take Brussels sprouts," Monckton said. 

Ill 

IT TOOK us some time that night, to get either started or 
settled down. We Monckton and the bosun and the two 
women and I visited four more cafes, each like the other 
one and like the one where we had left George and Carl 
same people, same music, same thin, colored drinks. The two 
women accompanied us, with us but not of us, biding and 
acquiescent, saying constantly and patiently and without 
vrords that it was time to go to bed. So after a while I left 
them and went back to the ship. George and Carl were not 
aboard. 

The next morning they were not there either, though 
Monckton and the bosun were, and the cook and the steward 
swearing up and down the galley; it seemed that the cook 
was planning to spend the day ashore himself. So they hacl 



Divorce in Naples 883 

to stay aboard all day. Along toward midafternoon there 
came aboard a smallish man in a soiled suit who looked like 
one of those Columbia day students that go up each morning 
on the East Side subway from around Chatham Square. He 
was hatless, with an oiled pompadour. He had not shaved 
recently, and he spoke no English in a pleasant, deprecatory 
way that was all teeth. But he had found the right ship and 
he had a note from George, written on the edge of a dirty 
scrap of newspaper, and we found where George was. He 
was in jail. 

The steward hadn't stopped cursing all day, anyhow. He 
didn't stop now, either. He and the messenger went off to 
the consul's. The steward returned a little after six o'clock, 
with George. George didn't look so much like he had been 
drunk; he looked dazed, quiet, with his wild hair and a blue 
stubble on his jaw. He went straight to Carl's bunk and he 
began to turn Carl's meticulous covers back one by one like 
a traveler examining the bed in a third-class European hotel, 
as if he expected to find Carl hidden among them. "You 
mean," he said, u he ain't been back? He ain't been back 



"We haven't seen him," we told George. "The steward 
hasn't seen him either. We thought he was in jail with you." 

He began to replace the covers; that is, he made an at- 
tempt to draw them one by one up the bed again in a kind 
of detached way, as if he were not conscious, sentient. 
"They run," he said in a dull tone. "They ducked out on 
me. I never thought he'd a done it. I never thought he'd a 
done me this way. It was her. She was the one made him 
done it. She knew what he was, and how I ..." Then he 
began to cry, quietly, in that dull, detached way. "He must 
have been sitting there with his hand in her lap all the time. 
And I never suspicioned. She kept on moving her chair 
closer and closer to his. But I trusted him. I never suspi- 



884 Beyond 

cloned nothing. I thought he wouldn't a done nothing seri- 
ous without asking me first, let alone ... I trusted him." 

It appeared that the bottom of George's glass had distorted 
their shapes enough to create in George the illusion that 
Carl and the woman were drinking as he drank, in a serious 
but celibate way. He left them at the table and went back 
to the lavatory; or rather, he said that he realized suddenly 
that he was in the lavatory and that he had better be getting 
back, concerned not over what might transpire while he was 
away, but over the lapse, over his failure to be present at his 
own doings which the getting to the lavatory inferred. So 
he returned to the table, not yet alarmed; merely concerned 
and amused. He said he was having a fine time. 

So at first he believed that he was still having such a good 
time that he could not find his own table. He found the one 
which he believed should be his, but it was vacant save for 
three stacks of saucers, so he made one round of the room, 
still amused, still enjoying himself; he was still enjoying 
himself when he repaired to the center of the dance floor 
where, a head above the dancers, he began to shout "Porteus 
ahoy!" in a loud voice, and continued to do so until a waiter 
who spoke English came and removed him and led him back 
to that same vacant table bearing the three stacks of saucers 
and the three glasses, one of which he now recognized as 
his own. 

But he was still enjoying himself, though not so much 
now, believing himself to be the victim of a practical joke, 
first on the part of the management, and it appeared that he 
must have created some little disturbance, enjoying himself 
less and less all the while, the center of an augmenting clump 
of waiters and patrons. 

When at last he did realize, accept the fact, that they were 
gone, it must have been pretty bad for him: the outrage, the 
despair, the sense of elapsed time, an unfamiliar city at night 



Divorce in Naples 885 

in which Carl must be found, and that quickly if it was to 
do any good. He tried to leave, to break through the crowd, 
without paying the score. Not that he would have beaten 
the bill; he just didn't have time. If he could have found 
Carl within the next ten minutes, he would have returned 
and paid the score twice over: I am sure of that. 

And so they held him, the wild American, a cordon of 
waiters and clients women and men both and he drag- 
ging a handful of coins from his pockets ringing onto the 
tile floor. Then he said it was like having your legs swarmed 
by a pack of dogs: waiters, clients, men and women, on 
hands and knees on the floor, scrabbling after the rolling 
coins, and George slapping about with his big feet, trying 
to stamp the hands away. 

Then he was standing in the center of an abrupt wide 
circle, breathing a little hard, with the two Napoleons in 
their swords and pallbearer gloves and Knights of Pythias 
bonnets on either side of him. He did not know what he 
had done; he only knew that he was under arrest. It was 
not until they reached the Prefecture, where there was an 
interpreter, that he learned that he was a political prisoner, 
having insulted the king's majesty by placing foot on the 
king's effigy on a coin. They put him in a forty-foot dun- 
geon, with seven other political prisoners, one of whom was 
the messenger. 

"They taken my belt and my necktie and the strings out 
of my shoes," he told us dully. "There wasn't nothing in 
the room but a barrel fastened in the middle of the floor and 
a wooden bench running all the way round the walls. I 
knew what the barrel was for right off, because they had 
already been using it for that for some time. You was ex- 
pected to sleep on the bench when you couldn't stay on 
your feet no longer. When I stooped over and looked at it 
close, it was like looking down at Forty-second Street from 



886 Beyond 

a airplane. They looked just like Yellow cabs. Then I went 
and used the barrel. But I used it with the end of me it 
wasn't intended to be used with." 

Then he told about the messenger. Truly, Despair, like 
Poverty, looks after its own. There they were: the Italian 
who spoke no English, and George who scarcely spoke any 
language at all; certainly not Italian. That was about four 
o'clock in the morning. Yet by daylight George had found 
the one man out of the seven who could have served him or 
probably would have. 

"He told me he was going to get out at noon, and I told 
him I would give him ten lire as soon as I got out, and he 
got me the scrap of paper and the pencil (this, in a bare 
dungeon, from among seven men stripped to the skin of 
everything save the simplest residue of clothing necessary 
for warmth: of money, knives, shoelaces, even pins and 
loose buttons) and I wrote the note and he hid it and they 
left him out and after about four hours they come and got 
me and there was the steward." 

"How did you talk to him, George?" the bosun said. 
"Even the steward couldn't find out anything until they got 
to the consul's." 

"I don't know," George said. "We just talked. That was 
the only way I could tell anybody where I was at." 

We tried to get him to go to bed, but he wouldn't do it. 
He didn't even shave. He got something to eat in the galley 
and went ashore. We watched him go down the side. 

"Poor bastard," Monckton said. 

"Why?" the bosun said. "What did he take Carl there 
for? They could have gone to the movies." 

"I wasn't thinking about George," Monckton said. 

"Oh," the bosun said. "Well, a man can't keep on going 
ashore anywhere, let alone Europe, all his life without 
getting ravaged now and then." 

"Good God," Monckton said. "I should hope not." 



Divorce in Naples 887 

George returned at six o'clock the next morning. He still 
looked dazed, though still quite sober, quite calm. Overnight 
his beard had grown another quarter inch. "I couldn't find 
them," he said quietly. "I couldn't find them nowheres." 
He had to act as messman now, taking Carl's place at the 
officers' table, but as soon as breakfast was done, he disap- 
peared; we heard the steward cursing him up and down the 
ship until noon, trying to find him. Just before noon he 
returned, got through dinner, departed again. He came back 
just before dark. 

"Found him yet?" I said. He didn't answer. He stared at 
me for a while with that blank look. Then he went to their 
bunks and hauled one of the imitation leather bags down and 
tumbled all of Carl's things into it and crushed down the 
lid upon the dangling sleeves and socks and hurled the bag 
out onto the well deck, where it tumbled once and burst 
open, vomiting the white jackets and the mute socks and 
the underclothes. Then he went to bed, fully dressed, and 
slept fourteen hours. The cook tried to get him up for break- 
fast, but it was like trying to rouse up a dead man. 

When he waked he looked better. He borrowed a ciga- 
rette of me and went and shaved and came back and bor- 
rowed another cigarette. "Hell with him," he said. "Leave 
the bastard go. I don't give a damn." 

That afternoon he put Carl's things back into his bunk. 
Not carefully and not uncarefully: he just gathered them 
up and dumped them into the berth and paused for a mo- 
ment to see if any of them were going to fall out, before 
turning away. 

IV 

IT WAS JUST before daylight. When I returned to the ship 
about midnight, the quarters were empty. When I waked 



888 Beyond 

just before daylight, all the bunks save my own were still 
vacant. I was lying in a halfdoze, when I heard Carl in the 
passage. He was coming quietly; I had scarcely heard him 
before he appeared in the door. He stood there for a while, 
looking no larger than an adolescent boy in the halflight, 
before he entered. I closed my eyes quickly. I heard him, 
still on tiptoe, come to my bunk and stand above me for a 
while. Then I heard him turn away. I opened my eyes just 
enough to watch him. 

He undressed swiftly, ripping his clothes off, ripping off 
a button that struck the bulkhead with a faint click. Naked, 
in the wan light, he looked smaller and frailer than ever as he 
dug a towel from his bunk where George had tumbled his 
things, flinging the other garments aside with a kind of 
dreadful haste. Then he went out, his bare feet whispering 
in the passage. 

I could hear the shower beyond the bulkhead running for 
a long time; it would be cold now, too. But it ran for a long 
time, then it ceased and I closed my eyes again until he had 
entered. Then I watched him lift from the floor the under- 
garment which he had removed and thrust it through a port- 
hole quickly, with something of the air of a recovered 
drunkard putting out of sight an empty bottle. He dressed 
and put on a fresh white jacket and combed his hair, leaning 
to the small mirror, looking at his face for a long time. 

And then he went to work. He worked about the bridge 
deck all day long; what he could have found to do there we 
could not imagine. But the crew's quarters never saw him 
until after dark. All day long we watched the white jacket 
flitting back and forth beyond the open doors or kneeling 
as he polished the brightwork about the companions. He 
seemed to work with a kind of fury. And when he was 
forced by his duties to come topside during the day, we 
noticed that it was always on the port side, and we lay with 



Divorce in Naples 889 

our starboard to the dock. And about the galley or the after 
deck George worked a little and loafed a good deal, not 
looking toward the bridge at all. 

"That's the reason he stays up there, polishing that bright- 
work all day long," the bosun said. "He knows George can't 
come up there." 

"It don't look to me like George wants to," I said. 

"That's right," Monckton said. "For a dollar George 
would go up to the binnacle and ask the Old Man for a 
cigarette." 

"But not for curiosity," the bosun said. 

"You think that's all it is?" Monckton said. "Just curi- 
osity?" 

"Sure," the bosun said. "Why not?" 

"Monckton's right," I said. "This is the most difficult 
moment in marriage: the day after your wife has stayed out 
all night." 

"You mean the easiest," the bosun said. "George can quit 
him now." 

"Do you think so?" Monckton said. 

We lay there five days. Carl was still polishing the bright- 
work in the bridge-deck companions. The steward would 
send him out on deck, and go away; he would return and 
find Carl still working on the port side and he would make 
him go to starboard, above the dock and the Italian boys 
in bright, soiled jerseys and the venders of pornographic 
postcards. But it didn't take him long there, and then we 
would see him below again, sitting quietly in his white jacket 
in the stale gloom, waiting for suppertime. Usually he would 
be darning socks 

George had not yet said one word to him; Carl might not 
have been aboard at all, the very displacement of space 
which was his body, impedeless and breathable air. It was 
now George's turn to stay away from the ship most of the 



890 Beyond 

day and all of the night, returning a little drunk at three 
and four o'clock, to waken everyone by hand, save Carl, and 
talk in gross and loud recapitulation of recent and always 
different women before climbing into his bunk. As far as 
we knew, they did not even look at one another until we 
were well on our way to Gibraltar. 

Then Carl's fury of work slacked somewhat. Yet he 
worked steadily all day, then, bathed, his blond hair wet and 
smooth, his slight body in a cotton singlet, we would see him 
leaning alone in the long twilight upon the rail midships or 
forward. But never about the poop where we smoked and 
talked and where George had begun again to play the 
single record on the victrola, committing, unrequested and 
anathemaed, cold-blooded encore after encore. 

Then one night we saw them together. They were leaning 
side by side on the poop rail. That was the first time Carl 
had looked astern, looked toward Naples since that morn- 
ing when he returned to the ship, and even now it was the 
evening on which the Gates of Hercules had sunk into the 
waxing twilight and the River Ocean began to flow down 
into the darkling sea and overhead the crosstrees swayed in 
measured and slow recover against the tall night and the 
low new moon. 

"He's all right now," Monckton said. "The dog's gone 
back to his vomit." 

"I said he was all right all the time," the bosun said. 
"George didn't give a damn." 

"I wasn't talking about George," Monckton said. "George 
hasn't made the grade yet." 

V 

GEORGE TOLD us. "He'd keep on moping and mooning, see, 
and I'd keep on trying to talk to him, to tell him T wasn't 



Divorce in Naples 891 

mad no more. Jeez, it had to come some day; a man can't be 
a angel all your life. But he wouldn't even look back that 
way. Until all of a sudden he says one night: 

" 'What do you do to them?' I looked at him. 'How does 
a man treat them?' 

u 'You mean to tell me,' I says, 'that you spent three days 
with her and she ain't showed you that?' 

" 'I mean, give them/ he says. 'Don't men give * 

" 'Jeez Christ,' I says, 'you done already give her some- 
thing they would have paid you money for it in Siam, 
Would have made you the prince or the prime minister at 
the least. What do you mean?' 

" *I don't mean money,' he says. 'I mean . . .' 

" 'Well,' I says, 'if you was going to see her again, if she 
was going to be your girl, you'd give her something. Bring 
it back to her. Like something to wear or something: they 
don't care much what, them foreign women, hustling them 
wops all their life that wouldn't give them a full breath if 
they was a toy balloon; they don't care much what it is. But 
you ain't going to see her again, are you?' 

" 'No,' he says. 'No,' he says. 'No.' And he looked like he 
was fixing to jump off the boat and swim on ahead and wait 
for us at Hatteras. 

" 'So you don't want to worry about that,' I says. Then I 
went and played the vie again, thinking that might cheer 
him up, because he ain't the first, for Christ's sake; he never 
invented it. But it was the next night; we was at the poop 
rail then the first time he had looked back watching the 
phosrus along the logline, when he says: 

" 'Maybe I got her into trouble.' 

'"Doing what?' I says. 'With what? With the police 5 
Didn't you make her show you her petite?' Like she would 
have needed a ticket, with that face full of gold; Jeez, she 



892 Beyond 

could have rode the train on her face alone; maybe that was 
her savings bank instead of using her stocking. 

" 'What ticket?' he says. So I told him. For a minute I 
thought he was crying, then I seen that he was just trying 
to not puke. So I knew what the trouble was, what had been 
worrying him. I remember the first time it come as a surprise 
to me. 'Oh/ I says, 'the smell. It don't mean nothing/ I says; 
you don't want to let that worry you. It ain't that they smell 
bad,' I says, 'that's just the Italian national air/ " 

And then we thought that at last he really was sick. He 
worked all day long, coming to bed only after the rest of 
us were asleep and snoring, and I saw him in the night get 
up and go topside again, and 1 followed and saw him sitting 
on a windlass. He looked like a little boy, still, small, motion- 
less in his underclothes. But he was young, and even an old 
man can't be sick very long with nothing but work to do and 
salt air to breathe; and so two weeks later we were watching 
him and George dancing again in their undershirts after 
supper on the after well deck while the victrola lifted its 
fatuous and reiterant ego against the waxing moon and the 
ship snored and hissed through the long seas off Hatteras. 
They didn't talk; they just danced, gravely and tirelessly as 
the nightly moon stood higher and higher up the sky. Then 
we turned south, and the Gulf Stream ran like blue ink 
alongside, bubbled with fire by night in the softening lati- 
tudes, and one night off Tortugas the ship began to tread 
the moon's silver train like an awkward and eager cour- 
tier, and Carl spoke for the first time after almost twenty 
days. 

"George/' he said, "do me a favor, will you?" 

"Sure, bud/' George said, stamping on the deck each time 
the needle clucked, his black head shoulders above Carl's 
sleek pale one, the two of them in decorous embrace, their 



Divorce in Naples 893 

canvas shoes hissing in unison: "Sure," George said. "Spit it 
out." 

"When we get to Galveston, I want you to buy me a suit 
of these pink silk teddybears that ladies use. A little bigger 
than I'd wear, see?" 



Carcassonne 



AND ME ON A BUCKSKIN PONY 'with eyes like blue electricity 
and a mane like tangled fire, galloping up the hill and right 
off into the high heaven of the world 

His skeleton lay still. Perhaps it was thinking about this. 
Anyway, after a time it groaned. But it said nothing, which 
is certainly not like you he thought you are not like your- 
self, but I cajft say that a little quiet is not pleasant 

He lay beneath an unrolled strip of tarred roofing made of 
paper. All of him that is, save that part which suffered 
neither insects nor temperature and which galloped unflag- 
ging on the destinationless pony, up a piled silver hill of 
cumulae where no hoof echoed nor left print, toward the 
blue precipice never gained. This part was neither flesh nor 
unflesh and he tingled a little pleasantly with its lackful 
contemplation as he lay beneath the tarred paper bedcloth- 
ing. 

So were the mechanics of sleeping, of denning up for the 
night, simplified. Each morning the entire bed rolled back 
into a spool and stood erect in the corner. It was like those 
glasses, reading glasses which old ladies used to wear, at- 
tached to a cord that rolls onto a spindle in a neat case of 
unmarked gold; a spindle, a case, attached to the deep bosom 
of the mother of sleep. 

He lay still, savoring this. Beneath him Rincon followed 

89* 



896 Beyond 

its fatal, secret, nightly pursuits, where upon the rich and 
inert darkness of the streets lighted windows and doors lay 
like oily strokes of broad and overladen brushes. From the 
docks a ship's siren unsourced itself. For a moment it was 
sound, then it compassed silence, atmosphere, bringing upon 
the eardrums a vacuum in which nothing, not even silence, 
was. Then it ceased, ebbed; the silence breathed again with 
a clashing of palm fronds like sand hissing across a sheet of 
metal. 

Still his skeleton lay motionless. Perhaps it was thinking 
about this and he thought of his tarred paper bed as a pair 
of spectacles through which he nightly perused the fabric 
of dreams: 

Across the twin transparencies of the spectacles the horse 
still gallops with its tangled welter of tossing flames. For- 
ward and back against the taut roundness of its belly its legs 
swing, rhythmically reaching and overreaching, each spurn- 
ing overreach punctuated by a flicking limberness of shod 
hooves. He can see the saddlegirth and the soles of the rider's 
feet in the stirrups. The girth cuts the horse in two just back 
of the withers, yet it still gallops with rhythmic and un- 
flagging fury and without progression, and he thinks of that 
riderless Norman steed which galloped against the Saracen 
Emir, who, so keen of eye, so delicate and strong the wrist 
which swung the blade, severed the galloping beast at a 
single blow, the several halves thundering on in the sacred 
dust where him of Bouillon and Tancred too clashed in 
sullen retreat; thundering on through the assembled foes of 
our meek Lord, wrapped still in the fury and the pride of 
the charge, not knowing that it was dead. 

The ceiling of the garret slanted in a ruined pitch to the 
low eaves. It was dark, and the body consciousness, assum- 
ing the office of vision, shaped in his mind's eye his motion- 
less body grown phosphorescent with that steady decay 



Carcassonne 897 

which had set up within his body on the day of his birth. 
the flesh is dead living on itsetf subsisting consuming itsetf 
thriftily in its own renewal will never die for I am the Resur- 
rection and the Life Of a man, the worm should be lusty, 
lean, hairedover. Of women, of delicate girls briefly like 
heard music in tune, it should be suavely shaped, falling 
feeding into prettinesses, feeding, what though to Me but 
as a seething of new milk Who am the Resurrection and 
the Life 

It was dark. The agony of wood was soothed by these 
latitudes; empty rooms did not creak and crack. Perhaps 
wood was like any other skeleton though, after a time, once 
reflexes of old compulsions had spent themselves. Bones 
might lie under seas, in the caverns of the sea, knocked 
together by the dying echoes of waves. Like bones of horses 
cursing the inferior riders who bestrode them, bragging to 
one another about what they would have done with a first- 
rate rider up. But somebody always crucified the first-rate 
riders. And then it's better to be bones knocking together 
to the spent motion of falling tides in the caverns and the 
grottoes of the sea. 

where him of Bouillon and Tancred too 

His skeleton groaned again. Across the twin transparencies 
of the glassy floor the horse still galloped, unflagging and 
without progress, its destination the barn where sleep was 
stabled. It was dark. Luis, who ran the cantina downstairs, 
allowed him to sleep in the garret. But the Standard Oil Com- 
pany, who owned the garret and the roofing paper, owned 
the darkness too; it was Mrs Widdrington's, the Standard Oil 
Company's wife's, darkness he was using to sleep in. She'd 
make a poet of you too, if you did not work anywhere. She 
believed that, if a reason for breathing were not acceptable 
to her, it was no reason. With her, if you were white and did 
not work, you were either a tramp or a poet. Maybe you 



898 Beyond 

were. Women are so wise. They have learned how to live 
unconfused by reality, impervious to it. It was dark. 

and knock my bones together and together It was dark, 
a darkness filled with a fairy pattering of small feet, stealthy 
and intent. Sometimes the cold patter of them on his face 
waked him in the night, and at his movement they scurried 
invisibly like an abrupt disintegration of dead leaves in a 
wind, in whispering arpeggios of minute sound, leaving a thin 
but definite effluvium of furtiveness and voracity. At times, 
lying so while daylight slanted grayly along the ruined pitch 
of the eaves, he watched their shadowy flickings from ob- 
scurity to obscurity, shadowy and huge as cats, leaving along 
the stagnant silences those whisperings gusts of fairy feet. 

Mrs Widdrington owned the rats too. But wealthy people 
have to own so many things. Only she didn't expect the rats 
to pay for using her darkness and silence by writing poetry. 
Not that they could not have, and pretty fair verse probably. 
Something of the rat about Byron: allocutions of stealthful 
voracity; a fairy pattering of little feet behind a bloody arras 
where fell where jell where I was King of Kings but the 
woman with the woman with the dogs eyes to knock my 
bones together and together 

"I would like to perform something," he said, shaping his 
lips soundlessly in the darkness, and the galloping horse filled 
his mind again with soundless thunder. He could see the sad- 
dlegirth and the soles of the rider's stirruped feet, and he 
thought of that Norman steed, bred of many fathers to bear 
iron mail in the slow, damp, green valleys of England, mad- 
dened with heat and thirst and hopeless horizons filled with 
shimmering nothingness, thundering along in two halves and 
not knowing it, fused still in the rhythm of accrued momen- 
tum. Its head was mailed so that it could not see forward at 
all, and from the center of the plates projected a pro- 
jected a 



Carcassonne 899 

"Chamfron," his skeleton said. 

"Chamfron." He mused for a time, while the beast that 
did not know that it was dead thundered on as the ranks of 
the Lamb's foes opened in the sacred dust and let it through. 
"Chamfron," he repeated. Living, as it did, a retired life, his 
skeleton could know next to nothing of the world. Yet it had 
an astonishing and exasperating way of supplying him with 
bits of trivial information that had temporarily escaped his 
mind. "All you know is what I tell you," he said. 

"Not always," the skeleton said. "I know that the end of 
life is lying still. You haven't learned that yet. Or you haven't 
mentioned it to me, anyway." 

"Oh, I've learned it," he said. "I've had it dinned into me 
enough. It isn't that. It's that I don't believe it's true." 

The skeleton groaned. 

"I don't believe it, I say," he repeated. 

"All right, all right," the skeleton said testily. "I shan't dis- 
pute you. I never do. I only give you advice." 

"Somebody has to, I guess," he agreed sourly. "At least, 
it looks like it." He lay still beneath the tarred paper, in a si- 
lence filled with fairy patterings. Again his body slanted and 
slanted downward through opaline corridors groined with 
ribs of dying sunlight upward dissolving dimly, and came to 
rest at last in the windless gardens of the sea. About him the 
sv/aying caverns and the grottoes, and his body lay on the 
rippled floor, tumbling peacefully to the wavering echoes of 
the tides. 

/ 'want to perform something bold and tragical and austere 
he repeated, shaping the soundless words in the pattering 
silence me on a buckskin pony with eyes like blue electricity 
and a mane like tangled fire, galloping up the hill and right 
off into the high heaven of the world Still galloping, the 
horse soars outward; still galloping, it thunders up the long 
blue hill of heaven, its tossing mane in golden swirls like fire. 



900 Beyond 

Steed and rider thunder on, thunjder punily diminishing: a 
dying star upon the immensity of darkness and of silence 
within which, steadfast, fading, deepbreasted and grave of 
flank, muses the dark and tragic figure of the Earth, his 
mother. 


 From a little after two oclock until almost sundown of the
long still hot weary dead September afternoon they sat in what Miss
Coldfield still called the office because her father had called it
thata dim hot airless room with the blinds all closed and fastened for
forty-three summers because when she was a girl someone had believed
that light and moving air carried heat and that dark was always cooler,
and which (as the sun shone fuller and fuller on that side of the house)
became latticed with yellow slashes full of dust motes which Quentin
thought of as being flecks of the dead old dried paint itself blown
inward from the scaling blinds as wind might have blown them. There was
a wistaria vine blooming for the second time that summer on a wooden
trellis before one window, into which sparrows came now and then in
random gusts, making a dry vivid dusty sound before going away: and
opposite Quentin, Miss Coldfield in the eternal black which she had worn
for forty-three years now, whether for sister, father, or nothusband
none knew, sitting so bolt upright in the straight hard chair that was
so tall for her that her legs hung straight and rigid as if she had iron
shinbones and ankles, clear of the floor with that air of impotent and
static rage like childrens feet, and talking in that grim haggard
amazed voice until at last listening would renege and hearing-sense
self-confound and the long-dead object of her impotent yet indomitable
frustration would appear, as though by outraged recapitulation evoked,
quiet inattentive and harmless, out of the biding and dreamy and
victorious dust.

Her voice would not cease, it would just vanish. There would be the dim
coffin-smelling gloom sweet and over-sweet with the twice-bloomed
wistaria against the outer wall by the savage quiet September sun
impacted distilled and hyperdistilled, into which came now and then the
loud cloudy flutter of the sparrows like a flat limber stick whipped by
an idle boy, and the rank smell of female old flesh long embattled in
virginity while the wan haggard face watched him above the faint
triangle of lace at wrists and throat from the too tall chair in which
she resembled a crucified child; and the voice not ceasing but vanishing
into and then out of the long intervals like a stream, a trickle running
from patch to patch of dried sand, and the ghost mused with shadowy
docility as if it were the voice which he haunted where a more fortunate
one would have had a house. Out of quiet thunderclap he would abrupt
(man-horse-demon) upon a scene peaceful and decorous as a schoolprize
water color, faint sulphur-reek still in hair clothes and beard, with
grouped behind him his band of wild niggers like beasts half tamed to
walk upright like men, in attitudes wild and reposed, and manacled among
them the French architect with his air grim, haggard, and tatter-ran.
Immobile, bearded and hand palm-lifted the horseman sat; behind him the
wild blacks and the captive architect huddled quietly, carrying in
bloodless paradox the shovels and picks and axes of peaceful conquest.
Then in the long unamaze Quentin seemed to watch them overrun suddenly
the hundred square miles of tranquil and astonished earth and drag house
and formal gardens violently out of the soundless Nothing and clap them
down like cards upon a table beneath the up-palm immobile and pontific,
creating the Sutpens Hundred, the _Be Sutpens Hundred_ like the
oldentime _Be Light_. Then hearing would reconcile and he would seem to
listen to two separate Quentins nowthe Quentin Compson preparing for
Harvard in the South, the deep South dead since 1865 and peopled with
garrulous outraged baffled ghosts, listening, having to listen, to one
of the ghosts which had refused to lie still even longer than most had,
telling him about old ghost-times; and the Quentin Compson who was still
too young to deserve yet to be a ghost, but nevertheless having to be
one for all that, since he was born and bred in the deep South the same
as she wasthe two separate Quentins now talking to one another in the
long silence of notpeople, in notlanguage, like this: _It seems that
this demonhis name was Sutpen(Colonel Sutpen)Colonel Sutpen. Who
came out of nowhere and without warning upon the land with a band of
strange niggers and built a plantation(Tore violently a plantation,
Miss Rosa Coldfield says)tore violently. And married her sister Ellen
and begot a son and a daughter which(Without gentleness begot, Miss
Rosa Coldfield says)without gentleness. Which should have been the
jewels of his pride and the shield and comfort of his old age,
only(Only they destroyed him or something or he destroyed them or
something. And died)and died. Without regret, Miss Rosa Coldfield
says(Save by her) Yes, save by her. (And by Quentin Compson) Yes. And
by Quentin Compson._

Because you are going away to attend the college at Harvard they tell
me, Miss Coldfield said. So I dont imagine you will ever come back
here and settle down as a country lawyer in a little town like
Jefferson, since Northern people have already seen to it that there is
little left in the South for a young man. So maybe you will enter the
literary profession as so many Southern gentlemen and gentlewomen too
are doing now and maybe some day you will remember this and write about
it. You will be married then I expect and perhaps your wife will want a
new gown or a new chair for the house and you can write this and submit
it to the magazines. Perhaps you will even remember kindly then the old
woman who made you spend a whole afternoon sitting indoors and listening
while she talked about people and events you were fortunate enough to
escape yourself when you wanted to be out among young friends of your
own age.

Yessum, Quentin said. _Only she dont mean that_, he thought. _Its
because she wants it told._ It was still early then. He had yet in his
pocket the note which he had received by the hand of a small negro boy
just before noon, asking him to call and see herthe quaint, stiffly
formal request which was actually a summons, out of another world
almostthe queer archaic sheet of ancient good notepaper written over
with the neat faded cramped script which, due to his astonishment at the
request from a woman three times his age and whom he had known all his
life without having exchanged a hundred words with her or perhaps to the
fact that he was only twenty years old, he did not recognize as
revealing a character cold, implacable, and even ruthless. He obeyed it
immediately after the noon meal, walking the half mile between his home
and hers through the dry dusty heat of early September and so into the
house. It too was somehow smaller than its actual sizeit was of two
storiesun-painted and a little shabby, yet with an air, a quality of
grim endurance as though like her it had been created to fit into and
complement a world in all ways a little smaller than the one in which it
found itself. There in the gloom of the shuttered hallway whose air was
even hotter than outside, as if there were prisoned in it like in a tomb
all the suspiration of slow heat-laden time which had recurred during
the forty-five years, the small figure in black which did not even
rustle, the wan triangle of lace at wrists and throat, the dim face
looking at him with an expression speculative, urgent and intent, waited
to invite him in.

_Its because she wants it told_, he thought, _so that people whom she
will never see and whose names she will never hear and who have never
heard her name nor seen her face will read it and know at last why God
let us lose the War: that only through the blood of our men and the
tears of our women could He stay this demon and efface his name and
lineage from the earth._ Then almost immediately he decided that neither
was this the reason why she had sent the note, and sending it, why to
him, since if she had merely wanted it told, written and even printed,
she would not have needed to call in anybodya woman who even in his
(Quentins) fathers youth had already established herself as the towns
and the countys poetess laureate by issuing to the stern and meager
subscription list of the county newspaper poems, ode, eulogy and
epitaph, out of some bitter and implacable reserve of undefeat.

It would be three hours yet before he would learn why she had sent for
him because part of it, the first part of it, Quentin already knew. It
was a part of his twenty years heritage of breathing the same air and
hearing his father talk about the man Sutpen; a part of the
townsJeffersonseighty years heritage of the same air which the
man himself had breathed between this September afternoon in 1909 and
that Sunday morning in June in 1833 when he first rode into town out of
no discernible past and acquired his land no one knew how and built his
house, his mansion, apparently out of nothing and married Ellen
Coldfield and begot his two childrenthe son who widowed the daughter
who had not yet been a brideand so accomplished his allotted course to
its violent (Miss Coldfield at least would have said, just) end. Quentin
had grown up with that; the mere names were interchangeable and almost
myriad. His childhood was full of them; his very body was an empty hall
echoing with sonorous defeated names; he was not a being, an entity, he
was a commonwealth. He was a barracks filled with stubborn back-looking
ghosts still recovering, even forty-three years afterward, from the
fever which had cured the disease, waking from the fever without even
knowing that it had been the fever itself which they had fought against
and not the sickness, looking with stubborn recalcitrance backward
beyond the fever and into the disease with actual regret, weak from the
fever yet free of the disease and not even aware that the freedom was
that of impotence.

(But why tell me about it? he said to his father that evening, when he
returned home, after she had dismissed him at last with his promise to
return for her in the buggy; why tell me about it? What is it to me
that the land of the earth or whatever it was got tired of him at last
and turned and destroyed him? What if it did destroy her family too?
Its going to turn and destroy us all some day, whether our name happens
to be Sutpen or Coldfield or not.

Ah, Mr Compson said. Years ago we in the South made our women into
ladies. Then the War came and made the ladies into ghosts. So what else
can we do, being gentlemen, but listen to them being ghosts? Then he
said, Do you want to know the real reason why she chose you? They were
sitting on the gallery after supper, waiting for the time Miss Coldfield
had set for Quentin to call for her. Its because she will need someone
to go with hera man, a gentleman, yet one still young enough to do
what she wants, do it the way she wants it done. And she chose you
because your grandfather was the nearest thing to a friend Sutpen ever
had in this county, and she probably believes that Sutpen may have told
your grandfather something about himself and her, about that engagement
which did not engage, that troth which failed to plight. Might even have
told your grandfather the reason why at the last she refused to marry
him. And that your grandfather might have told me and I might have told
you. And so, in a sense, the affair, no matter what happens out there
tonight, will still be in the family; the skeleton (if it be a skeleton)
still in the closet. She may believe that if it hadnt been for your
grandfathers friendship, Sutpen could never have got a foothold here,
and that if he had not got that foothold, he could not have married
Ellen. So maybe she considers you partly responsible through heredity
for what happened to her and her family through him.)

Whatever her reason for choosing him, whether it was that or not, the
getting to it, Quentin thought, was taking a long time. Meanwhile, as
though in inverse ratio to the vanishing voice, the invoked ghost of the
man whom she could neither forgive nor revenge herself upon began to
assume a quality almost of solidity, permanence. Itself circumambient
and enclosed by its effluvium of hell, its aura of unregeneration, it
mused (mused, thought, seemed to possess sentience, as if, though
dispossessed of the peacewho was impervious anyhow to fatiguewhich
she declined to give it, it was still irrevocably outside the scope of
her hurt or harm) with that quality peaceful and now harmless and not
even very attentivethe ogre-shape which, as Miss Coldfields voice
went on, resolved out of itself before Quentins eyes the two half-ogre
children, the three of them forming a shadowy background for the fourth
one. This was the mother, the dead sister Ellen: this Niobe without
tears who had conceived to the demon in a kind of nightmare, who even
while alive had moved but without life and grieved but without weeping,
who now had an air of tranquil and unwitting desolation, not as if she
had either outlived the others or had died first, but as if she had
never lived at all. Quentin seemed to see them, the four of them
arranged into the conventional family group of the period, with formal
and lifeless decorum, and seen now as the fading and ancient photograph
itself would have been seen enlarged and hung on the wall behind and
above the voice and of whose presence there the voices owner was not
even aware, as if she (Miss Coldfield) had never seen this room
beforea picture, a group which even to Quentin had a quality strange,
contradictory and bizarre; not quite comprehensible, not (even to
twenty) quite righta group the last member of which had been dead
twenty-five years and the first, fifty, evoked now out of the airless
gloom of a dead house between an old womans grim and implacable
unforgiving and the passive chafing of a youth of twenty telling himself
even amid the voice _Maybe you have to know anybody awful well to love
them but when you have hated somebody for forty-three years you will
know them awful well so maybe its better then, maybe its fine then
because after forty-three years they cant any longer surprise you or
make you either very contented or very mad._ And maybe it (the voice,
the talking, the incredulous and unbearable amazement) had even been a
cry aloud once, Quentin thought, long ago when she was a girlof young
and indomitable unregret, of indictment of blind circumstance and savage
event; but not now: now only the lonely thwarted old female flesh
embattled for forty-three years in the old insult, the old unforgiving
outraged and betrayed by the final and complete affront which was
Sutpens death:

He wasnt a gentleman. He wasnt even a gentleman. He came here with a
horse and two pistols and a name which nobody ever heard before, knew
for certain was his own any more than the horse was his own or even the
pistols, seeking some place to hide himself, and Yoknapatawpha County
supplied him with it. He sought the guarantee of reputable men to
barricade him from the other and later strangers who might come seeking
him in turn, and Jefferson gave him that. Then he needed respectability,
the shield of a virtuous woman, to make his position impregnable even
against the men who had given him protection on that inevitable day and
hour when even they must rise against him in scorn and horror and
outrage; and it was mine and Ellens father who gave him that. Oh, I
hold no brief for Ellen: blind romantic fool who had only youth and
inexperience to excuse her even if that; blind romantic fool, then later
blind woman mother fool when she no longer had either youth or
inexperience to excuse her, when she lay dying in that house for which
she had exchanged pride and peace both and nobody there but the daughter
who was already the same as a widow without ever having been a bride and
was, three years later, to be a widow sure enough without having been
anything at all, and the son who had repudiated the very roof under
which he had been born and to which he would return but once more before
disappearing for good, and that as a murderer and almost a fratricide;
and he, fiend blackguard and devil, in Virginia fighting, where the
chances of the earths being rid of him were the best anywhere under the
sun, yet Ellen and I both knowing that he would return, that every man
in our armies would have to fall before bullet or ball found him; and
only I, a child, a child, mind you, four years younger than the very
niece I was asked to save, for Ellen to turn to and say, Protect her.
Protect Judith at least. Yes, blind romantic fool, who did not even
have that hundred miles of plantation which apparently moved our father
nor that big house and the notion of slaves underfoot day and night
which reconciled, I wont say moved, her aunt. No: just the face of a man
who contrived somehow to swagger even on a horsea man who so far as
anyone (including the father who was to give him a daughter in marriage)
knew either had no past at all or did not dare reveal ita man who rode
into town out of nowhere with a horse and two pistols and a herd of wild
beasts that he had hunted down singlehanded because he was stronger in
fear than even they were in whatever heathen place he had fled from, and
that French architect who looked like he had been hunted down and caught
in turn by the negroesa man who fled here and hid, concealed himself
behind respectability, behind that hundred miles of land which he took
from a tribe of ignorant Indians, nobody knows how, and a house the size
of a courthouse where he lived for three years without a window or door
or bedstead in it and still called it Sutpens Hundred as if it had been
a kings grant in unbroken perpetuity from his great grandfathera
home, position: a wife and family which, being necessary to concealment,
he accepted along with the rest of respectability as he would have
accepted the necessary discomfort and even pain of the briers and thorns
in a thicket if the thicket could have given him the protection he
sought.

No: not even a gentleman. Marrying Ellen or marrying ten thousand
Ellens could not have made him one. Not that he wanted to be one, or
even be taken for one. No. That was not necessary, since all he would
need would be Ellens and our fathers names on a wedding license (or on
any other patent of respectability) that people could look at and read
just as he would have wanted our fathers (or any other reputable mans)
signature on a note of hand because our father knew who his father was
in Tennessee and who his grandfather had been in Virginia and our
neighbors and the people we lived among knew that we knew and we knew
they knew we knew and we knew that they would have believed us about
whom and where he came from even if we had lied, just as anyone could
have looked at him once and known that he would be lying about who and
where and why he came from by the very fact that apparently he had to
refuse to say at all. And the very fact that he had had to choose
respectability to hide behind was proof enough (if anyone needed further
proof) that what he fled from must have been some opposite of
respectability too dark to talk about. Because he was too young. He was
just twenty-five and a man of twenty-five does not voluntarily undertake
the hardship and privation of clearing virgin land and establishing a
plantation in a new country just for money; not a young man without any
past that he apparently cared to discuss, in Mississippi in 1833, with a
river full of steamboats loaded with drunken fools covered with diamonds
and bent on throwing away their cotton and slaves before the boat
reached New Orleansnot with all this just one nights hard ride away
and the only handicap or obstacle being the other blackguards or the
risk of being put ashore on a sandbar, and at the remotest, a hemp rope.
And he was no younger son sent out from some old quiet country like
Virginia or Carolina with the surplus negroes to take up new land,
because anyone could look at those negroes of his and tell that they may
have come (and probably did) from a much older country than Virginia or
Carolina but it wasnt a quiet one. And anyone could have looked once at
his face and known that he would have chosen the river and even the
certainty of the hemp rope, to undertaking what he undertook even if he
had known that he would find gold buried and waiting for him in the very
land which he had bought.

No. I hold no more brief for Ellen than I do for myself. I hold even
less for myself, because I had had twenty years in which to watch him,
where Ellen had had but five. And not even those five to see him but
only to hear at second hand what he was doing, and not even to hear more
than half of that, since apparently half of what he actually did during
those five years nobody at all knew about, and half of the remainder no
man would have repeated to a wife, let alone a young girl; he came here
and set up a raree show which lasted five years and Jefferson paid him
for the entertainment by at least shielding him to the extent of not
telling their womenfolks what he was doing. But I had had all my life to
watch him in, since apparently and for what reason Heaven has not seen
fit to divulge, my life was destined to end on an afternoon in April
forty-three years ago, since anyone who even had as little to call
living as I had had up to that time would not call what I have had since
living. I saw what had happened to Ellen, my sister. I saw her almost a
recluse, watching those two doomed children growing up whom she was
helpless to save. I saw the price which she had paid for that house and
that pride; I saw the notes of hand on pride and contentment and peace
and all to which she had put her signature when she walked into the
church that night, begin to fall due in succession. I saw Judiths
marriage forbidden without rhyme or reason or shadow of excuse; I saw
Ellen die with only me, a child, to turn to and ask to protect her
remaining child; I saw Henry repudiate his home and birthright and then
return and practically fling the bloody corpse of his sisters
sweetheart at the hem of her wedding gown; I saw that man returnthe
evils source and head which had outlasted all its victimswho had
created two children not only to destroy one another and his own line,
but my line as well, yet I agreed to marry him.

No. I hold no brief for myself. I dont plead youth, since what
creature in the South since 1861, man woman nigger or mule, had had time
or opportunity not only to have been young, but to have heard what being
young was like from those who had. I dont plead propinquity: the fact
that I, a woman young and at the age for marrying and in a time when
most of the young men whom I would have known ordinarily were dead on
lost battlefields, that I lived for two years under the same roof with
him. I dont plead material necessity: the fact that, an orphan a woman
and a pauper, I turned naturally not for protection but for actual food
to my only kin: my dead sisters family: though I defy anyone to blame
me, an orphan of twenty, a young woman without resources, who should
desire not only to justify her situation but to vindicate the honor of a
family the good name of whose women has never been impugned, by
accepting the honorable proffer of marriage from the man whose food she
was forced to subsist on. And most of all, I do not plead myself: a
young woman emerging from a holocaust which had taken parents security
and all from her, who had seen all that living meant to her fall into
ruins about the feet of a few figures with the shapes of men but with
the names and statures of heroesa young woman, I say, thrown into
daily and hourly contact with one of these men who, despite what he
might have been at one time and despite what she might have believed or
even known about him, had fought for four honorable years for the soil
and traditions of the land where she had been born. And the man who had
done that, villain dyed though he be, would have possessed in her eyes,
even if only from association with them, the stature and shape of a hero
too, and now he also emerging from the same holocaust in which she had
suffered, with nothing to face what the future held for the South but
his bare hands and the sword which he at least had never surrendered and
the citation for valor from his defeated Commander-in-Chief. Oh, he was
brave. I have never gainsaid that. But that our cause, our very life and
future hopes and past pride, should have been thrown into the balance
with men like that to buttress itmen with valor and strength but
without pity or honor. Is it any wonder that Heaven saw fit to let us
lose?

Nome, Quentin said.

But that it should have been our father, mine and Ellens father of all
of them that he knew, out of all the ones who used to go out there and
drink and gamble with him and watch him fight those wild negroes, whose
daughters he might even have won at cards. That it should have been our
father. How he could have approached papa, on what grounds; what there
could have been besides the common civility of two men meeting on the
street, between a man who came from nowhere or dared not tell where and
our father; what there could have been between a man like that and
papaa Methodist steward, a merchant who was not rich and who not only
could have done nothing under the sun to advance his fortunes or
prospects but could by no stretch of the imagination even have owned
anything that he would have wanted, even picked up in the roada man
who owned neither land nor slaves except two house servants whom he had
freed as soon as he got them, bought them, who neither drank nor hunted
nor gambledwhat there could have been between a man who to my certain
knowledge was never in a Jefferson church but three times in his
lifethe once when he first saw Ellen, the once when they rehearsed the
wedding, the once when they performed ita man that anyone could look
at and see that, even if he apparently had none now, he was accustomed
to having money and intended to have it again and would have no scruples
about how he got itthat man to discover Ellen inside a church. In
church, mind you, as though there were a fatality and curse on our
family and God Himself were seeing to it that it was performed and
discharged to the last drop and dreg. Yes, fatality and curse on the
South and on our family as though because some ancestor of ours had
elected to establish his descent in a land primed for fatality and
already cursed with it, even if it had not rather been our family, our
fathers progenitors, who had incurred the curse long years before and
had been coerced by Heaven into establishing itself in the land and the
time already cursed. So that even I, a child still too young to know
more than that, though Ellen was my own sister and Henry and Judith my
own nephew and niece, I was not even to go out there save when papa or
my aunt was with me and that I was not to play with Henry and Judith at
all except in the house (and not because I was four years younger than
Judith and six years younger than Henry: wasnt it to me that Ellen
turned before she died and said Protect them?)even I used to wonder
what our father or his father could have done before he married our
mother that Ellen and I would have to expiate and neither of us alone be
sufficient; what crime committed that would leave our family cursed to
be instruments not only for that mans destruction, but for our own.

Yessum, Quentin said.

Yes, the grim quiet voice said from beyond the unmoving triangle of
dim lace; and now, among the musing and decorous wraiths Quentin seemed
to watch resolving the figure of a little girl, in the prim skirts and
pantalettes, the smooth prim decorous braids, of the dead time. She
seemed to stand, to lurk, behind the neat picket fence of a small,
grimly middleclass yard or lawn, looking out upon the whatever
ogre-world of that quiet village street with that air of children born
too late into their parents lives and doomed to contemplate all human
behavior through the complex and needless follies of adultsan air
Cassandralike and humorless and profoundly and sternly prophetic out of
all proportion to the actual years even of a child who had never been
young. Because I was born too late. I was born twenty-two years too
latea child to whom out of the overheard talk of adults my own
sisters and my sisters childrens faces had come to be like the faces
in an ogre-tale between supper and bed long before I was old enough or
big enough to be permitted to play with them, yet to whom that sister
must have to turn at the last when she lay dying, with one of the
children vanished and doomed to be a murderer and the other doomed to be
a widow before she had even been a bride, and say, Protect her, at
least. At least save Judith. A child, yet whose childs vouchsafed
instinct could make that reply which the mature wisdom of her elders
apparently could not make: Protect her? From whom and from what; He has
already given them life: he does not need to harm them further. It is
from themselves that they need protection.

It should have been later than it was; it should have been late, yet the
yellow slashes of mote-palpitant sunlight were latticed no higher up the
impalpable wall of gloom which separated them; the sun seemed hardly to
have moved. It (the talking, the telling) seemed (to him, to Quentin) to
partake of that logic- and reason-flouting quality of a dream which the
sleeper knows must have occurred, stillborn and complete, in a second,
yet the very quality upon which it must depend to move the dreamer
(verisimilitude) to credulityhorror or pleasure or amazementdepends
as completely upon a formal recognition of and acceptance of elapsed and
yet-elapsing time as music or a printed tale. Yes. I was born too late.
I was a child who was to remember those three faces (and his, too) as
seen for the first time in the carriage on that first Sunday morning
when this town finally realized that he had turned that road from
Sutpens Hundred in to the church into a race track. I was three then,
and doubtless I had seen them before; I must have. But I do not remember
it. I do not even remember ever having seen Ellen before that Sunday. It
was as though the sister whom I had never laid eyes on, who before I was
born had vanished into the stronghold of an ogre or a djinn, was now to
return through a dispensation of one day only, to the world which she
had quitted, and I a child of three, waked early for the occasion,
dressed and curled as if for Christmas, for an occasion more serious
than Christmas even, since now and at last this ogre or djinn had agreed
for the sake of the wife and the children to come to church, to permit
them at least to approach the vicinity of salvation, to at least give
Ellen one chance to struggle with him for those childrens souls on a
battleground where she could be supported not only by Heaven but by her
own family and people of her own kind; yes, even for the moment
submitting himself to redemption, or lacking that, at least chivalrous
for the instant even though still unregenerate. That is what I expected.
This is what I saw as I stood there before the church between papa and
our aunt and waited for the carriage to arrive from the twelve-mile
drive. And though I must have seen Ellen and the children before this,
this is the vision of my first sight of them which I shall carry to my
grave: a glimpse like the forefront of a tornado, of the carriage and
Ellens high white face within it and the two replicas of his face in
miniature flanking her, and on the front seat the face and teeth of the
wild negro who was driving, and he, his face exactly like the negros
save for the teeth (this because of his beard, doubtless)all in a
thunder and a fury of wildeyed horses and of galloping and of dust.

Oh, there were plenty of them to abet him, assist him, make a race of
it; ten oclock on Sunday morning, the carriage racing on two wheels up
to the very door to the church with that wild negro in his Christian
clothes looking exactly like a performing tiger in a linen duster and a
top hat, and Ellen with no drop of blood in her face, holding those two
children who were not crying and who did not need to be held, who sat on
either side of her, perfectly still too, with in their faces that
infantile enormity which we did not then quite comprehend. Oh, yes,
there were plenty to aid and abet him; even he could not have held a
horse race without someone to race against. Because it was not even
public opinion that stopped him, not even the men who might have had
wives and children in carriages to be ridden down and into ditches: it
was the minister himself, speaking in the name of the women of Jefferson
and Yoknapatawpha County. So he quit coming to church himself; now it
would be just Ellen and the children in the carriage on Sunday morning,
so we knew now that at least there would be no betting now, since no one
could say if it was an actual race or not, since now, with his face
absent, it was only the wild negros perfectly inscrutable one with the
teeth glinting a little, so that now we could never know if it were a
race or a runaway, and if there was triumph, it was on the face twelve
miles back there at Sutpens Hundred, which did not even require to see
or be present. It was the negro now, who in the act of passing another
carriage spoke to that team too as well as to his ownsomething without
words, not needing words probably, in that tongue in which they slept in
the mud of that swamp and brought here out of whatever dark swamp he had
found them in and brought them herethe dust, the thunder, the carriage
whirling up to the church door while women and children scattered and
screamed before it and men caught at the bridles of the other team. And
the negro would let Ellen and the children out at the door and take the
carriage on around to the hitching grove and beat the horses for running
away; there was even a fool who tried to interfere once, whereupon the
negro turned upon him with the stick lifted and his teeth showing a
little and said, Marster say; I do. You tell Marster.

Yes. From them; from themselves. And this time it was not even the
minister. It was Ellen. Our aunt and papa were talking and I came in and
my aunt said Go out and play, though even if I could not have heard
through the door at all, I could have repeated the conversation for
them: Your daughter, your own daughter my aunt said; and papa: Yes.
She is my daughter. When she wants me to interfere she will tell me so
herself. Because this Sunday when Ellen and the children came out of
the front door, it was not the carriage waiting, it was Ellens phaeton
with the old gentle mare which she drove and the stableboy that he had
bought instead of the wild negro. And Judith looked once at the phaeton
and realized what it meant and began to scream, screaming and kicking
while they carried her back into the house and put her to bed. No, he
was not present. Nor do I claim a lurking triumphant face behind a
window curtain. Probably he would have been as amazed as we were since
we would all realize now that we were faced by more than a childs
tantrum or even hysteria: that his face had been in that carriage all
the time; that it had been Judith, a girl of six, who had instigated and
authorized that negro to make the team run away. Not Henry, mind; not
the boy, which would have been outrageous enough; but Judith, the girl.

As soon as papa and I entered those gates that afternoon and began to
go up the drive toward the house, I could feel it. It was as though
somewhere in that Sunday afternoons quiet and peace the screams of that
child still existed, lingered, not as sound now but as something for the
skin to hear, the hair on the head to hear. But I did not ask at once. I
was just four then; I sat in the buggy beside papa as I had stood
between him and our aunt before the church on that first Sunday when I
had been dressed to come and see my sister and my nephew and niece for
the first time, looking at the house. I had been inside it before too,
of course, but even when I saw it for the first time that I could
remember I seemed already to know how it was going to look just as I
seemed to know how Ellen and Judith and Henry would look before I saw
them for the time which I always remember as being the first. No, not
asking even then, but just looking at that huge quiet house, saying
What room is Judith sick in, papa? with that quiet aptitude of a child
for accepting the inexplicable, though I now know that even then I was
wondering what Judith saw when she came out the door and found the
phaeton instead of the carriage, the tame stableboy instead of the wild
man; what she had seen in that phaeton which looked so innocent to the
rest of usor worse, what she had missed when she saw the phaeton and
began to scream. Yes, a still hot quiet Sunday afternoon like this
afternoon; I remember yet the utter quiet of that house when we went in
and from which I knew at once that he was absent without knowing that he
would now be in the scuppernong arbor drinking with Wash Jones. I only
knew, as soon as papa and I crossed the threshold, that he was not
there: as though with some almost omniscient conviction, knowing that he
did not need to stay and observe his triumphand that, in comparison
with what was to be, this one was a mere trivial business even beneath
our notice too. Yes, that quiet darkened room with the blinds closed and
a Negro woman sitting beside the bed with a fan and Judiths white face
on the pillow beneath a camphor cloth, asleep as I supposed then:
possibly it was sleep, or would be called sleep: and Ellens face white
and calm and papa said Go out and find Henry and ask him to play with
you, Rosa and so I stood just outside that quiet door in that quiet
upper hall because I was afraid to go away even from it, because I could
hear the sabbath afternoon quiet of that house louder than thunder,
louder than laughing even with triumph.

Think of the children, papa said.

Think? Ellen said. What else do I do; What else do I lie awake at
night and do but think of them? Neither papa nor Ellen said: Come back
home. No: This occurred before it became fashionable to repair your
mistakes by turning your back on them and running. It was just the two
quiet voices beyond that blank door which might have been discussing
something printed in a magazine; and I, a child standing close beside
that door because I was afraid to be there but more afraid to leave it,
standing motionless beside that door as though trying to make myself
blend with the dark wood and become invisible, like a chameleon,
listening to the living spirit, presence, of that house, since some of
Ellens life and breath had now gone into it as well as his, breathing
away in a long neutral sound of victory and despair, of triumph and
terror too.

Do you love this . . . papa said.

Papa. Ellen said. That was all. But I could see her face then as
clearly as papa could have, with that same expression which it had worn
in the carriage on that first Sunday and the others. Then a servant came
and said our buggy was ready.

Yes. From themselves. Not from him, not from anybody, just as nobody
could have saved them, even himself. Because he now showed us why that
triumph had been beneath his notice. He showed Ellen, that is: not me. I
was not there; it was six years now, during which I had scarcely seen
him. Our aunt was gone now and I was keeping house for papa. Perhaps
once a year papa and I would go out there and have dinner, and maybe
four times a year Ellen and the children would come in and spend the day
with us. Not he; that I know of, he never entered this house again after
he and Ellen married. I was young then; I was even young enough to
believe that this was due to some stubborn coal of conscience, if not
remorse, even in him. But I know better now. I know now that it was
simply because since papa had given him respectability through a wife
there was nothing else he could want from papa and so not even sheer
gratitude, let alone appearances, could force him to forego his own
pleasure to the extent of taking a family meal with his wifes people.
So I saw little of them. I did not have time now to play, even if I had
ever had any inclination. I had never learned how and I saw no reason to
try to learn now even if I had had the time.

So it was six years now, though it was actually no secret to Ellen
since it had apparently been going on ever since he drove the last nail
in the house, the only difference between now and the time of his
bachelorhood being that now they would hitch the teams and saddle horses
and mules in the grove beyond the stable and so come up across the
pasture unseen from the house. Because there were plenty of them still;
it was as if God or the devil had taken advantage of his very vices in
order to supply witnesses to the discharge of our curse not only from
among gentlefolks, our own kind, but from the very scum and riffraff who
could not have approached the house itself under any other
circumstances, not even from the rear. Yes, Ellen and those two children
alone in that house twelve miles from town, and down there in the stable
a hollow square of faces in the lantern light, the white faces on three
sides, the black ones on the fourth, and in the center two of his wild
negroes fighting, naked, fighting not as white men fight, with rules and
weapons, but as negroes fight to hurt one another quick and bad, Ellen
knew that, or thought she did; that was not it. She accepted thatnot
reconciled: acceptedas though there is a breathing-point in outrage
where you can accept it almost with gratitude since you can say to
yourself, _thank God, this is all; at least I now know all of
it_thinking that, clinging still to that when she ran into the stable
that night while the very men who had stolen into it from the rear fell
back away from her with at least some grain of decency, and Ellen seeing
not the two black beasts she had expected to see but instead a white one
and a black one, both naked to the waist and gouging at one anothers
eyes as if they should not only have been the same color, but should
have been covered with fur too. Yes. It seems that on certain occasions,
perhaps at the end of the evening, the spectacle, as a grand finale or
perhaps as a matter of sheer deadly forethought toward the retention of
supremacy, domination, he would enter the ring with one of the negroes
himself. Yes. Thats what Ellen saw: her husband and the father of her
children standing there naked and panting and bloody to the waist and
the negro just fallen evidently, lying at his feet and bloody too, save
that on the negro it merely looked like grease or sweatEllen running
down the hill from the house, bareheaded, in time to hear the sound, the
screaming, hearing it while she still ran in the darkness and before the
spectators knew that she was there, hearing it even before it occurred
to one spectator to say, Its a horse then Its a woman then My
God, its a childran in, and the spectators falling back to permit
her to see Henry plunge out from among the negroes who had been holding
him, screaming and vomitingnot pausing, not even looking at the faces
which shrank back away from her as she knelt in the stable filth to
raise Henry and not looking at Henry either but up at _him_ as he stood
there with even his teeth showing beneath his beard now and another
negro wiping the blood from his body with a towsack. I know you will
excuse us, gentlemen, Ellen said. But they were already departing,
nigger and white, slinking out again as they had slunk in, and Ellen not
watching them now either but kneeling in the dirt while Henry clung to
her, crying, and _he_ standing there yet while a third nigger prodded
his shirt or coat at him as though the coat were a stick and he a caged
snake. Where is Judith, Thomas? Ellen said.

Judith? he said. Oh, he was not lying; his own triumph had outrun
him; he had builded even better in evil than even he could have hoped.
Judith? Isnt she in bed?

Dont lie to me, Thomas, Ellen said. I can understand your bringing
Henry here to see this, wanting Henry to see this; I will try to
understand it; yes, I will make myself try to understand it. But not
Judith, Thomas. Not my baby girl, Thomas.

I dont expect you to understand it, he said. Because you are a
woman. But I didnt bring Judith down here. I would not bring her down
here. I dont expect you to believe that. But I swear to it.

I wish I could believe you, Ellen said. I want to believe you. Then
she began to call. Judith! she called in a voice calm and sweet and
filled with despair: Judith honey! Time to come to bed.

But I was not there. I was not there to see the two Sutpen faces this
timeonce on Judith and once on the negro girl beside herlooking down
through the square entrance to the loft.




                               [*  II  *]


          It was a summer of wistaria. The twilight was full of it and
of the smell of his fathers cigar as they sat on the front gallery
after supper until it would be time for Quentin to start, while in the
deep shaggy lawn below the veranda the fireflies blew and drifted in
soft randomthe odor, the scent, which five months later Mr Compsons
letter would carry up from Mississippi and over the long iron New
England snow and into Quentins sitting-room at Harvard. It was a day of
listening toothe listening, the hearing in 1909 mostly about that
which he already knew, since he had been born in and still breathed the
same air in which the church bells had rung on that Sunday morning in
1833 and, on Sundays, heard even one of the original three bells in the
same steeple where descendants of the same pigeons strutted and crooned
or wheeled in short courses resembling soft fluid paint-smears on the
soft summer sky. That Sunday morning in June with the bells ringing
peaceful and peremptory and a little cacophonousthe denominations in
concord though not in tuneand the ladies and children, and house
negroes to carry the parasols and flywhisks, and even a few men (the
ladies moving in hoops among the miniature broadcloth of little boys and
the pantalettes of little girls, in the skirts of the time when ladies
did not walk but floated) when the other men sitting with their feet on
the railing of the Holston House gallery looked up, and there the
stranger was. He was already halfway across the Square when they saw
him, on a big hard-ridden roan horse, man and beast looking as though
they had been created out of thin air and set down in the bright summer
sabbath sunshine in the middle of a tired foxtrotface and horse that
none of them had ever seen before, name that none of them had ever
heard, and origin and purpose which some of them were never to learn. So
that in the next four weeks (Jefferson was a village then: the Holston
House, the courthouse, six stores, a blacksmith and livery stable, a
saloon frequented by drovers and peddlers, three churches and perhaps
thirty residences) the strangers name went back and forth among the
places of business and of idleness and among the residences in steady
strophe and antistrophe: _Sutpen. Sutpen. Sutpen. Sutpen._

That was all that the town was to know about him for almost a month. He
had apparently come into town from the southa man of about twenty-five
as the town learned later, because at the time his age could not have
been guessed because he looked like a man who had been sick. Not like a
man who had been peacefully ill in bed and had recovered to move with a
sort of diffident and tentative amazement in a world which he had
believed himself on the point of surrendering, but like a man who had
been through some solitary furnace experience which was more than just
fever, like an explorer say, who not only had to face the normal
hardship of the pursuit which he chose but was overtaken by the added
and unforeseen handicap of the fever also and fought through it at
enormous cost not so much physical as mental, alone and unaided and not
through blind instinctive will to endure and survive but to gain and
keep to enjoy it the material prize for which he accepted the original
gambit. A man with a big frame but gaunt now almost to emaciation, with
a short reddish beard which resembled a disguise and above which his
pale eyes had a quality at once visionary and alert, ruthless and
reposed in a face whose flesh had the appearance of pottery, of having
been colored by that ovens fever either of soul or environment, deeper
than sun alone beneath a dead impervious surface as of glazed clay. That
was what they saw, though it was years before the town learned that that
was all which he possessed at the timethe strong spent horse and the
clothes on his back and a small saddlebag scarcely large enough to
contain the spare linen and the razors, and the two pistols of which
Miss Coldfield told Quentin, with the butts worn smooth as pickhandles
and which he used with the precision of knitting needles; later
Quentins grandfather saw him ride at a canter around a sapling at
twenty feet and put both bullets into a playing card fastened to the
tree. He had a room in the Holston House but he carried the key with him
and each morning he fed and saddled the horse and rode away before
daylight, where to the town likewise failed to learn, probably due to
the fact that he gave the pistol demonstration on the third day after
his arrival. So they had to depend on inquiry to find out what they
could about him, which would of necessity be at night, at the supper
table in the Holston House dining room or in the lounge which he would
have to cross to gain his room and lock the door again, which he would
do as soon as he finished eating. The bar opened into the lounge too,
and that would or should have been the place to accost him and even
inquire, except for the fact that he did not use the bar. He did not
drink at all, he told them. He did not say that he used to drink and had
quit, nor that he had never used alcohol. He just said that he would not
care for a drink; it was years later before even Quentins grandfather
(he was a young man too then; it would be years yet before he would
become General Compson) learned that the reason Sutpen did not drink was
that he did not have the money with which to pay his share or return the
courtesy: it was General Compson who first realized that at this time
Sutpen lacked not only the money to spend for drink and conviviality,
but the time and inclination as well: that he was at this time
completely the slave of his secret and furious impatience, his
conviction gained from whatever that recent experience had beenthat
fever mental or physicalof a need for haste, of time fleeing beneath
him, which was to drive him for the next five yearsas General Compson
computed it, roughly until about nine months before his son was born.

So they would catch him, run him to earth, in the lounge between the
supper table and his locked door to give him the opportunity to tell
them who he was and where he came from and what he was up to, whereupon
he would move gradually and steadily until his back came in contact with
somethinga post or a walland then stand there and tell them nothing
whatever as pleasantly and courteously as a hotel clerk. It was the
Chickasaw Indian agent with or through whom he dealt and so it was not
until he waked the County Recorder that Saturday night with the deed,
patent, to the land and the gold Spanish coin, that the town learned
that he now owned a hundred square miles of some of the best virgin
bottom land in the country, though even that knowledge came too late
because Sutpen himself was gone, where to again they did not know. But
he owned land among them now and some of them began to suspect what
General Compson apparently knew: that the Spanish coin with which he had
paid to have his patent recorded was the last one of any kind which he
possessed. So they were certain now that he had departed to get more;
there were several who even anticipated in believing (and even in saying
aloud, now that he was not present) what Sutpens future and then unborn
sister-in-law was to tell Quentin almost eighty years later: that he had
found some unique and practical way of hiding loot and that he had
returned to the cache to replenish his pockets, even if he had not
actually ridden with the two pistols back to the River and the
steamboats full of gamblers and cotton- and slavedealers to replenish
the cache. At least some of them were telling one another that when two
months later he returned, again without warning and accompanied this
time by the covered wagon with a negro driving it and on the seat with
the negro a small, alertly resigned man with a grim, harried Latin face,
in a frock coat and a flowered waistcoat and a hat which would have
created no furore on a Paris boulevard, all of which he was to wear
constantly for the next two yearsthe somberly theatric clothing and
the expression of fatalistic and amazed determinationwhile his white
client and the negro crew which he was to advise though not direct went
stark naked save for a coating of dried mud. This was the French
architect. Years later the town learned that he had come all the way
from Martinique on Sutpens bare promise and lived for two years on
venison cooked over a campfire, in an unfloored tent made of the wagon
hood, before he so much as saw any color or shape of pay. And until he
passed through town on his way back to New Orleans two years later, he
was not even to see Jefferson again; he would not come, or Sutpen would
not bring him, to town even on the few occasions when Sutpen would be
seen there, and he did not have much chance to look at Jefferson on that
first day because the wagon did not stop. Apparently it was only by
sheer geographical hap that Sutpen passed through town at all, pausing
only long enough for someone (not General Compson) to look beneath the
wagon hood and into a black tunnel filled with still eyeballs and
smelling like a wolfden.

But the legend of Sutpens wild negroes was not to begin at once,
because the wagon went on as though even the wood and iron which
composed it, as well as the mules which drew it, had become imbued by
sheer association with him with that quality of gaunt and tireless
driving, that conviction for haste and of fleeing time; later Sutpen
told Quentins grandfather that on that afternoon when the wagon passed
through Jefferson they had been without food since the previous night
and that he was trying to reach Sutpens Hundred and the river bottom to
try to kill a deer before dark, so he and the architect and the negroes
would not have to spend another night without food. So the legend of the
wild men came gradually back to town, brought by the men who would ride
out to watch what was going on, who began to tell how Sutpen would take
stand beside a game trail with the pistols and send the negroes in to
drive the swamp like a pack of hounds; it was they who told how during
that first summer and fall the negroes did not even have (or did not
use) blankets to sleep in, even before the coon-hunter Akers claimed to
have waked one of them out of the absolute mud like a sleeping alligator
and screamed just in time. The negroes could speak no English yet and
doubtless there were more than Akers who did not know that the language
in which they and Sutpen communicated was a sort of French and not some
dark and fatal tongue of their own.

There were many more than Akers, though the others were responsible
citizens and landowners and so did not have to lurk about the camp at
night. In fact, as Miss Coldfield told Quentin, they would make up
parties to meet at the Holston House and go out horseback, often
carrying lunch. Sutpen had built a brick kiln and he had set up the saw
and planer which he had brought in the wagona capstan with a long
sapling walking-beam, with the wagon team and the negroes in shifts and
himself too when necessary, when the machinery slowed, hitched to itas
if the negroes actually were wild men; as General Compson told his son,
Quentins father, while the negroes were working Sutpen never raised his
voice at them, that instead he led them, caught them at the
psychological instant by example, by some ascendancy of forbearance
rather than by brute fear. Without dismounting (usually Sutpen did not
even greet them with as much as a nod, apparently as unaware of their
presence as if they had been idle shades) they would sit in a curious
quiet clump as though for mutual protection and watch his mansion rise,
carried plank by plank and brick by brick out of the swamp where the
clay and timber waitedthe bearded white man and the twenty black ones
and all stark naked beneath the croaching and pervading mud. Being men,
these spectators did not realize that the garments which Sutpen had worn
when he first rode into Jefferson were the only ones in which they had
ever seen him, and few of the women in the county had seen him at all.
Otherwise, some of them would have anticipated Miss Coldfield in this
too: in divining that he was saving his clothes, since decorum even if
not elegance of appearance would be the only weapon (or rather, ladder)
with which he could conduct the last assault upon what Miss Coldfield
and perhaps others believed to be respectabilitythat respectability
which, according to General Compson, consisted in Sutpens secret mind
of a great deal more than the mere acquisition of a chatelaine for his
house. So he and the twenty negroes worked together, plastered over with
mud against the mosquitoes and, as Miss Coldfield told Quentin,
distinguishable one from another by his beard and eyes alone and only
the architect resembling a human creature because of the French clothes
which he wore constantly with a sort of invincible fatality until the
day after the house was completed save for the windowglass and the
ironware which they could not make by hand and the architect
departedworking in the sun and heat of summer and the mud and ice of
winter, with quiet and unflagging fury.

It took him two years, he and his crew of imported slaves which his
adopted fellow citizens still looked on as being a good deal more deadly
than any beast he could have started and slain in that country. They
worked from sunup to sundown while parties of horsemen rode up and sat
their horses quietly and watched, and the architect in his formal coat
and his Paris hat and his expression of grim and embittered amazement
lurked about the environs of the scene with his air something between a
casual and bitterly disinterested spectator and a condemned and
conscientious ghostamazement, General Compson said, not at the others
and what they were doing so much as at himself, at the inexplicable and
incredible fact of his own presence. But he was a good architect;
Quentin knew the house, twelve miles from Jefferson, in its grove of
cedar and oak, seventy-five years after it was finished. And not only an
architect, as General Compson said, but an artist since only an artist
could have borne those two years in order to build a house which he
doubtless not only expected but firmly intended never to see again. Not,
General Compson said, the hardship to sense and the outrage to
sensibility of the two years sojourn, but Sutpen: that only an artist
could have borne Sutpens ruthlessness and hurry and still manage to
curb the dream of grim and castlelike magnificence at which Sutpen
obviously aimed, since the place as Sutpen planned it would have been
almost as large as Jefferson itself at the time; that the little grim
harried foreigner had singlehanded given battle to and vanquished
Sutpens fierce and overweening vanity or desire for magnificence or for
vindication or whatever it was (even General Compson did not know yet)
and so created of Sutpens very defeat the victory which, in conquering,
Sutpen himself would have failed to gain.

So it was finished then, down to the last plank and brick and wooden pin
which they could make themselves. Un-painted and unfurnished, without a
pane of glass or a doorknob or hinge in it, twelve miles from town and
almost that far from any neighbor, it stood for three years more
surrounded by its formal gardens and promenades, its slave quarters and
stables and smokehouses; wild turkey ranged within a mile of the house
and deer came light and colored like smoke and left delicate prints in
the formal beds where there would be no flowers for four years yet. Now
there began a period, a phase, during which the town and the county
watched him with more puzzlement yet. Perhaps it was because the next
step toward that secret end which General Compson claimed to have known
but which the town and the county comprehended but dimly or not at all,
now required patience or passive time instead of that driving fury to
which he had accustomed them; now it was the women who first suspected
what he wanted, what the next step would be. None of the men, certainly
not those who knew him well enough to call him by name, suspected that
he wanted a wife. Doubtless there were some of them, husbands and
bachelors both, who not only would have refused to entertain the idea
but would even have protested against it, because for the next three
years he led what must have been to them a perfect existence. He lived
out there, eight miles from any neighbor, in masculine solitude in what
might be called the half-acre gunroom of a baronial splendor. He lived
in the Spartan shell of the largest edifice in the county, not excepting
the courthouse itself, whose threshold no woman had so much as seen,
without any feminized softness of window-pane or door or mattress; where
there was not only no woman to object if he should elect to have his
dogs in to sleep on the pallet bed with him, he did not even need dogs
to kill the game which left footprints within sight of the kitchen door
but hunted it instead with human beings who belonged to him body and
soul and of whom it was believed (or said) that they could creep up to a
bedded buck and cut its throat before it could move.

It was at this time that he began to invite the parties of men of which
Miss Coldfield told Quentin, out to Sutpens Hundred to camp in blankets
in the naked rooms of his embryonic formal opulence; they hunted, and at
night played cards and drank, and on occasion he doubtless pitted his
negroes against one another and perhaps even at this time participated
now and then himselfthat spectacle which, according to Miss Coldfield,
his son was unable to bear the sight of while his daughter looked on
unmoved. Sutpen drank himself now, though there were probably others
besides Quentins grandfather who remarked that he drank very sparingly
save when he himself had managed to supply some of the liquor. His
guests would bring whiskey out with them but he drank of this with a
sort of sparing calculation as though keeping mentally, General Compson
said, a sort of balance of spiritual solvency between the amount of
whiskey he accepted and the amount of running meat which he supplied to
the guns.

He lived like that for three years. He now had a plantation; inside of
two years he had dragged house and gardens out of virgin swamp, and
plowed and planted his land with seed cotton which General Compson
loaned him. Then he seemed to quit. He seemed to just sit down in the
middle of what he had almost finished, and to remain so for three years
during which he did not even appear to intend or want anything more.
Perhaps it is not to be wondered at that the men in the county came to
believe that the life he now led had been his aim all the time; it was
General Compson, who seemed to have known him well enough to offer to
lend him seed cotton for his start, who knew any better, to whom Sutpen
ever told anything about his past. It was General Compson who knew first
about the Spanish coin being his last one, as it was Compson (so the
town learned later) who offered to lend Sutpen the money to finish and
furnish his house, and was refused. So doubtless General Compson was the
first man in the county to tell himself that Sutpen did not need to
borrow money with which to complete the house, supply what it yet
lacked, because he intended to marry it. Not the first person to know:
rather the first man, since, according to what Miss Coldfield told
Quentin seventy-five years later, the women in the county had been
telling one another and their husbands as well that Sutpen did not
intend to quit there, that he had already gone to too much trouble, gone
through too much privation and hardship, to settle down and live exactly
as he had lived while the house was being built save that now he had a
roof to sleep under in place of an unfloored wagon hood. Probably the
women had already cast about among the families of the men who might now
be called his friends, for that prospective bride whose dowry might
complete the shape and substance of that respectability Miss Coldfield
anyway believed to be his aim. So when, at the expiration of this second
phase, three years after the house was finished and the architect
departed, and again on Sunday morning and again without warning, the
town saw him cross the square, on foot now but in the same garments in
which he had ridden into town five years ago and which no one had seen
since (he or one of the negroes had ironed the coat with heated bricks,
General Compson told Quentins father) and enter the Methodist church,
only some of the men were surprised. The women merely said that he had
exhausted the possibilities of the families of the men with whom he had
hunted and gambled and that he had now come to town to find a wife
exactly as he would have gone to the Memphis market to buy livestock or
slaves. But when they comprehended whom it was that he had apparently
come to town and into church to invest with his choice, the assurance of
the women became one with the mens surprise, and then even more than
that: amazement.

Because the town now believed that it knew him. For two years it had
watched him as with that grim and unflagging fury he had erected that
shell of a house and laid out his fields, then for three years he had
remained completely static, as if he were run by electricity and someone
had come along and removed, dismantled the wiring or the dynamo. So that
when he entered the Methodist church that Sunday morning in his ironed
coat, there were men as well as women who believed that they had only to
look around the congregation in order to anticipate the direction his
feet would take him, until they became aware that he had apparently
marked down Miss Coldfields father with the same cold and ruthless
deliberation with which he had probably marked down the French
architect. They watched in shocked amazement while he laid deliberate
siege to the one man in the town with whom he could have had nothing in
common, least of all, moneya man who obviously could do nothing under
the sun for him save give him credit at a little crossroads store or
cast a vote in his favor if he should ever seek ordination as a
Methodist ministera Methodist steward, a merchant not only of modest
position and circumstances but who already had a wife and family of his
own, let alone a dependent mother and sister, to support out of the
proceeds of a business which he had brought to Jefferson ten years ago
in a single wagona man with a name for absolute and undeviating and
even Puritan uprightness in a country and time of lawless opportunity,
who neither drank nor gambled nor even hunted. In their surprise they
forgot that Mr Coldfield had a marriageable daughter. They did not
consider the daughter at all. They did not think of love in connection
with Sutpen. They thought of ruthlessness rather than justice and of
fear rather than respect, but not of pity or love: besides being too
lost in amazed speculation as to just how Sutpen intended or could
contrive to use Mr Coldfield to further whatever secret ends he still
had. They were never to know: even Miss Rosa Coldfield did not. Because
from that day there were no more hunting parties out at Sutpens
Hundred, and when they saw him now it would be in town. But not loafing,
idling. The men who had slept and matched glasses with him under his
roof (some of them had even come to call him Sutpen without the formal
Mister) watched him pass along the street before the Holston House with
a single formal gesture to his hat and go on and enter Mr Coldfields
store, and that was all.

Then one day he quitted Jefferson for the second time, Mr Compson told
Quentin. The town should have been accustomed to that by now.
Nevertheless, his position had subtly changed, as you will see by the
towns reaction to this second return. Because when he came back this
time, he was in a sense a public enemy. Perhaps this was because of what
he brought back with him this time: the material he brought back this
time, as compared to the simple wagonload of wild niggers which he had
brought back before. But I dont think so. That is, I think it was a
little more involved than the sheer value of his chandeliers and
mahogany and rugs. I think that the affront was born of the towns
realization that he was getting it involved with himself; that whatever
the felony which produced the mahogany and crystal, he was forcing the
town to compound it. Heretofore, until that Sunday when he came to
church, if he had misused or injured anybody, it was only old
Ikkemotubbe, from whom he got his landa matter between his conscience
and Uncle Sam and God. But now his position had changed, because when,
about three months after he departed, four wagons left Jefferson to go
to the River and meet him, it was known that Mr Coldfield was the man
who hired and dispatched them. They were big wagons, drawn by oxen, and
when they returned the town looked at them and knew, no matter what they
might have contained, that Mr Coldfield could not have mortgaged
everything that he owned for enough to fill them; doubtless this time
there were more men than women even who pictured him during this absence
with a handkerchief over his face and the two pistol barrels glinting
beneath the candelabra of a steamboats saloon, even if no worse: if not
something performed in the lurking dark of a muddy landing and with a
knife from behind. They saw him pass, on the roan horse beside his four
wagons; it seems that even the ones who had eaten his food and shot his
game and even called him Sutpen without the Mister, didnt accost
him now. They just waited while reports and rumors came back to town of
how he and his now somewhat tamed negroes had installed the windows and
doors and the spits and pots in the kitchen and the crystal chandeliers
in the parlors and the furniture and the curtains and the rugs; it was
that same Akers who had blundered onto the mudcouched negro five years
ago who came, a little wildeyed and considerably slack-mouthed, into the
Holston House bar one evening and said, Boys, this time he stole the
whole durn steamboat!

So at last civic virtue came to a boil. One day and with the sheriff of
the county among them, a party of eight or ten took the road out to
Sutpens Hundred. They did not go all the way because about six miles
from town they met Sutpen himself. He was riding the roan horse, in the
frock coat and the beaver hat which they knew and with his legs wrapped
in a piece of tarpaulin; he had a portmanteau on his pommel and he was
carrying a small woven basket on his arm. He stopped the roan (it was
April then, and the road was still a quagmire) and sat there in his
splashed tarpaulin and looked from one face to the next; your
grandfather said that his eyes looked like pieces of a broken plate and
that his beard was strong as a curry-comb. That was how he put it:
strong as a curry-comb. Good morning, gentlemen, he said. Were you
looking for me?

Doubtless something more than this transpired at the time, though none
of the vigilance committee ever told it that I know of. All I ever heard
is how the town, the men on the gallery of the Holston House saw Sutpen
and the committee ride onto the square together, Sutpen a little in
front and the others bunched behind himSutpen with his legs and feet
wrapped neatly in his tarpaulin and his shoulders squared inside the
worn broadcloth coat and that worn brushed beaver cocked a little,
talking to them over his shoulder and those eyes hard and pale and
reckless and probably quizzical and maybe contemptuous even then. He
pulled up at the door and the negro hostler ducked out and took the
roans head and Sutpen got down, with his portmanteau and the basket and
mounted the steps, and I heard how he turned there and looked at them
again where they huddled on their horses, not knowing what to do
exactly. And it might have been a good thing that he had that beard and
they could not see his mouth. Then he turned, and he looked at the other
men sitting with their feet on the railing and watching him too, men who
used to come out to his place and sleep on the floor and hunt with him,
and he saluted them with that florid, swaggering gesture to the hat
(yes, he was underbred. It showed like this always, your grandfather
said, in all his formal contacts with people. He was like John L.
Sullivan having taught himself painfully and tediously to do the
schottische, having drilled himself and drilled himself in secret until
he now believed it no longer necessary to count the musics beat, say.
He may have believed that your grandfather or Judge Benbow might have
done it a little more effortlessly than he, but he would not have
believed that anyone could have beat him in knowing when to do it and
how. And besides, it was in his face; that was where his power lay, your
grandfather said: that anyone could look at him and say, _Given the
occasion and the need, this man can and will do anything_). Then he went
on into the house and commanded a chamber.

So they sat on their horses and waited for him. I suppose they knew
that he would have to come out some time: I suppose they sat there and
thought about those two pistols. Because there was still no warrant for
him, you see: it was just public opinion in an acute state of
indigestion; and now other horsemen rode into the square and became
aware of the situation, so that there was quite a posse waiting when he
walked out onto the gallery. He wore a new hat now, and a new broadcloth
coat, so they knew what the portmanteau had contained. They even knew
now what the basket had contained because he did not have that with him
now either. Doubtless at the time it merely puzzled them more than ever,
because, you see, they had been too busy speculating on just how he was
planning to use Mr Coldfield and, since his return, too completely
outraged by the belief that they now saw the results even if the means
were still an enigma, to remember about Miss Ellen at all.

So he stopped again doubtless and looked from face to face again,
doubtless memorizing the new faces, without any haste, with still the
beard to hide whatever his mouth might have shown. But he seems to have
said nothing at all this time. He just descended the steps and walked on
across the square, the committee (your grandfather said it had grown to
almost fifty by now) moving too, following him across the square. They
say he did not even look back. He just walked on, erect, with the new
hat cocked and carrying in his hand now that which must have seemed to
them the final gratuitous insult, with the committee riding along in the
street beside him and not quite parallel, and others who did not happen
to have horses at the moment joining in and following the committee in
the road, and ladies and children and women slaves coming to the doors
and windows of the homes as they passed to watch as they went on in grim
tableau, and Sutpen, still without once looking back, entered Mr
Coldfields gate and strode on up the brick walk to the door, carrying
his newspaper cornucopia of flowers.

They waited for him again. The crowd was growing fast nowother men
and a few boys and even some negroes from the adjacent houses, clotting
behind the eight original members of the committee who sat watching Mr
Coldfields door until he emerged. It was a good while and he no longer
carried the flowers, and when he returned to the gate, he was engaged to
be married. But they did not know this, and as soon as he reached the
gate, they arrested him. They took him back to town, with the ladies and
children and house niggers watching from behind curtains and behind the
shrubbery in the yards and the corners of the houses, the kitchens where
doubtless food was already beginning to scorch, and so back to the
square where the rest of the able-bodied men left their offices and
stores to follow, so that when he reached the courthouse, Sutpen had a
larger following than if he actually had been the runaway slave. They
arraigned him before a justice, but by that time your grandfather and Mr
Coldfield had got there. They signed his bond and late that afternoon he
returned home with Mr Coldfield, walking along the same street as of the
forenoon, with doubtless the same faces watching him from behind the
window curtains, to the betrothal supper with no wine at table and no
whiskey before or after. During none of his three passages that day
through that street did his bearing alterthe same unhurried stride to
which that new frock coat swung, the same angle to the new hat above the
eyes and the beard. Your grandfather said that some of the faience
appearance which the flesh of his face had had when he came to town five
years ago was gone now and that his face had an honest sunburn. And he
was not fleshier either; your grandfather said that was not it: it was
just that the flesh on his bones had become quieter, as though passive
after some actual breasting of atmosphere like in running, so that he
actually filled his clothes now, with that quality still swaggering but
without braggadocio or belligerence, though according to your
grandfather the quality had never been belligerence, only watchfulness.
And now that was gone, as though after the three years he could trust
his eyes alone to do the watching, without the flesh on his bones
standing sentry also. Two months later, he and Miss Ellen were married.

It was in June of 1838, almost five years to the day from that Sunday
morning when he rode into town on the roan horse. It (the wedding) was
in the same Methodist church where he saw Ellen for the first time,
according to Miss Rosa. The aunt had even forced or nagged (not cajoled:
that would not have done it) Mr Coldfield into allowing Ellen to wear
powder on her face for the occasion. The powder was to hide the marks of
tears. But before the wedding was over the powder was streaked, caked
and channelled. Ellen seems to have entered the church that night out of
weeping as though out of rain, gone through the ceremony and then walked
back out of the church and into the weeping again, the tears again, the
same tears even, the same rain. She got into the carriage and departed
in it (the rain) for Sutpens Hundred.

It was the wedding which caused the tears: not marrying Sutpen.
Whatever tears there were for that, granted there were tears, came
later. It was not intended to be a big wedding. That is, Mr Coldfield
seems not to have intended it to be. You will notice that most divorces
occur with women who were married by tobacco-chewing j.p.s in country
courthouses or by ministers waked after midnight, with their suspenders
showing beneath their coattails and no collar on and a wife or spinster
sister in curl papers for witness. So is it too much to believe that
these women come to long for divorce from a sense not of incompleteness
but of actual frustration and betrayal? that regardless of the breathing
evidence of children and all else, they still have in their minds the
image of themselves walking to music and turning heads, in all the
symbolical trappings and circumstances of ceremonial surrender of that
which they no longer possess? and why not, since to them the actual and
authentic surrender can only be (and has been) a ceremony like the
breaking of a banknote to buy a ticket for the train. Of the two men, it
was Sutpen who desired the big wedding, the full church and all the
ritual. I have this from something your grandfather let drop one day and
which he doubtless had from Sutpen himself in the same accidental
fashion, since Sutpen never even told Ellen that he wanted it, and the
fact that at the last minute he refused to support her in her desire and
insistence upon it accounts partly for the tears. Mr Coldfield
apparently intended to use the church into which he had invested a
certain amount of sacrifice and doubtless self-denial and certainly
actual labor and money for the sake of what might be called a demand
balance of spiritual solvency, exactly as he would have used a cotton
gin in which he considered himself to have incurred either interest or
responsibility, for the ginning of any cotton which he or any member of
his family, by blood or by marriage, had raisedthat, and no more.
Perhaps his wanting a small wedding was due to the same tedious and
unremitting husbandry which had enabled him to support mother and sister
and marry and raise a family on the proceeds of that store which ten
years ago had fitted into a single wagon; or perhaps it was some innate
sense of delicacy and fitness (which his sister and daughter did not
seem to possess, by the way) regarding the prospective son-in-law whom
just two months ago he had been instrumental in getting out of jail. But
it was not due to any lack of courage regarding the son-in-laws still
anomalous position in the town. Regardless of what their relations
before that had been and of what their future relations might be, if Mr
Coldfield had believed Sutpen guilty at the time of any crime, he would
not have raised a finger to take Sutpen out. He might not have gone out
of his way to keep Sutpen in jail, but doubtless the best possible moral
fumigation which Sutpen could have received at the time in the eyes of
his fellow citizens was the fact that Mr Coldfield signed his
bondsomething he would not have done to save his own good name even
though the arrest had been a direct result of the business between
himself and Sutpenthat affair which, when it reached a point where his
conscience refused to sanction it, he had withdrawn from and let Sutpen
take all the profit, refusing even to allow Sutpen to reimburse him for
the loss which, in withdrawing, he had suffered, though he did permit
his daughter to marry this man of whose actions his conscience did not
approve. This was the second time he did something like that.

When they were married, there were just ten people in the church,
including the wedding party, of the hundred who had been invited; though
when they emerged from the church (it was at night: Sutpen had brought
in a half-dozen of his wild negroes to wait at the door with burning
pine knots) the rest of the hundred were there in the persons of boys
and youths and men from the drovers tavern on the edge of townstock
traders and hostlers and such who had not been invited. That was the
other half of the reason for Ellens tears. It was the aunt who
persuaded or cajoled Mr Coldfield into the big wedding. But Sutpen
wanted it. He wanted, not the anonymous wife and the anonymous children,
but the two names, the stainless wife and the unimpeachable
father-in-law, on the license, the patent. Yes, patent, with a gold seal
and red ribbons too if that had been practicable. But not for himself.
She (Miss Rosa) would have called the gold seal and the ribbons vanity.
But then, so had vanity conceived that house and, built it in a strange
place and with little else but his bare hands and further handicapped by
the chance and probability of meddling interference arising out of the
disapprobation of all communities of men toward any situation which they
do not understand. And pride: Miss Rosa had admitted that he was brave;
perhaps she even allowed him pride: the same pride which wanted such a
house, which would accept nothing less, and drove through to get it at
whatever cost. And then he lived in it, alone, on a pallet on the floor
for three years until he could furnish it as it should be furnishednot
the least of which furniture was that wedding license. She was quite
right. It was not just shelter, just anonymous wife and children that he
wanted, just as he did not want just wedding. But when the female crisis
came, when Ellen and the aunt tried to enlist him on their side to
persuade Mr Coldfield to the big wedding, he refused to support them. He
doubtless remembered even better than Mr Coldfield that two months ago
he had been in jail; that public opinion which at some moment during the
five preceding years had swallowed him even though he never had quite
ever lain quiet on its stomach, had performed one of mankinds natural
and violent and inexplicable volte-faces and regurgitated him. And it
did not help him any that at least two of the citizens who should have
made two of the teeth in the outraged jaw served instead as props to
hold the jaw open and impotent while he walked out of it unharmed.

Ellen and the aunt remembered this too. The aunt did. Being a woman,
she was doubtless one of that league of Jefferson women who on the
second day after the town saw him five years ago, had agreed never to
forgive him for not having any past, and who had remained consistent.
Since the marriage was now a closed incident, she probably looked upon
it as the one chance not only to secure her nieces future as his wife,
but to justify the action of her brother in getting him out of jail and
her own position as having apparently sanctioned and permitted the
wedding which in reality she could not have prevented. It may have been
for the sake of that big house and the position and state which the
women realized long before the men did that he not only aimed at but was
going to attain. Or maybe women are even less complex than that and to
them any wedding is better than no wedding and a big wedding with a
villain preferable to a small one with a saint.

So the aunt even used Ellens tears; and Sutpen, who probably knew
about what was going to happen, becoming as the time drew near graver
and graver. Not concerned: just watchful, like he must have been from
the day when he turned his back upon all that he knewthe faces and the
customsand (he was just fourteen then, he told your grandfather) set
out into a world which even in theory he knew nothing about, and with a
fixed goal in his mind which most men do not set up until the blood
begins to slow at thirty or more and then only because the image
represents peace and indolence or at least a crowning of vanity. Even
then he had that same alertness which he had to wear later day and night
without changing or laying aside, like the clothing which he had to
sleep in as well as live in, and in a country and among a people whose
very language he had to learnthat unsleeping care which must have
known that it could permit itself but one mistake; that alertness for
measuring and weighing event against eventuality, circumstance against
human nature, his own fallible judgment and mortal clay against not only
human but natural forces, choosing and discarding, compromising with his
dream and his ambition like you must with the horse which you take
across country, over timber, which you control only through your ability
to keep the animal from realizing that actually you cannot, that
actually it is the stronger.

His was the curious position now. He was the solitary one. Not Ellen.
She not only had the aunt to support her, but the fact that women never
plead nor claim loneliness until impenetrable and insurmountable
circumstance forces them to give up all hope of attaining the particular
bauble which at the moment they happen to want. And not Mr Coldfield. He
had not only public opinion but his own disinclination for the big
wedding to support it without incongruity or paradox. Then (the tears
won; Ellen and the aunt wrote out a hundred invitationsSutpen brought
in one of the wild negroes who carried them from door to door by
handand even sent out a dozen more personal ones for the dress
rehearsal) when they reached the church for the rehearsal on the night
before the wedding and found the church itself empty and a handful of
men from the towns purlieus (including two of old Ikkemotubbes
Chickasaws) standing in the shadows outside the door, the tears came
down again. Ellen went through the rehearsal, but afterward the aunt
took her home in a state very near hysteria, though by the next day it
had become just quiet intermittent weeping again. There was some talk
even of putting the wedding off. I dont know who it came from, perhaps
from Sutpen. But I know who vetoed it. It was as though the aunt were
now bent, no longer on merely thrusting Sutpen down the towns throat,
but thrusting the wedding itself. She spent all the next day going from
house to house, the invitation list in her hand, in a house dress and a
shawl and one of the Coldfield negroes (they were both women) following
her, perhaps for protection, perhaps just sucked along like a leaf in
the wake of that grim virago fury of female affront; yes, she came to
our house too, though your grandfather had never intended anything else
but to attend the wedding: the aunt must have had no doubts about father
since father had helped take Sutpen out of jail, though she was probably
past all ratiocination by then. Father and your grandmother were just
married then and mother was a stranger in Jefferson and I dont know what
she thought except that she would never talk about what happened: about
the mad woman whom she had never seen before, who came bursting into the
house, not to invite her to a wedding but to dare her not to come, and
then rushed out again. Mother could not even tell what wedding she meant
at first, and when father came home he found mother in hysterics too,
and even twenty years later mother could not tell what actually
happened. There was nothing comic in it to her. Father used to tease her
about it, but even twenty years after that day, when he would tease her
I have seen her begin to raise her hand (perhaps with the thimble on one
finger) as though to protect herself and the same look come into her
face that must have been there when Ellens aunt departed.

The aunt covered the town that morning. It did not take her long and it
was complete; by nightfall the circumstances of the situation had spread
not only beyond the town but beneath it, penetrating the livery stable
and the drovers tavern which was to supply the guests who did attend
it. Ellen of course was not aware of this, anymore than the aunt herself
was, or would have believed what was going to happen even if she had
been clairvoyant and could actually have seen the rehearsal of events
before time produced them. Not that the aunt would have considered
herself insulated against being thus affronted, she simply could not
have believed that her intentions and actions of the day could have any
result other than the one for which she had surrendered for the time not
only all Coldfield dignity but all female modesty as well. Sutpen I
suppose could have told her, but doubtless he knew that the aunt would
not have believed him. Probably he did not even try: he just did the
only thing he could do, which was to send out to Sutpens Hundred and
bring in six or seven more of his negroes, men on whom he could depend,
the only men on whom he could depend, and arm them with the lighted pine
knots which they were holding at the door when the carriage came up and
the wedding party got out. And this is where the tears stopped, because
now the street before the church was lined with carriages and buggies,
though only Sutpen and possibly Mr Coldfield remarked that instead of
being drawn up before the door and empty, they were halted across the
street and still occupied, and that now the banquette before the church
door was a sort of arena lighted by the smoking torches which the
negroes held above their heads, the light of which wavered and gleamed
upon the two lines of faces between which the party would have to pass
to enter the church. There were no catcalls yet, no jeering; evidently
neither Ellen nor the aunt suspected that anything was wrong.

For a time Ellen walked out of the weeping, the tears, and so into the
church. It was empty yet save for your grandfather and grandmother and
perhaps a half-dozen more who might have come out of loyalty to the
Coldfields or perhaps to be close and so miss nothing of that which the
town, as represented by the waiting carriages, seemed to have
anticipated as well as Sutpen did. It was still empty even after the
ceremony started and concluded. Ellen had something of pride too, or at
least that vanity which at times can assume the office of pride and
fortitude; besides, nothing had happened yet. The crowd outside was
quiet yet, perhaps out of respect for the church, out of that aptitude
and eagerness of the Anglo-Saxon for complete mystical acceptance of
immolated sticks and stones. She seems to have walked out of the church
and so into it without any warning whatever. Perhaps she was still
moving beneath that pride which would not allow the people inside the
church to see her weep. She just walked into it, probably hurrying
toward the seclusion of the carriage where she could weep; perhaps her
first intimation was the voice shouting, Look out! Dont hit her now!
and then the objectdirt, filth, whatever it waspassing her, or
perhaps the changing light itself as she turned and saw one of the
negroes, his torch raised and in the act of springing toward the crowd,
the faces, when Sutpen spoke to him in that tongue which even now a good
part of the county did not know was a civilized language. That was what
she saw, what the others saw from the halted carriages across the
streetthe bride shrinking into the shelter of his arm as he drew her
behind him and he standing there, not moving even after another object
(they threw nothing which could actually injure: it was only clods of
dirt and vegetable refuse) struck the hat from his head, and a third
struck him full in the cheststanding there motionless, with an
expression almost of smiling where his teeth showed through the beard,
holding his wild negroes with that one word (there were doubtless
pistols in the crowd; certainly knives: the negro would not have lived
ten seconds if he had sprung) while about the wedding party the circle
of faces with open mouths and torch-reflecting eyes seemed to advance
and waver and shift and vanish in the smoky glare of the burning pine.
He retreated to the carriage, shielding the two women with his body,
ordering the negroes to follow with another word. But they threw nothing
else. Apparently it was that first spontaneous outburst, though they had
come armed and prepared with the ones they did throw. In fact, that
seemed to have been the entire business which had come to a head when
the vigilance committee followed him to Mr Coldfields gate that day two
months before. Because the men who had composed the mob, the traders and
drovers and teamsters, returned, vanished back into the region from
which they had emerged for this one occasion like rats; scattered,
departed about the countryfaces which even Ellen was not to remember,
seen for the night or the meal or just the drink at other taverns twenty
and fifty and a hundred miles further on along nameless roads and then
gone from there too; and those who had come in the carriages and buggies
to see a Roman holiday, driving out to Sutpens Hundred to call and (the
men) to hunt his game and eat his food again and on occasion gathering
at night in his stable while he matched two of his wild negroes against
one another as men match game cocks or perhaps even entered the ring
himself. It blew away, though not out of memory. He did not forget that
night, even though Ellen, I think, did, since she washed it out of her
remembering with tears. Yes, she was weeping again now; it did, indeed,
rain on that marriage.




                              [*  III  *]


          If he threw Miss Rosa over, I wouldnt think she would want to
tell anybody about it _Quentin said_.

Ah _Mr Compson said again_ After Mr Coldfield died in 64, Miss Rosa
moved out to Sutpens Hundred to live with Judith. She was twenty then,
four years younger than her niece whom, in obedience to her sisters
dying request, she set out to save from the familys doom which Sutpen
seemed bent on accomplishing, apparently by the process of marrying him.
She (Miss Rosa) was born in 1845, with her sister already seven years
married and the mother of two children and Miss Rosa born into her
parents middleage (her mother must have been at least forty and she
died in that childbed and Miss Rosa never forgave her father for it) and
at a time whengranted that Miss Rosa merely mirrored her parents
attitude toward the son-in-lawthe family wanted only peace and quiet
and probably did not expect and maybe did not even want another child.
But she was born, at the price of her mothers life and was never to be
permitted to forget it. She was raised by the same spinster aunt who
tried to force not only the elder sisters bridegroom but the wedding
too down the throat of a town which did not want it, growing up in that
closed masonry of females to see in the fact of her own breathing not
only the lone justification for the sacrifice of her mothers life, not
only a living and walking reproach to her father, but a breathing
indictment, ubiquitous and even transferable, of the entire male
principle (that principle which had left the aunt a virgin at
thirty-five). So for the first sixteen years of her life she lived in
that grim tight little house with the father whom she hated without
knowing itthat queer silent man whose only companion and friend seems
to have been his conscience and the only thing he cared about his
reputation for probity among his fellow menthat man who was later to
nail himself in his attic and starve to death rather than look upon his
native land in the throes of repelling an invading armyand the aunt
who even ten years later was still taking revenge for the fiasco of
Ellens wedding by striking at the town, the human race, through any and
all of its creaturesbrother nieces nephew-in-law herself and allwith
the blind irrational fury of a shedding snake. The aunt had taught Miss
Rosa to look upon her sister as a woman who had vanished, not only out
of the family and the house but out of life too, into an edifice like
Bluebeards and there transmogrified into a mask looking back with
passive and hopeless grief upon the irrevocable world, held there not in
durance but in a kind of jeering suspension by a man who had entered
hers and her familys life before she was born with the abruptness of a
tornado, done irrevocable and incalculable damage, and gone on. In a
grim mausoleum air of Puritan righteousness and outraged female
vindictiveness Miss Rosas childhood was passed, that aged and ancient
and timeless absence of youth which consisted of a Cassandralike
listening beyond closed doors, of lurking in dim halls filled with that
presbyterian effluvium of lugubrious and vindictive anticipation, while
she waited for the infancy and childhood with which nature had
confounded and betrayed her to overtake the disapprobation regarding any
and every thing which could penetrate the walls of that house through
the agency of any man, particularly her father, which the aunt seems to
have invested her with at birth along with the swaddling clothes.

Perhaps she saw in her fathers death, in the resulting necessity upon
her as an orphan and a pauper, to turn to her next of kin for food and
shelter and protectionand this kin the niece whom she had been asked
to saveperhaps in this she saw fate itself supplying her with the
opportunity to observe her sisters dying request. Perhaps she even saw
herself as an instrument of retribution: if not in herself an active
instrument strong enough to cope with him, at least as a kind of passive
symbol of inescapable reminding to rise bloodless and without dimension
from the sacrificial stone of the marriage-bed. Because until he came
back from Virginia in 66 and found her living there with Judith and
Clytie(Yes, Clytie was his daughter too: Clytemnestra. He named her
himself. He named them all himself: all his own get and all the get of
his wild niggers after the country began to assimilate them. Miss Rosa
didnt tell you that two of the niggers in the wagon that day were
women?

No, sir, _Quentin said_.

Yes. Two of them. And brought here neither by chance nor oversight. He
saw to that, who had doubtless seen even further ahead than the two
years it actually took him to build his house and show his good
intentions to his neighbors until they allowed him to mix his wild stock
with their tame, since the difference in tongue between his niggers and
theirs could have been a barrier only for a matter of weeks or perhaps
even days. He brought the two women deliberately; he probably chose them
with the same care and shrewdness with which he chose the other
livestockthe horses and mules and cattlewhich he bought later on.
And he lived out there for almost five years before he had speaking
acquaintance with any white woman in the county, just as he had no
furniture in his house and for the same reason: he had at the time
nothing to exchange for them. Yes. He named Clytie as he named them all,
the one before Clytie and Henry and Judith even, with that same robust
and sardonic temerity, naming with his own mouth his own ironic
fecundity of dragons teeth. Only I have always liked to believe that he
intended to name Clytie, Cassandra, prompted by some pure dramatic
economy not only to beget but to designate the presiding augur of his
own disaster, and that he just got the name wrong through a mistake
natural in a man who must have almost taught himself to read)When he
returned home in 66, Miss Rosa had not seen him a hundred times in her
whole life. And what she saw then was just that ogre-face of her
childhood seen once and then repeated at intervals and on occasions
which she could neither count nor recall, like the mask in Greek
tragedy, interchangeable not only from scene to scene, but from actor to
actor and behind which the events and occasions took place without
chronology or sequence, leaving her actually incapable of saying how
many separate times she had seen him for the reason that, waking or
sleeping, the aunt had taught her to see nothing else. On those guarded
and lugubrious and even formal occasions when she and the aunt went out
to Sutpens Hundred to spend the day and the aunt would order her to go
and play with her nephew and niece exactly as she might have ordered her
to play a piece for company on the piano, she would not see him even at
the dinner table because the aunt would have arranged the visit to
coincide with his absence; and probably Miss Rosa would have tried to
avoid meeting him even if he had been there. And on the four or five
occasions during the year when Ellen would bring the children in to
spend the day at her fathers, the aunt (that strong vindictive
consistent woman who seems to have been twice the man that Mr Coldfield
was and who in very truth was not only Miss Rosas mother but her father
too) cast over these visits also that same atmosphere of grim embattled
conspiracy and alliance against the two adversaries, one of whomMr
Coldfieldwhether he could have held his own or not, had long since
drawn in his picquets and dismantled his artillery and retired into the
impregnable citadel of his passive rectitude: and the otherSutpenwho
probably could have engaged and even routed them but who did not even
know that he was an embattled foe. Because he would not even come to the
house to the noon meal. His reason may have been because of some
delicacy for his father-in-law. The true reason for and beginning of the
relationship between Mr Coldfield and himself neither aunt, Ellen, or
Miss Rosa ever knew, and Sutpen was to divulge to but one manand that
under the pledge of confidence as long as Mr Coldfield livedout of
regard for Mr Coldfields carefully nurtured name for immaculate
moralityand which, your grandfather said, Mr Coldfield himself never
divulged for the same reason. Or perhaps the reason was that now since
he had got out of his father-in-law all that Mr Coldfield possessed that
Sutpen could have used or wanted, he had neither the courage to face his
father-in-law nor the grace and decency to complete the ceremonial
family group even four times a year. Or perhaps it was the reason which
Sutpen gave himself and which the aunt refused to believe because of
that very fact: that he did not get to town every day and when he did he
preferred to spend it (he used the bar now) with the men who gathered
each noon at the Holston House.

That was the face which, when Miss Rosa saw it at all, was across his
own dining tablethe face of a foe who did not even know that it was
embattled. She was ten now and following the aunts dereliction (Miss
Rosa now kept her fathers house as the aunt had done, until the night
the aunt climbed out the window and vanished) there was not only no one
to make her try to play with her nephew and niece on those days formal
and funereal, she did not even have to go out there and breathe the same
air which he breathed and where, even though absent, he still remained,
lurked, in what seemed to her sardonic and watchful triumph. She went
out to Sutpens Hundred just once a year now when, in their Sunday
clothes she and her father drove the twelve miles in a stout battered
buggy behind the stout scrubby team, to spend the day. It was now Mr
Coldfield who insisted on the visits, who had never gone out with them
while the aunt was there, perhaps from a sense of duty, which was the
reason he gave and which in this case even the aunt would have believed,
perhaps because it was not the true one, since doubtless even Miss Rosa
would not have believed the true one: which was that Mr Coldfield wanted
to see his grandchildren regarding whom he was in a steadily increasing
unease of that day when their father would tell the son at least of that
old business between them which Mr Coldfield was not yet sure that his
son-in-law had never told. Though the aunt was gone, she still managed
to bequeath and invoke upon each of these expeditions something of the
old flavor of grim sortie, more than ever now against a foe who did not
know that he was at war. Because now that the aunt was gone, Ellen had
reneged from that triumvirate of which Miss Rosa tried without realizing
it to make two. Now she was completely alone, facing him across the
dinner table, without support even from Ellen (at this time Ellen went
through a complete metamorphosis, emerging into her next lustrum with
the finality of actual re-birth);facing across the table the foe who
was not even aware that he sat there not as host and brother-in-law but
as the second party to an armistice. He probably did not even look at
her twice as weighed against his own family and childrenthe small
slight child whose feet, even when she would be grown, would never quite
reach the floor even from her own chairsas against Ellen who, though
small-boned also, was what is known as fullbodied (and who would have
been, if her life had not declined into a time when even men found
little enough to eat and the end of her days had been without trouble,
fullbodied indeed. Not fat: just rounded and complete, the hair white,
the eyes still even young, even a faint bloom yet on what would be
dewlaps and not cheeks any longer, the small plump ringed unscarified
hands folded in tranquil anticipation of the food, on the damask before
the Haviland beneath the candelabra) and against Judith already taller
than Ellen, and Henry though not as tall for sixteen as Judith was for
fourteen, yet giving promise of someday standing eye to eye with his
father; this face which rarely spoke during the meal, with eyes like (as
you might put it) pieces of coal pressed into soft dough and prim hair
of that peculiar mouse-like shade of hair on which the sun does not
often shine, against Judiths and Henrys out-of-doors faces: Judith
with her mothers hair and her fathers eyes and Henry with his hair
halfway between his fathers red and Ellens black and eyes of a bright
dark hazelthis small body of Miss Rosas with its air of curious and
paradoxical awkwardness like a costume borrowed at the last moment and
of necessity for a masquerade which she did not want to attend: that
aura of a creature cloistered now by deliberate choice and still in the
throes of enforced apprenticeship to, rather than voluntary or even
acquiescent participation in, breathingthis bound maidservant to flesh
and blood waiting even now to escape it by writing a schoolgirls poetry
about the also-dead. The face, the smallest face in the company,
watching him across the table with still and curious and profound
intensity as though she actually had some intimation gained from that
rapport with the fluid cradle of events (time) which she had acquired or
cultivated by listening beyond closed doors not to what she heard there,
but by becoming supine and receptive, incapable of either discrimination
or opinion or incredulity, listening to the prefevers temperature of
disaster, which makes soothsayers and sometimes makes them right, and of
the future catastrophe in which the ogre-face of her childhood would
apparently vanish so completely that she would agree to marry the late
owner of it.

That may have been the last time she saw him. Because they quit going
out there. Mr Coldfield quit. There had never been any day set for the
visit. One morning he would merely appear at breakfast in the decent and
heavy black coat in which he had been married and had worn fifty-two
times each year since until Ellen married, and then fifty-three times a
year after the aunt deserted them, until he put it on for good the day
he climbed to the attic and nailed the door behind him and threw the
hammer out the window and so died in it. Then after breakfast Miss Rosa
would retire and reappear in the formidable black or brown silk which
the aunt had chosen for her years ago and which she continued to wear on
Sundays and occasions even after it was worn out, until the day when her
father decided that the aunt would not return and permitted Miss Rosa to
use the clothing which the aunt had left in the house the night of her
elopement. Then they would get into the buggy and depart, Mr Coldfield
first docking the two negroes for the noon meal which they would not
have to prepare and (so the town believed) charging them for the crude
one of leftovers which they would have to eat. Then one year they did
not go. Doubtless Mr Coldfield failed to come to breakfast in the black
coat, and more days passed and still he did not, and that was all.
Perhaps he felt, now that the grandchildren were grown, that the draft
on his conscience had been discharged what with Henry away at the State
University at Oxford and Judith gone even further than thatinto that
transition stage between childhood and womanhood where she was even more
inaccessible to the grandfather of whom she had seen but little during
her life and probably cared less anywaythat state where, though still
visible, young girls appear as though seen through glass and where even
the voice cannot reach them; where they exist (this the hoyden who
couldand didoutrun and outclimb, and ride and fight both with and
beside her brother) in a pearly lambence without shadows and themselves
partaking of it; in nebulous suspension held, strange and unpredictable,
even their very shapes fluid and delicate and without substance; not in
themselves floating and seeking but merely waiting, parasitic and potent
and serene, drawing to themselves without effort the post-genitive upon
and about which to shape, flow into back, breast, bosom, flank, thigh.

Now the period began which ended in the catastrophe which caused a
reversal so complete in Miss Rosa as to permit her to agree to marry the
man whom she had grown up to look upon as an ogre. It was not a
volte-face of character: that did not change. Even her behavior did not
change to any extent. Even if Charles Bon had not died, she would in all
probability have gone out to Sutpens Hundred to live after her fathers
death sooner or later, and once she had done so she would have probably
passed the remainder of her life there. But if Bon had lived and he and
Judith had married and Henry had remained in the known world, she would
have moved out there only when she was ready to, and she would have
lived in her dead sisters family only as the aunt which she actually
was. It was not her character that changed: despite the six years or so
since she had actually seen him and certainly the four years which she
had spent feeding her father secretly at night while he hid from
Confederate provost marshals in the attic. At the same time she was
writing heroic poetry about the very men from whom her father was hiding
and who would have shot him or hung him without trial if they had found
himand incidentally the ogre of her childhood was one of them and (he
brought home with him a citation for valor in Lees own hand) a good
one. The face which Miss Rosa carried out there to live for the rest of
her life was the same face which had watched him across the dinner table
and which he likewise could not have said how many times he had seen,
nor when and where, not for the reason that he was unable to forget it
but because he could probably not have remembered it enough to have
described it ten minutes after looking away, and from behind the face
the same woman who had been that child now watched him with that same
grim and cold intensity.

Although she was not to see Sutpen again for years, she now saw her
sister and niece more often than ever. Ellen was now at the full peak of
what the aunt would have called her renegadery. She seemed not only to
acquiesce, to be reconciled to her life and marriage, but to be actually
proud of it. She had bloomed, as if Fate were crowding the normal Indian
summer which should have bloomed gradually and faded gracefully through
six or eight years, into three or four, either for compensation for what
was to come or to clear the books, pay the check to which Fates wife,
Nature, had signed his name. Ellen was in her late thirties, plump, her
face unblemished still. It was as though whatever marks being in the
world had left upon it up to the time the aunt vanished had been removed
from between the skeleton and the skin, between the sum of experience
and the envelope in which it resides, by the intervening years of
annealing and untroubled flesh. Her carriage, air, now was a little
regalshe and Judith made frequent trips to town now, calling upon the
same ladies, some of whom were now grandmothers, whom the aunt had tried
to force to attend the wedding twenty years ago, and, to the meager
possibilities which the town offered, shoppingas though she had
succeeded at last in evacuating not only the puritan heritage but
reality itself; had immolated outrageous husband and incomprehensible
children into shades; escaped at last into a world of pure illusion in
which, safe from any harm, she moved, lived, from attitude to attitude
against her background of chatelaine to the largest, wife to the
wealthiest, mother of the most fortunate. When she shopped (there were
twenty stores in Jefferson now) she unbent without even getting out of
the carriage, gracious and assured and talking the most complete
nonsense, speaking her bright set meaningless phrases out of the part
which she had written for herself, of the duchess peripatetic with
property soups and medicines among a soilless and uncompelled
peasantrya woman who, if she had had the fortitude to bear sorrow and
trouble, might have risen to actual stardom in the role of the
matriarch, arbitrating from the fireside corner of a crone the pride and
destiny of her family, instead of turning at the last to the youngest
member of it and asking her to protect the others.

Often twice and sometimes three times a week the two of them came to
town and into the housethe foolish unreal voluble preserved woman now
six years absent from the worldthe woman who had quitted home and kin
on a flood of tears and in a shadowy miasmic region something like the
bitter purlieus of Styx had produced two children and then rose like the
swamp-hatched butterfly, unimpeded by weight of stomach and all the
heavy organs of suffering and experience, into a perennial bright vacuum
of arrested sunand Judith, the young girl dreaming, not living, in her
complete detachment and imperviousness to actuality almost like physical
deafness. To them, Miss Rosa must not have been anything at all now: not
the child who had been the object and victim of the vanished aunts
vindictive unflagging care and attention, and not even the woman which
her office as housekeeper would indicate, and certainly not the factual
aunt herself. And it would be hard to say which of the two, sister or
niece, was the most unreal to Miss Rosa in turnthe adult who had
escaped reality into a bland region peopled by dolls, or the young girl
who slept waking in some suspension so completely physical as to
resemble the state before birth and as far removed from realitys other
extreme as Ellen was from hers, driving up to the house twice and three
times a week, and one time, in the summer when Judith was seventeen,
stopping in on their way overland to Memphis to buy Judith clothes; yes:
a trousseau.

That was the summer following Henrys first year at the University,
after he had brought Charles Bon home with him for Christmas and then
again to spend a week or so of the summer vacation before Bon rode on to
the River to take the steamboat home to New Orleans; the summer in which
Sutpen himself went away, on business, Ellen said, doubtless unaware,
such was her existence then, that she did not know where her husband had
gone and not even conscious that she was not curious. No one but your
grandfather and perhaps Clytie was ever to know that Sutpen had gone to
New Orleans too. They would enter Miss Rosas house, that dim grim tight
little house where even yet, four years after she had left the aunt
still seemed to be just beyond any door with her hand already on the
knob, and which Ellen would fill with ten or fifteen minutes of shrill
uproar and then depart, taking with her the dreamy and volitionless
daughter who had not spoken one word; and Miss Rosa who in actual fact
was the girls aunt and who by actual years should have been her sister
ignoring the mother to follow the departing and inaccessible daughter
with myopic and inarticulate yearning and not one whit of jealousy,
projecting upon Judith all the abortive dreams and delusions of her own
doomed and frustrated youth, offering Judith the only gift (it was Ellen
who told this, with shrieks of amusement, more than once) in her power:
she offered to teach Judith how to keep house and plan meals and count
laundry, receiving for the offer the blank fathomless stare, the
unhearing What? What did you say? while even now Ellen was shrieking
with astonished appreciation. Then they were gonecarriage, bundles,
Ellens peacock amusement, the nieces impenetrable dreaming. When they
came to town next and the carriage stopped before Mr Coldfields house,
one of the negresses came out and said that Miss Rosa was not at home.

That summer she saw Henry again too. She had not seen him since the
summer before although he had been home Christmas with Charles Bon, his
friend from the University, and she had heard about the balls and
parties at Sutpens Hundred during the holidays, but she and her father
had not gone out. And when Henry stopped with Bon on the way back to
school the day after New Years to speak to his aunt, she actually was
not at home. So she did not see him until the following summer, after a
full year. She was down town, shopping; she was standing on the street
talking to your grandmother when he rode past. He didnt see her; he
passed on a new mare which his father had given him, in the coat and hat
of a man now; your grandmother said he was as tall as his father and
that he sat the mare with the same swagger although lighter in the bone
than Sutpen, as if his bones were capable of bearing the swagger but
were still too light and quick to support the pomposity. Because Sutpen
was acting his role too. He had corrupted Ellen in more ways than one.
He was the biggest single landowner and cotton-planter in the county
now, attained by the same tactics with which he had built his housethe
same singleminded unflagging effort and utter disregard of how his
actions which the town could see might look and how the ones which the
town could not see must appear to it. There were some among his fellow
citizens who believed even yet that there was a nigger in the woodpile
somewhere, ranging from the ones who believed that the plantation was
just a blind to his actual dark avocation, through the ones who believed
that he had found some way to juggle the cotton market itself and so get
more per bale for his cotton than honest men could, to those who
believed apparently that the wild niggers which he had brought there had
the power to actually conjure more cotton per acre from the soil than
any tame ones had ever done. He was not liked (which he evidently did
not want, anyway) but feared, which seemed to amuse, if not actually
please, him. But he was accepted; he obviously had too much money now to
be rejected or even seriously annoyed any more. He accomplished
thisgot his plantation to running smoothly (he had an overseer now; it
was the son of that same sheriff who had arrested him at his
bride-to-bes gate on the day of the betrothal) within ten years of the
wedding, and now he acted his role tooa role of arrogant ease and
leisure which, as the leisure and ease put flesh on him, became a little
pompous. Yes, he had corrupted Ellen to more than renegadery, though,
like her, he was unaware that his flowering was a forced blooming too
and that while he was still playing the scene to the audience, behind
him Fate, destiny, retribution, ironythe stage manager, call him what
you willwas already striking the set and dragging on the synthetic and
spurious shadows and shapes of the next one.There goes your
grandmother said. But Miss Rosa had already seen Henry. She was standing
there beside your grandmother, her head hardly reaching your
grandmothers shoulder, thin, in one of the dresses which the aunt had
left in the house and which Miss Rosa had cut down to fit herself, who
had never been taught to sew either, just as she had assumed the
housekeeping and offered to teach Judith to do the same, who had never
been taught to cook nor taught to do anything save listen through closed
doors, standing there with a shawl over her head like she might have
been fifty instead of fifteen, looking after her nephew and saying, Why
. . . hes shaved.

Then she stopped seeing Ellen even. That is, Ellen also stopped coming
to the house, stopped breaking the carriages weekly ritual of store to
store where, without getting out, Ellen bade merchant and clerk fetch
out to her the cloth and the meager fripperies and baubles which they
carried and which they knew even better than she that she would not buy
but instead would merely finger and handle and disarrange and then
reject, all in that flow of bright pettish volubility. Not contemptuous,
not even patronizing exactly, but with a bland and even childlike
imposition upon the sufferance or good manners or sheer helplessness of
the men, the merchants and clerks; then to come to the house and fill it
too with that meaningless uproar of vanity, of impossible and
foundationless advice about Miss Rosa and her father and the house,
about Miss Rosas clothes and the arrangement of the furniture and how
the food was prepared and even the hours at which it was eaten. Because
the time now approached (it was 1860, even Mr Coldfield probably
admitted that war was unavoidable) when the destiny of Sutpens family
which for twenty years now had been like a lake welling from quiet
springs into a quiet valley and spreading, rising almost imperceptibly
and in which the four members of it floated in sunny suspension, felt
the first subterranean movement toward the outlet, the gorge which would
be the lands catastrophe too, and the four peaceful swimmers turning
suddenly to face one another, not yet with alarm or distrust but just
alert, feeling the dark set, none of them yet at that point where man
looks about at his companions in disaster and thinks _When will I stop
trying to save them and save only myself?_ and not even aware that that
point was approaching.

So Miss Rosa did not see any of them; she had never seen (and was never
to see alive) Charles Bon at all; Charles Bon of New Orleans, Henrys
friend who was not only some few years older than Henry but actually a
little old to be still in college and certainly a little out of place in
that one where he wasa small new college in the Mississippi hinterland
and even wilderness, three hundred miles from that worldly and even
foreign city which was his homea young man of a worldly elegance and
assurance beyond his years, handsome, apparently wealthy and with for
background the shadowy figure of a legal guardian rather than any
parentsa personage who in the remote Mississippi of that time must
have appeared almost phoenix-like, fullsprung from no childhood, born of
no woman and impervious to time and, vanished, leaving no bones nor dust
anywherea man with an ease of manner and a swaggering gallant air in
comparison with which Sutpens pompous arrogance was clumsy bluff and
Henry actually a hobble-de-hoy. Miss Rosa never saw him; this was a
picture, an image. It was not what Ellen told her: Ellen at the absolute
halcyon of her butterflys summer and now with the added charm of
gracious and graceful voluntary surrendering of youth to her bloods and
sexs successor, that concurrent attitude and behavior with the
engagements span with which mothers who want to can almost make
themselves the brides of their daughters weddings. Listening to Ellen,
a stranger would have almost believed that the marriage, which
subsequent events would indicate had not even been mentioned between the
young people and the parents, had been actually performed. Ellen did not
once mention love between Judith and Bon. She did not hint around it.
Love, with reference to them was just a finished and perfectly dead
subject like the matter of virginity would be after the birth of the
first grandchild. She spoke of Bon as if he were three inanimate objects
in one, or perhaps one inanimate object for which she and her family
would find three concordant uses: a garment which Judith might wear as
she would a riding habit or a ball gown, a piece of furniture which
would complement and complete the furnishing of her house and position,
and a mentor and example to correct Henrys provincial manners and
speech and clothing. She seemed to have encompassed time. She postulated
the elapsed years during which no honeymoon nor any change had taken
place, out of which the (now) five faces looked with a sort of lifeless
and perennial bloom like painted portraits hung in a vacuum, each taken
at its forewarned peak and smoothed of all thought and experience, the
originals of which had lived and died so long ago that their joys and
griefs must now be forgotten even by the very boards on which they had
strutted and postured and laughed and wept. This, while Miss Rosa, not
listening, who had got the picture from the first word, perhaps from the
name, Charles Bon; the spinster doomed for life at sixteen, sitting
beneath this bright glitter of delusion like it was one of those colored
electric beams in cabarets and she there for the first time in her life
and the beam filled with a substanceless glitter of tinsel motes darting
suddenly upon her, halting for a moment then going on. She wasnt
jealous of Judith. It was not selfpity either, sitting there blinking
steadily at her sister, while Ellen talked, in one of those botched-over
house dresses (the clothes, castoff sometimes but usually new, which
Ellen gave her from time to time were always silk, of course) which the
aunt had abandoned when she eloped with the horse-and-mule-trader,
perhaps in the hope or even the firm intention of never wearing anything
like them again. It was probably just peaceful despair and relief at
final and complete abnegation, now that Judith was about to immolate the
frustrations vicarious recompense into the living fairy tale. It
sounded like a fairy tale when Ellen told it later to your grandmother,
only it was a fairy tale written for and acted by a fashionable ladies
club. But to Miss Rosa it must have been authentic, not only plausible
but justified: hence the remark which sent Ellen again (she told this
too, for the childish joke it was) into shrieks of amused and fretted
astonishment. We deserve him, Miss Rosa said. Deserve? Him? Ellen
said, probably shrieked too. Of course we deserve himif you want to
put it that way. I certainly hope and expect you to feel that the
Coldfields are qualified to reciprocate whatever particularly signal
honor marriage with anyone might confer upon them.

Naturally there is no known rejoinder to this. At least, as far as Ellen
ever told, Miss Rosa did not try to make one. She just saw Ellen depart
and then set about to make Judith the second only gift in her power. She
possessed two now, this one likewise bequeathed to her by the aunt who
taught her both to keep house and how to fit clothes by climbing out a
window one night, though this second gift developed late (you might say,
repercussed) due to the fact that when the aunt left, Miss Rosa was not
yet large enough to be able to use the discarded clothing even by
cutting the garments down. She set about secretly making garments for
Judiths trousseau. She got the cloth from her fathers store. She could
not have got it anywhere else. Your grandmother told me that at that
time Miss Rosa actually could not count money, that she knew the
progression of the coins in theory but that apparently she had never had
the actual cash to see, touch, experiment and prove with; that on
certain days of the week she would go down town with a basket and shop
at certain stores which Mr Coldfield had already designated, with no
coin nor sum of money changing lip or hand, and that later in the day Mr
Coldfield would trace her course by the debits scratched on paper or on
walls and counters, and pay them. So she would have to get the material
from him, though his stock which had begun as a collection of the
crudest necessities and which apparently could not even feed himself and
his daughter from its own shelves, had not increased, let alone
diversified. Yet this was where she had to go to get the material to
make those intimate young girl garments which were to be for her own
vicarious bridaland you can imagine too what Miss Rosas notion of
such garments would be, let alone what her notion of them would look
like when she had finished them unassisted. Nobody knows how she managed
to get the material from her fathers store. He didnt give it to her.
He would have felt it incumbent on him to supply his granddaughter with
clothes if she were indecently clad or if she were ragged or cold, but
not to marry in. So I believe she stole it. She must have. She must have
taken it almost from under her fathers nose (it was a small store and
he was his own clerk and from any point in it he could see any other
point) with that amoral boldness, that affinity for brigandage in women,
but more likely, or so I would like to think, by some subterfuge of such
bald and desperate transparence concocted by innocence that its very
simplicity fooled him.

So she didnt even see Ellen anymore. Apparently Ellen had now served
her purpose, completed the bright pointless noon and afternoon of the
butterflys summer and vanished, perhaps not out of Jefferson, but out
of her sisters life anyway, to be seen but the one time more dying in
bed in a darkened room in the house on which fateful mischance had
already laid its hand to the extent of scattering the black foundation
on which it had been erected and removing its two male mainstays,
husband and sonthe one into the risk and danger of battle, the other
apparently into oblivion. Henry had just vanished. She heard of that too
while she was spending her days (and nights; she would have to wait
until her father was asleep) sewing tediously and without skill on the
garments which she was making for her nieces trousseau and which she
had to keep hidden not only from her father but from the two negresses,
who might have told Mr Coldfieldwhipping lace out of raveled and
hoarded string and thread and sewing it onto garments while news came of
Lincolns election and of the fall of Sumpter, and she scarce listening,
hearing and losing the knell and doom of her native land between two
tedious and clumsy stitches on a garment which she would never wear and
never remove for a man whom she was not even to see alive. Henry just
vanished: she heard just what the town heardthat on this next
Christmas Henry and Bon came home again to spend the holidays, the
handsome and wealthy New Orleansian whose engagement to the daughter the
mother had been filling the towns ears with for six months now. They
came again and now the town listened for the announcement of the actual
day. And then something happened. Nobody knew what: whether something
between Henry and Bon on one hand and Judith on the other, or between
the three young people on one hand and the parents on the other. But
anyway, when Christmas day came, Henry and Bon were gone. And Ellen was
not visible (she seemed to have retired to the darkened room which she
was not to quit until she died two years later) and nobody could have
told from either Sutpens or Judiths faces or actions or behavior, and
so the tale came through the negroes: of how on the night before
Christmas there had been a quarrel between, not Bon and Henry or Bon and
Sutpen, but between the son and the father and that Henry had formally
abjured his father and renounced his birthright and the roof under which
he had been born and that he and Bon had ridden away in the night and
that the mother was prostratethough, the town believed, not at the
upset of the marriage but at the shock of reality entering her life:
this the merciful blow of the axe before the beasts throat is cut.

Thats what Miss Rosa heard. Nobody knows what she thought. The town
believed that Henrys action was just the fiery nature of youth, let
alone a Sutpen, and that time would cure it. Doubtless Sutpens and
Judiths behavior toward one another and toward the town had something
to do with this. They would be seen together in the carriage in town now
and then as though nothing had occurred between them at least, which
certainly would not have been the case if the quarrel had been between
Bon and the father, and probably not the case if the trouble had been
between Henry and his father because the town knew that between Henry
and Judith there had been a relationship closer than the traditional
loyalty of brother and sister even; a curious relationship: something of
that fierce impersonal rivalry between two cadets in a crack regiment
who eat from the same dish and sleep under the same blanket and chance
the same destruction and who would risk death for one another, not for
the others sake but for the sake of the unbroken front of the regiment
itself. Thats all Miss Rosa knew. She could have known no more about it
than the town knew because the ones who did know (Sutpen or Judith: not
Ellen, who would have been told nothing in the first place and would
have forgot, failed to assimilate, it if she had been toldEllen the
butterfly, from beneath whom without warning the very sunbuoyed air had
been withdrawn, leaving her now with the plump hands folded on the
coverlet in the darkened room and the eyes above them probably not even
suffering but merely filled with baffled incomprehension) would not have
told her anymore than they would have told anyone in Jefferson or
anywhere else. Miss Rosa probably went out there, probably once and then
no more. And she must have told Mr Coldfield that there was nothing
wrong and evidently she believed that herself since she continued to sew
on the garments for Judiths wedding.

She was still doing that when Mississippi seceded and when the first
Confederate uniforms began to appear in Jefferson where Colonel Sartoris
and Sutpen were raising the regiment which departed in 61, with Sutpen,
second in command, riding at Colonel Sartoris left hand, on the black
stallion named out of Scott, beneath the regimental colors which he and
Sartoris had designed and which Sartoris womenfolks had sewed together
out of silk dresses. He had filled out physically from what he had been
not only when he first rode into Jefferson that Sunday in 33, but from
what he had been when he and Ellen married. He was not portly yet,
though he was now getting on toward fifty-five. The fat, the stomach,
came later. It came upon him suddenly, all at once, in the year after
whatever it was happened to his engagement to Miss Rosa and she quitted
his roof and returned to town to live alone in her fathers house and
did not ever speak to him again except when she addressed him that one
time when they told her that he was dead. The flesh came upon him
suddenly, as though what the negroes and Wash Jones, too, called the
fine figure of a man had reached and held its peak after the foundation
had given way and something between the shape of him that people knew
and the uncompromising skeleton of what he actually was had gone fluid
and, earthbound, had been snubbed up and restrained, balloonlike,
unstable and lifeless, by the envelope which it had betrayed.

She did not see the regiment depart because her father forbade her to
leave the house until it was gone, refusing to allow her to take part in
or be present with the other women and girls in the ceremony of its
departure, though not because his son-in-law happened to be in it. He
had never been an irascible man and before war was actually declared and
Mississippi seceded, his acts and speeches of protest had been not only
calm but logical and quite sensible. But after the die was cast he
seemed to change overnight, just as his daughter Ellen changed her
nature a few years before. As soon as troops began to appear in
Jefferson he closed his store and kept it closed all during the period
that soldiers were being mobilized and drilled, and later, after the
regiment was gone, whenever casual troops would bivouac for the night in
passing, refusing to sell any goods for any price to the military and,
so it was told, to the families not only of soldiers but of men or women
who had supported secession and war only in talk, opinion. He refused to
permit his sister to come back home to live while her horse-trader
husband was in the army, he would not even allow Miss Rosa to look out
the window at passing soldiers. He had closed his store permanently and
was at home all day now. He and Miss Rosa lived in the back of the
house, with the front door locked and the front shutters closed and
fastened. He spent the day, the neighbors said, behind one of the
slightly opened blinds like a picquet on post, armed not with a musket
but with the big family Bible in which his and his sisters birth and
his marriage and Ellens birth and marriage and the birth of his two
grandchildren and of Miss Rosa, and his wifes death (but not the
marriage of the aunt; it was Miss Rosa who entered that, along with
Ellens death, on the day when she entered Mr Coldfields own, and
Charles Bons and even Sutpens) had been duly entered in his neat
clerks hand, until a detachment of troops would pass: whereupon he
would open the Bible and declaim in a harsh loud voice even above the
sound of the tramping feet, the passages of the old violent vindictive
mysticism which he had already marked as the actual picquet would have
ranged his row of cartridges along the window sill. Then one morning he
learned that his store had been broken into and looted, doubtless by a
company of strange troops bivouacked on the edge of town and doubtless
abetted, if only vocally, by his own fellow citizens. That night he
mounted to the attic with his hammer and his handful of nails and nailed
the door behind him and threw the hammer out the window. He was not a
coward. He was a man of uncompromising moral strength, coming into a new
country with a small stock of goods and supporting five people out of it
in comfort and security at least. He did it by close trading, to be
sure: he could not have done it save by close trading or dishonesty; and
as your grandfather said, a man who, in a country such as Mississippi
was then, would restrict dishonesty to the selling of straw hats and
hame strings and salt meat would have been already locked up by his own
family as a kleptomaniac. But he was not a coward, even though his
conscience may have objected, as your grandfather said, not so much to
the idea of pouring out human blood and life, but at the idea of waste:
of wearing out and eating up and shooting away material in any cause
whatever.

Now Miss Rosas life consisted of keeping life in herself and her
father. Up to the night when it was looted, they had lived out of the
store. She would go to the store after dark with a basket and fetch back
enough food to last for a day or two. So the stock, not renewed for some
time before that, was considerably reduced even before the looting; and
soon she, who had never been taught to do anything practical because the
aunt had raised her to believe that she was not only delicate but
actually precious, was cooking the food which as time passed became
harder and harder to come by and poorer and poorer in quality, and
hauling it up to her father at night by means of a well pulley and rope
attached to the attic window. She did this for three years, feeding in
secret and at night and with food which in quantity was scarcely
sufficient for one, the man whom she hated. And she may not have known
before that she hated him and she may not have known it now even,
nevertheless the first of the odes to Southern soldiers in that
portfolio which when your grandfather saw it in 1885 contained a
thousand or more, was dated in the first year of her fathers voluntary
incarceration and dated at two oclock in the morning.

Then he died. One morning the hand did not come out to draw up the
basket. The old nails were still in the door and neighbors helped her
break it in with axes and they found him, who had seen his sole means of
support looted by the defenders of his cause, even if he had repudiated
it and them, with three days uneaten food beside his pallet bed as if
he had spent the three days in a mental balancing of his terrestrial
accounts, found the result and proved it and then turned upon his
contemporary scene of folly and outrage and injustice the dead and
consistent impassivity of a cold and inflexible disapproval. Now Miss
Rosa was not only an orphan, but a pauper too. The store was just a
shell, the deserted building vacated even by rats and containing
nothing, not even goodwill since he had irrevocably estranged himself
from neighbors, town, and embattled land, all three by his behavior.
Even the two negresses were gone nowwhom he had freed as soon as he
came into possession of them (through a debt, by the way, not purchase),
writing out their papers of freedom which they could not read and
putting them on a weekly wage which he held back in full against the
discharge of their current market valueand in return for which they
had been among the first Jefferson negroes to desert and follow the
Yankee troops. So when he died, he had nothing, not only saved but kept.
Doubtless the only pleasure which he had ever had was not in the meager
spartan hoard which he had accumulated before his path crossed that of
his future son-in-lawnot in the money but in its representation of a
balance in whatever spiritual counting-house he believed would some day
pay his sight drafts on self-denial and fortitude. And doubtless what
hurt him most in the whole business with Sutpen was not the loss of the
money but the fact that he had had to sacrifice the hoarding, the symbol
of the fortitude and abnegation, to keep intact the spiritual solvency
which he believed that he had already established and secured. It was as
if he had had to pay the same note twice because of some trifling
oversight of date or signature.

So Miss Rosa was both pauper and orphan, with no kin above dust but
Judith and the aunt who had been last heard of two years ago while
trying to pass the Yankee lines to reach Illinois and so be near the
Rock Island prison where her husband, who had offered his talents for
horse- and mule-getting to the Confederate cavalry remount corps and had
been caught at it, now was. Ellen was dead two years nowthe butterfly,
the moth caught in a gale and blown against a wall and clinging there
beating feebly, not with any particular stubborn clinging to life, not
in particular pain since it was too light to have struck hard, nor even
with very much remembrance of the bright vacuum before the gale, but
just in bewildered and uncomprehending amazementthe bright trivial
shell not even changed to any great extent despite the year of bad food,
since all of Sutpens negroes had deserted also to follow the Yankee
troops away; the wild blood which he had brought into the country and
tried to mix, blend, with the tame which was already there, with the
same care and for the same purpose which he blended that of the stallion
and that of his own. And with the same success: as though his presence
alone compelled that house to accept and retain human life; as though
houses actually possess a sentience, a personality and character
acquired, not so much from the people who breathe or have breathed in
them inherent in the wood and brick or begotten upon the wood and brick
by the man or men who conceived and built themin this house an
incontrovertible affirmation for emptiness, desertion; an insurmountable
resistance to occupancy save when sanctioned and protected by the
ruthless and the strong. Ellen had lost some flesh of course, but it was
as the butterfly itself enters dissolution by actually dissolving: the
area of wing and body decreasing a little, the pattern of the spots
drawing a little closer together, but with no wrinkle to showthe same
smooth, almost girlish face on the pillow (though Miss Rosa now
discovered that Ellen had been dyeing her hair evidently for years), the
same almost plump soft (though now unringed) hands on the coverlet, and
only the bafflement in the dark uncomprehending eyes to indicate
anything of present life by which to postulate approaching death as she
asked the seventeen-year-old sister to protect the remaining child.
(Henry up to now was just vanished, his birthright voluntarily
repudiated; he had not yet returned to play his final part in his
familys doomand this, your grandfather said, spared Ellen too, not
that it would have been the crushing and crowning blow but that it would
have been wasted on her since the clinging moth, even alive, would have
been incapable now of feeling anymore of wind or violence.) So the
natural thing would have been for her to go out and live with Judith,
the natural thing for her or any Southern woman, gentlewoman. She would
not have needed to be asked; no one would expect her to wait to be.
Because thats what a Southern lady is. Not the fact that, penniless and
with no prospect of ever being otherwise and knowing that all who know
her know this, yet moving with a parasol and a private chamber pot and
three trunks into your home and into the room where your wife uses the
hand-embroidered linen, she not only takes command of all the servants
who likewise know that she will never tip them, because they know as
well as the white folks that she will never have anything to tip them
with, but goes into the kitchen and dispossesses the cook and seasons
the very food you are going to eat to suit her own palateits not
this, not this that she is depending on to keep body and soul together:
it is as though she were living on the actual blood itself, like a
vampire, not with insatiability, certainly not with voracity, but with
that serene and idle splendor of flowers abrogating to herself, because
it fills her veins also, nourishment from the old blood that crossed
uncharted seas and continents and battled wilderness hardships and
lurking circumstances and fatalities.

Thats what she would have been expected to do. But she didnt. Yet
Judith still had those abandoned acres to draw from, let alone Clytie to
help her, keep her company, and Wash Jones to feed her as Wash had fed
Ellen before she died. But Miss Rosa didnt go out there at once.
Perhaps she never would have gone. Although Ellen had asked her to
protect Judith, possibly she felt that Judith did not need protection
yet, since if even deferred love could have supplied her with the will
to exist, endure for this long, then that same love, even though
deferred, must and would preserve Bon until the folly of men would
stalemate from sheer exhaustion and he would return from wherever he was
and bring Henry with himHenry, victim too of the same folly and
mischance. She must have seen Judith now and then and Judith probably
urged her to come out to Sutpens Hundred to live, but I believe that
this is the reason she did not go, even though she did not know where
Bon and Henry were and Judith apparently never thought to tell her.
Because Judith knew. She may have known for some time; even Ellen may
have known. Or perhaps Judith never told her mother either. Perhaps
Ellen did not know before she died that Henry and Bon were now privates
in the company which their classmates at the University had organized.
The first intimation Miss Rosa had had in four years that her nephew was
still alive was the afternoon when Wash Jones, riding Sutpens remaining
mule, stopped in front of the house and began to shout her name. She had
seen him before but she did not recognize hima gaunt gangling man
malaria-ridden with pale eyes and a face that might have been any age
between twenty-five and sixty, sitting on the saddleless mule in the
street before the gate, shouting Hello, Hello, at intervals until she
came to the door; whereupon he lowered his voice somewhat, though not
much. Air you Rosie Coldfield? he said.




                               [*  IV  *]


          It was still not dark enough for Quentin to start, not yet
dark enough to suit Miss Coldfield at least, even discounting the twelve
miles out there and the twelve miles back. Quentin knew that. He could
almost see her, waiting in one of the dark airless rooms in the little
grim houses impregnable solitude. She would have no light burning
because she would be out of the house soon, and probably some mental
descendant or kinsman of him or her who had told her once that light and
moving air carried heat had also told her that the cost of electricity
was not in the actual time the light burned but in the retroactive
overcoming of primary inertia when the switch was snapped: that that was
what showed on the meter. She would be wearing already the black bonnet
with jet sequins; he knew that: and a shawl, sitting there in the
augmenting and defunctive twilight; she would have even now in her hand
or on her lap the reticule with all the keys, entrance closet and
cupboard, that the house possessed which she was about to desert for
perhaps six hours; and a parasol, an umbrella too, he thought, thinking
how she would be impervious to weather and season since although he had
not spoken a hundred words to her in his life before this afternoon, he
did know that she had never before tonight quitted that house after
sundown save on Sundays and Wednesdays for prayer meeting, in the entire
forty-three years probably. Yes, she would have the umbrella. She would
emerge with it when he called for her and carry it invincibly into the
spent suspiration of an evening without even dew, where even now the
only alteration toward darkness was in the soft and fuller random of the
fireflies below the gallery, where he rose from his chair as Mr Compson,
carrying the letter, emerged from the house, snapping on the porch light
as he passed. You will probably have to go inside to read it, Mr
Compson said.

Maybe I can read it here all right, Quentin said.

Perhaps you are right, Mr Compson said. Maybe even the light of day,
let alone this he indicated the single globe stained and bug-fouled
from the long summer and which even when clean gave off but little
lightwould be too much for it, for them. Yes, for them: of that day
and time, of a dead time; people too as we are, and victims too as we
are, but victims of a different circumstance, simpler and therefore,
integer for integer, larger, more heroic and the figures therefore more
heroic too, not dwarfed and involved but distinct, uncomplex who had the
gift of loving once or dying once instead of being diffused and
scattered creatures drawn blindly limb from limb from a grab bag and
assembled, author and victim too of a thousand homicides and a thousand
copulations and divorcements. Perhaps you are right. Perhaps any more
light than this would be too much for it. But he did not give Quentin
the letter at once.

He sat again, Quentin sitting again too, and took up the cigar from the
veranda rail, the coal glowing again, the wistaria colored smoke
drifting again unwinded across Quentins face as Mr Compson raised his
feet once more to the railing, the letter in his hand and the hand
looking almost as dark as a negros against his linen leg.

Because Henry loved Bon. He repudiated blood birthright and material
security for his sake, for the sake of this man who was at least an
intending bigamist even if not an out and out blackguard, and on whose
dead body four years later Judith was to find the photograph of the
other woman and the child. So much so that he (Henry) could give his
father the lie about a statement which he must have realized that his
father could not and would not have made without foundation and proof.
Yet he did it, Henry himself striking the blow with his own hand, even
though he must have known that what his father told him about the woman
and the child was true. He must have said to himself, must have said
when he closed the library door for the last time behind himself that
Christmas eve and must have repeated while he and Bon rode side by side
through the iron dark of that Christmas morning, away from the house
where he had been born and which he would see but one time more and that
with the fresh blood of the man who now rode beside him, on his hands:
_I will believe; I will. I will. Even if it is so, even if what my
father told me is true and which, in spite of myself, I cannot keep from
knowing is true, I will still believe._ Because what else could he have
hoped to find in New Orleans, if not the truth? But who knows why a man,
though suffering, clings, above all the other well members, to the arm
or leg which he knows must come off? Because he loved Bon. I can imagine
him and Sutpen in the library that Christmas eve, the father and the
brother, percussion and repercussion like a thunderclap and its echo,
and as close together; the statement and the giving of the lie, the
decision instantaneous and irrevocable between father and friend,
between (so Henry must have believed) that where honor and love lay and
this where blood and profit ran, even though at the instant of giving
the lie he knew that it was the truth. That was why the four years, the
probation. He must have known that it would be vain, even then, on that
Christmas eve, not to speak of what he learned, saw with his own eyes in
New Orleans. He may even have known Bon that well by then, who had not
changed until then and so would in all probability not change later; and
he (Henry) who could not say to his friend, _I did that for love of you;
do this for love of me_. He couldnt say that, you seethis man, this
youth scarcely twenty, who had turned his back upon all that he knew, to
cast his lot with the single friend whom, even as they rode away that
night, he must have known, as he knew that what his father had told him
was true, that he was doomed and destined to kill. He must have known
that just as he knew that his hope was vain, what hope and what for he
could not have said; what hope and dream of change in Bon or in the
situation, what dream that he could someday wake from and find it had
been a dream, as in the injured mans fever dream the dear suffering arm
or leg is strong and sound and only the well ones sick.

It was Henrys probation; Henry holding all three of them in that
durance to which even Judith acquiesced up to a certain point. She did
not know what happened in the library that night. I dont think she ever
suspected, until that afternoon four years later when she saw them
again, when they brought Bons body into the house and she found in his
coat the photograph which was not her face, not her child; she just
waked the next morning and they were gone and only the letter, the note,
remaining, the note written by Henry since doubtless he refused to allow
Bon to writethis announcement of the armistice, the probation, and
Judith acquiescing up to that point, who would have refused as quickly
to obey any injunction of her father as Henry had been to defy him yet
who did obey Henry in this matternot the male relative, the brother,
but because of that relationship between themthat single personality
with two bodies both of which had been seduced almost simultaneously by
a man whom at the time Judith had never even seenshe and Henry both
knowing that she would observe the probation, give him (Henry) the
benefit of that interval, only up to that mutually recognized though
unstated and undefined point and both doubtless aware that when that
point was reached she would, and with the same calm, the same refusal to
accept or give because of any traditional weakness of sex, recall the
armistice and face him as a foe, not requiring or even wishing that Bon
be present to support her, doubtless even refusing to allow him to
intervene if he were, fighting the matter out with Henry like a man
first, before consenting to revert to the woman, the loved, the bride.
And Bon: Henry would have no more told Bon what his father had told him
than he would have returned to his father and told him that Bon denied
it, since to do one he would have to do the other and he knew that Bons
denial would be a lie and though he could have borne Bons lie himself,
he could not have borne for either Judith or his father to hear it.
Besides, Henry would not need to tell Bon what had happened.

Bon must have learned of Sutpens visit to New Orleans as soon as he
(Bon) reached home that first summer. He must have known that Sutpen now
knew his secretif Bon, until he saw Sutpens reaction to it, ever
looked upon it as a cause for secrecy, certainly not as a valid
objection to marriage with a white womana situation in which probably
all his contemporaries who could afford it were likewise involved and
which it would no more have occurred to him to mention to his bride or
wife or to her family than he would have told them the secrets of a
fraternal organization which he had joined before he married. In fact,
the manner in which his intended brides family reacted to the discovery
of it was doubtless the first and last time when the Sutpen family ever
surprised him. He is the curious one to me. He came into that isolated
puritan country household almost like Sutpen himself came into
Jefferson: apparently complete, without background or past or
childhooda man a little older than his actual years and enclosed and
surrounded by a sort of Scythian glitter, who seems to have seduced the
country brother and sister without any effort or particular desire to do
so, who caused all the pother and uproar, yet from the moment when he
realized that Sutpen was going to prevent the marriage if he could, he
(Bon) seems to have withdrawn into a mere spectator, passive, a little
sardonic, and completely enigmatic. He seems to hover, shadowy, almost
substanceless, a little behind and above all the other straightforward
and logical, even though (to him) incomprehensible, ultimatums and
affirmations and defiances and challenges and repudiations, with an air
of sardonic and indolent detachment like that of a youthful Roman consul
making the Grand Tour of his day among the barbarian hordes which his
grandfather conquered, benighted in a brawling and childish and quite
deadly mud-castle household in a miasmic and spirit-ridden forest. It
was as if he found the whole business, not inexplicable of course, just
unnecessary; that he knew at once that Sutpen had found out about the
mistress and child and he now found Sutpens action and Henrys reaction
a fetish-ridden moral blundering which did not deserve to be called
thinking, and which he contemplated with the detached attentiveness of a
scientist watching the muscles in an anesthetized frogwatching,
contemplating them from behind that barrier of sophistication in
comparison with which Henry and Sutpen were troglodytes. Not just the
outside, the way he walked and talked and wore his clothes and handed
Ellen into the dining room or into the carriage and (perhaps, probably)
kissed her hand and which Ellen envied for Henry, but the man
himselfthat fatalistic and impenetrable imperturbability with which he
watched them while he waited for them to do whatever it would be that
they would do, as if he had known all the while that the occasion would
arise when he would have to wait and that all he would need to do would
be to wait; had known that he had seduced Henry and Judith both too
thoroughly to have any fear that he might not marry Judith when he
wished to. Not that stupid shrewdness part instinct and part belief in
luck, and part muscular habit of the senses and nerves of the gambler
waiting to take what he can from what he sees, but a certain reserved
and inflexible pessimism stripped long generations ago of all the
rubbish and claptrap of people (yes, Sutpen and Henry and the Coldfields
too) who have not quite yet emerged from barbarism, who two thousand
years hence will still be throwing triumphantly off the yoke of Latin
culture and intelligence of which they were never in any great permanent
danger to begin with.

Because he loved Judith. He would have added doubtless after his
fashion since, as his intended father-in-law soon learned, this was not
the first time he had played this part, pledged what he had pledged to
Judith, let alone the first time he would have gone through a ceremony
to commemorate it, make what distinction (he was a Catholic of sorts) he
might between this one with a white woman and that other. Because you
will see the letter, not the first one he ever wrote to her but at least
the first, the only one she ever showed, as your grandmother knew then:
and, so we believe now that she is dead, the only one which she kept
unless of course Miss Rosa or Clytie destroyed the others after she
herself died: and this one here preserved not because Judith put it away
to keep but because she brought it herself and gave it to your
grandmother after Bons death, possibly on the same day when she
destroyed the others which he had written her (provided of course it was
she herself who destroyed them) which would have been when she found in
Bons coat the picture of the octoroon mistress and the little boy.
Because he was her first and last sweetheart. She must have seen him in
fact with exactly the same eyes that Henry saw him with. And it would be
hard to say to which of them he appeared the more splendidto the one
with hope, even though unconscious, of making the image hers through
possession; to the other with the knowledge of the insurmountable
barrier which the similarity of gender hopelessly intervenedthis man
whom Henry first saw riding perhaps through the grove at the University
on one of the two horses which he kept there or perhaps crossing the
campus on foot in the slightly Frenchified cloak and hat which he wore,
or perhaps (I like to think this) presented formally to the man
reclining in a flowered, almost feminized gown, in a sunny window in his
chambersthis man handsome elegant and even catlike and too old to be
where he was, too old not in years but in experience, with some tangible
effluvium of knowledge, surfeit: of actions done and satiations plumbed
and pleasures exhausted and even forgotten. So that he must have
appeared, not only to Henry but to the entire undergraduate body of that
small new provincial college, as a source not of envy, because you only
envy whom you believe to be, but for accident, in no way superior to
yourself: and what you believe, granted a little better luck than you
have had heretofore, you will someday possessnot of envy but of
despair: that sharp shocking terrible hopeless despair of the young
which sometimes takes the form of insult toward and even physical
assault upon the human subject of it or, in extreme cases like Henrys,
insult toward and assault upon any and all detractors of the subject, as
witness Henrys violent repudiation of his father and his birthright
when Sutpen forbade the marriage. Yes, he loved Bon, who seduced him as
surely as he seduced Judiththe country boy born and bred who, with the
five or six others of that small undergraduate body composed of other
planters sons whom Bon permitted to become intimate with him, who aped
his clothing and manner and (to the extent which they were able) his
very manner of living, looked upon Bon as though he were a hero out of
some adolescent Arabian Nights who had stumbled upon a talisman or
touchstone not to invest him with wisdom or power or wealth, but with
the ability and opportunity to pass from the scene of one scarce
imaginable delight to the next one without interval or pause or satiety.
And the very fact that, lounging before them in the outlandish and
almost feminine garments of his sybaritic privacy, he professed satiety
only increased the amazement and the bitter and hopeless outrage. Henry
was the provincial, the clown almost, given to instinctive and violent
action rather than to thinking who may have been conscious that his
fierce provincials pride in his sisters virginity was a false quantity
which must incorporate in itself an inability to endure in order to be
precious, to exist, and so must depend upon its loss, absence, to have
existed at all. In fact, perhaps this is the pure and perfect incest:
the brother realizing that the sisters virginity must be destroyed in
order to have existed at all, taking that virginity in the person of the
brother-in-law, the man whom he would be if he could become,
metamorphose into, the lover, the husband; by whom he would be
despoiled, choose for despoiler, if he could become, metamorphose into
the sister, the mistress, the bride. Perhaps that is what went on, not
in Henrys mind but in his soul. Because he never thought. He felt, and
acted immediately. He knew loyalty and acted it, he knew pride and
jealousy; he loved grieved and killed, still grieving and, I believe,
still loving Bon, the man to whom he gave four years of probation, four
years in which to renounce and dissolve the other marriage, knowing that
the four years of hoping and waiting would be in vain.

Yes, it was Henry who seduced Judith: not Bon, as witness the entire
queerly placid course of Bons and Judiths courtshipan engagement, if
engagement it ever was, lasting for a whole year yet comprising two
holiday visits as her brothers guest which Bon seems to have spent
either in riding and hunting with Henry or as acting as an elegant and
indolent esoteric hothouse bloom, possessing merely the name of a city
for origin history and past, about which Ellen preened and fluttered out
her unwitting butterflys Indian summer; he, the living man, was
usurped, you see. There was no time, no interval, no niche in the
crowded days when he could have courted Judith. You can not even imagine
him and Judith alone together. Try to do it and the nearest you can come
is a projection of them while the two actual people were doubtless
separate and elsewheretwo shades pacing, serene and untroubled by
flesh, in a summer gardenthe same two serene phantoms who seem to
watch, hover, impartial attentive and quiet, above and behind the
inexplicable thunderhead of interdictions and defiances and repudiations
out of which the rocklike Sutpen and the volatile and violent Henry
flashed and glared and ceasedHenry who up to that time had never even
been to Memphis, who had never been away from home before that September
when he went to the University with his countrified clothes and his
saddle horse and negro groom; the six or seven of them, of an age and
background, only in the surface matter of food and clothing and daily
occupation any different from the negro slaves who supported themthe
same sweat, the only difference being that on the one hand it went for
labor in fields where on the other it went as the price of the spartan
and meager pleasures which were available to them because they did not
have to sweat in the fields: the hard violent hunting and riding; the
same pleasures: the one, gambling for worn knives and brass jewelry and
twists of tobacco and buttons and garments because they happened to be
easiest and quickest to hand; on the other for the money and horses, the
guns and watches, and for the same reason; the same parties: the
identical music from identical instruments, crude fiddles and guitars,
now in the big house with candles and silk dresses and champagne, now in
dirt-floored cabins with smoking pine knots and calico and water
sweetened with molassesit was Henry, because at that time Bon had not
even seen Judith. He had probably not paid enough attention to Henrys
inarticulate recounting of his brief and conventional background and
history to have remembered that Henry had a sisterthis indolent man
too old to find even companionship among the youths, the children, with
whom he now lived; this man miscast for the time and knowing it,
accepting it for a reason obviously good enough to cause him to endure
it and apparently too serious or at least too private to be divulged to
what acquaintances he now possessedthis man who later showed the same
indolence, almost uninterest, the same detachment when the uproar about
that engagement which, so far as Jefferson knew, never formally existed,
which Bon himself never affirmed or denied, arose and he in the
background, impartial and passive as though it were not himself involved
or he acting on behalf of some absent friend, but as though the person
involved and interdict were someone whom he had never heard of and cared
nothing about. There does not even seem to have been any courtship.
Apparently he paid Judith the dubious compliment of not even trying to
ruin her, let alone insisting on the marriage either before or after
Sutpen forbade itthis, mind you, in a man who had already acquired a
name for prowess among women while at the University, long before Sutpen
was to find actual proof. No engagement, no courtship even: he and
Judith saw one another three times in two years, for a total period of
seventeen days, counting the time which Ellen consumed; they parted
without even saying goodbye. And yet, four years later, Henry had to
kill Bon to keep them from marrying. So it must have been Henry who
seduced Judith, not Bon: seduced her along with himself from that
distance between Oxford and Sutpens Hundred, between herself and the
man whom she had not even seen yet, as though by means of that telepathy
with which as children they seemed at times to anticipate one anothers
actions as two birds leave a limb at the same instant; that rapport not
like the conventional delusion of that between twins but rather such as
might exist between two people who, regardless of sex or age or heritage
of race or tongue, had been marooned at birth on a desert island: the
island here Sutpens Hundred; the solitude, the shadow of that father
with whom not only the town but their mothers family as well had merely
assumed armistice rather than accepting and assimilating.

You see? there they are: this girl, this young countrybred girl who
sees a man for an average of one hour a day for twelve days during his
life and that over a period of a year and a half, yet is bent on
marrying him to the extent of forcing her brother to the last resort of
homicide, even if not murder, to prevent it, and that after a period of
four years during which she could not have been always certain that he
was still alive; this father who had seen that man once, yet had reason
to make a six hundred mile journey to investigate him and either
discover what he already and apparently by clairvoyance suspected, or at
least something which served just as well as reason for forbidding the
marriage; this brother in whose eyes that sisters and daughters honor
and happiness, granted that curious and unusual relationship which
existed between them, should have been more jealous and precious than to
the father even, yet who must champion the marriage to the extent of
repudiating father and blood and home to become a follower and dependent
of the rejected suitor for four years before killing him apparently for
the very identical reason which four years ago he quitted home to
champion; and this lover who apparently without volition or desire
became involved in an engagement which he seems neither to have sought
nor avoided, who took his dismissal in the same passive and sardonic
spirit, yet four years later was apparently so bent upon the marriage to
which up to that time he had been completely indifferent as to force the
brother who had championed it to kill him to prevent it. Yes, granted
that, even to the unworldly Henry, let alone the more travelled father,
the existence of the eighth part negro mistress and the sixteenth-part
negro son, granted even the morganatic ceremonya situation which was
as much a part of a wealthy young New Orleansians social and
fashionable equipment as his dancing slipperswas reason enough, which
is drawing honor a little fine even for the shadowy paragons which are
our ancestors born in the South and come to man- and womanhood about
eighteen sixty or sixty one. Its just incredible. It just does not
explain. Or perhaps thats it: they dont explain and we are not supposed
to know. We have a few old mouth-to-mouth tales; we exhume from old
trunks and boxes and drawers letters without salutation or signature, in
which men and women who once lived and breathed are now merely initials
or nicknames out of some now incomprehensible affection which sound to
us like Sanskrit or Chocktaw; we see dimly people, the people in whose
living blood and seed we ourselves lay dormant and waiting, in this
shadowy attenuation of time possessing now heroic proportions,
performing their acts of simple passion and simple violence, impervious
to time and inexplicableYes, Judith, Bon, Henry, Sutpen: all of them.
They are there, yet something is missing; they are like a chemical
formula exhumed along with the letters from that forgotten chest,
carefully, the paper old and faded and falling to pieces, the writing
faded, almost indecipherable, yet meaningful, familiar in shape and
sense, the name and presence of volatile and sentient forces; you bring
them together in the proportions called for, but nothing happens; you
re-read, tedious and intent, poring, making sure that you have forgotten
nothing, made no miscalculation; you bring them together again and again
nothing happens: just the words, the symbols, the shapes themselves,
shadowy inscrutable and serene, against that turgid background of a
horrible and bloody mischancing of human affairs.

Bon and Henry came from the University to spend that first Christmas.
Judith and Ellen and Sutpen saw him for the first timeJudith, the man
whom she was to see for an elapsed time of twelve days, yet to remember
so that four years later (he never wrote her during that time. Henry
would not let him; it was the probation, you see) when she received a
letter from him saying _We have waited long enough_, she and Clytie
should begin at once to fashion a wedding dress and veil out of rags and
scraps; Ellen, the esoteric, the almost baroque, the almost epicene
object dart which with childlike voracity she essayed to include in the
furnishing and decoration of her house; Sutpen, the man whom, after
seeing once and before any engagement existed anywhere save in his
wifes mind, he saw as a potential threat to the (now and at last)
triumphant coronation of his old hardships and ambition, of which threat
he was apparently sure enough to warrant a six hundred mile journey to
prove itthis in a man who might have challenged and shot someone whom
he disliked or feared but who would not have made even a ten-mile
journey to investigate him. You see? You would almost believe that
Sutpens trip to New Orleans was just sheer chance, just a little more
of the illogical machinations of a fatality which had chosen that family
in preference to any other in the county or the land exactly as a small
boy chooses one ant-hill to pour boiling water into in preference to any
other, not even himself knowing why. Bon and Henry stayed two weeks and
rode back to school, stopping to see Miss Rosa but she was not at home;
they passed the long term before the summer vacation talking together
and riding and reading (Bon was reading law. He would be, would almost
have to, since only that could have made his residence bearable,
regardless of what reason he may have brought with him for
remainingthis, the perfect setting for his dilatory indolence: this
digging into musty Blackstone and Coke where, of an undergraduate body
still numbered in two figures, the law school probably consisted of six
others beside Henry and himselfyes, he corrupted Henry to the law
also; Henry changed in midterm) while Henry aped his clothing and
speech, caricatured rather, perhaps. And Bon, though he had now seen
Judith, was very likely the same lazy and catlike man on whom Henry
foisted now the role of his sisters intended, as during the fall term
Henry and his companions had foisted upon Bon the role of Lothario; and
Ellen and Judith now shopping two and three times a week in town and
stopping once to see Miss Rosa while on their way by carriage to
Memphis, with a wagon preceding them to fetch back the plunder and an
extra nigger on the box with the coachman to stop every few miles and
build a fire and re-heat the bricks on which Ellens and Judiths feet
rested, shopping, buying the trousseau for that wedding whose formal
engagement existed no where yet save in Ellens mind; and Sutpen, who
had seen Bon once and was in New Orleans investigating him when Bon next
entered the house: who knows what he was thinking, what waiting for,
what moment, day, to go to New Orleans and find what he seems to have
known all the while that he would find? There was no one for him to
tell, talk to about his fear and suspicion. He trusted no man nor woman,
who had no mans nor womans love, since Ellen was incapable of love and
Judith was too much like him and he must have seen at glance that Bon,
even though the daughter might still be saved from him, had already
corrupted the son. He had been too successful, you see; his was that
solitude of contempt and distrust which success brings to him who gained
it because he was strong instead of merely lucky.

Then June came and the end of the school year and Henry and Bon
returned to Sutpens Hundred, Bon to spend a day or two before riding on
to the River to take the steamboat home, to New Orleans where Sutpen had
already gone. He stayed but two days, yet now if ever was his chance to
come to an understanding with Judith, perhaps even to fall in love with
her. It was his only chance, his last chance, though of course neither
he nor Judith could have known it, since Sutpen, though but two weeks
absent from home, had doubtless already found out about the octoroon
mistress and the child. So for the first and last time Bon and Judith
might have been said to have a free fieldmight have been, since it was
really Ellen who had the free field. I can imagine her engineering that
courtship, supplying Judith and Bon with opportunities for trysts and
pledges with a coy and unflagging ubiquity which they must have tried in
vain to evade and escape, Judith with annoyed yet still serene concern,
Bon with that sardonic and surprised distaste which seems to have been
the ordinary manifestation of the impenetrable and shadowy character.
Yes, shadowy: a myth, a phantom: something which they engendered and
created whole themselves; some effluvium of Sutpen blood and character,
as though as a man he did not exist at all.

Yet there was the body which Miss Rosa saw, which Judith buried in the
family plot beside her mother. And this: the fact that even an undefined
and never-spoken engagement survived, speaking well for the postulation
that they did love one another, since during that two days mere romance
would have perished, died of sheer saccharinity and opportunity. Then
Bon rode on to the River and took the boat. And now this: who knows,
perhaps if Henry had gone with him that summer instead of waiting until
the next, Bon would not have had to die as he did; if Henry had only
gone then to New Orleans and found out then about the mistress and the
child; Henry who, before it was too late, might have reacted to the
discovery exactly as Sutpen did, as a jealous brother might have been
expected to react, since who knows but what it was not the fact of the
mistress and child, the possible bigamy, to which Henry gave the lie,
but to the fact that it was his father who told him, his father who
anticipated him, the father who is the natural enemy of any son and
son-in-law of whom the mother is the ally, just as after the wedding the
father will be the ally of the actual son-in-law who has for mortal foe
the mother of his wife. But Henry did not go this time. He rode to the
River with Bon and then returned; after a time Sutpen returned home too,
from where and for what purpose none were to know until the next
Christmas, and that summer passed, the last summer, the past summer of
peace and content, with Henry, doubtless without deliberate intent,
pleading Bons suit far better than Bon, than that indolent fatalist had
ever bothered to plead it himself, and Judith listening with that
serenity, that impenetrable tranquillity which a year or so before had
been the young girls vague and pointless and dreamy unvolition but was
now already a mature womansa mature woman in loverepose. Thats
when the letters came, and Henry reading them all, without jealousy,
with that complete abnegant transference, metamorphosis into the body
which was to become his sisters lover. And Sutpen saying nothing yet
about what he had learned in New Orleans but just waiting, unsuspected
even by Henry and Judith, waiting for what nobody knows, perhaps in the
hope that when Bon learned, as he would be obliged to, that Sutpen had
discovered his secret, he (Bon) would realize that the game was up and
not even return to school the next year. But Bon did return. He and
Henry met again at the University; the lettersfrom Henry and Bon both
nowmaking weekly journeys by the hand of Henrys groom; and Sutpen
still waiting, certainly no one could say for what now, incredible that
he should wait for Christmas, for the crisis to come to himthis man of
whom it was said that he not only went out to meet his troubles, he
sometimes went out and manufactured them. But this time he waited and it
came to him: Christmas, and Henry and Bon rode again to Sutpens Hundred
and even the town convinced now by Ellen that the engagement existed;
that twenty-fourth of December, 1860, and the nigger children, with
branches of mistletoe and holly for excuses, already lurking about the
rear of the big house to shout Christmas gift at the white people, the
rich city man come to court Judith, and Sutpen saying nothing even yet,
not suspected yet unless possibly by Henry who brought the matter to its
crisis that same night, and Ellen at the absolute floods peak of her
unreal and weightless life which with the next dawn was to break beneath
her and wash her, spent amazed and uncomprehending, into the shuttered
room where she died two years laterthe Christmas Eve, the explosion,
and none to ever know just why or just what happened between Henry and
his father and only the cabin-to-cabin whispering of negroes to spread
the news that Henry and Bon had ridden away in the dark and that Henry
had formally abjured his home and birthright.

They went to New Orleans. They rode through the bright cold of that
Christmas day, to the River and took the steamboat, Henry still doing
the leading, the bringing, as he always did until the very last, when
for the first time during their entire relationship Bon led and Henry
followed. Henry didnt have to go. He had voluntarily made himself a
pauper but he could have gone to his grandfather. No, he didnt have to
go. Bon was riding beside him, trying to find out from him what had
happened. Bon knew of course what Sutpen had discovered in New Orleans,
but he would need to know just what, just how much, Sutpen had told
Henry, and Henry not telling him. Doubtless Henry was riding the new
mare which he probably knew he would have to surrender, sacrifice too,
along with all the rest of his life, inheritance, going fast now and his
back rigid and irrevocably turned upon the house, his birthplace and all
the familiar scene of his childhood and youth which he had repudiated
for the sake of that friend with whom, despite the sacrifice which he
had just made out of love and loyalty, he still could not be perfectly
frank. Because he knew that what Sutpen had told him was true. He must
have known that at the very instant when he gave his father the lie. So
he dared not ask Bon to deny it; he dared not, you see. He could face
poverty, disinheritance, but he could not have borne that lie from Bon.
Yet he went to New Orleans. He went straight there, to the only place,
the very place, where he could not help but prove conclusively the very
statement which, coming from his father, he had called a lie. He went
there for that purpose; he went there to prove it. And Bon, riding
beside him, trying to find out what Sutpen had told himBon who for a
year and a half now had been watching Henry ape his clothing and speech,
who for a year and a half now had seen himself as the object of that
complete and abnegant devotion which only a youth, never a woman, gives
to another youth or a man; who for exactly a year now had seen the
sister succumb to that same spell which the brother had already
succumbed to, and this with no volition on the seducers part, without
so much as the lifting of a finger, as though it actually were the
brother who had put the spell on the sister, seduced her to his own
vicarious image which walked and breathed with Bons body. Yet here is
the letter, sent four years afterward, written on a sheet of paper
salvaged from a gutted house in Carolina, with stove polish found in
some captured Yankee stores; four years after she had had any message
from him save the messages from Henry that he (Bon) was still alive. So
whether Henry now knew about the other woman or not, he would now have
to know. Bon realized that. I can imagine them as they rode, Henry still
in the fierce repercussive flush of vindicated loyalty, and Bon, the
wiser, the shrewder even if only from wider experience and a few more
years of age, learning from Henry without Henrys being aware of it,
what Sutpen had told him. Because Henry would have to know now. And I
dont believe it was just to preserve Henry as an ally, for the crisis of
some future need. It was because Bon not only loved Judith after his
fashion but he loved Henry too and I believe in a deeper sense than
merely after his fashion. Perhaps in his fatalism he loved Henry the
better of the two, seeing perhaps in the sister merely the shadow, the
woman vessel with which to consummate the love whose actual object was
the youththis cerebral Don Juan who, reversing the order, had learned
to love what he had injured; perhaps it was even more than Judith or
Henry either: perhaps the life, the existence, which they represented.
Because who knows what picture of peace he might have seen in that
monotonous provincial backwater; what alleviation and escape for a
parched traveler who had traveled too far at too young an age, in this
granite-bound and simple country spring.

And I can imagine how Bon told Henry, broke it to him. I can imagine
Henry in New Orleans, who had not yet even been in Memphis, whose entire
worldly experience consisted of sojourns at other houses, plantations,
almost interchangeable with his own, where he followed the same routine
which he did at homethe same hunting and cockfighting, the same
amateur racing of horses on crude homemade tracks, horses sound enough
in blood and lineage yet not bred to race and perhaps not even thirty
minutes out of the shafts of a trap or perhaps even a carriage; the same
square dancing with identical and also interchangeable provincial
virgins, to music exactly like that at home, the same champagne, the
best doubtless yet crudely dispensed out of the burlesqued pantomime
elegance of negro butlers who (and likewise the drinkers who gulped it
down like neat whiskey between flowery and unsubtle toasts) would have
treated lemonade the same way. I can imagine him, with his puritan
heritagethat heritage peculiarly Anglo-Saxonof fierce proud
mysticism and that ability to be ashamed of ignorance and inexperience,
in that city foreign and paradoxical, with its atmosphere at once fatal
and languorous, at once feminine and steel-hardthis grim humorless
yokel out of a granite heritage where even the houses, let alone
clothing and conduct, are built in the image of a jealous and sadistic
Jehovah, put suddenly down in a place whose denizens had created their
All-Powerful and His supporting hierarchy-chorus of beautiful saints and
handsome angels in the image of their houses and personal ornaments and
voluptuous lives. Yes, I can imagine how Bon led up to it, to the shock:
the skill, the calculation, preparing Henrys puritan mind as he would
have prepared a cramped and rocky field and planted it and raised the
crop which he wanted. It would be the fact of the ceremony, regardless
of what kind, that Henry would balk at: Bon knew this. It would not be
the mistress or even the child, not even the negro mistress and even
less the child because of that fact, since Henry and Judith had grown up
with a negro half sister of their own; not the mistress to Henry,
certainly not the nigger mistress to a youth with Henrys background, a
young man grown up and living in a milieu where the other sex is
separated into three sharp divisions, separated (two of them) by a chasm
which could be crossed but one time and in but one directionladies,
women, femalesthe virgins whom gentlemen someday married, the
courtesans to whom they went while on sabbaticals to the cities, the
slave girls and women upon whom that first caste rested and to whom in
certain cases it doubtless owed the very fact of its virginitynot this
to Henry, young, strong-blooded, victim of the hard celibacy of riding
and hunting to heat and make importunate the blood of a young man, to
which he and his kind were forced to pass time away, with girls of his
own class interdict and inaccessible and women of the second class just
as inaccessible because of money and distance, and hence only the slave
girls, the housemaids neated and cleaned by white mistresses or perhaps
girls with sweating bodies out of the fields themselves and the young
man rides up and beckons the watching overseer and says Send me Juno or
Missylena or Chlory and then rides on into the trees and dismounts and
waits. No: it would be the ceremony, a ceremony entered into, to be
sure, with a negro, yet still a ceremony; this is what Bon doubtless
thought. So I can imagine him, the way he did it: the way in which he
took the innocent and negative plate of Henrys provincial soul and
intellect and exposed it by slow degrees to this esoteric milieu,
building gradually toward the picture which he desired it to retain,
accept. I can see him corrupting Henry gradually into the purlieus of
elegance, with no foreword, no warning, the postulation to come after
the fact, exposing Henry slowly to the surface aspectthe architecture
a little curious, a little femininely flamboyant and therefore to Henry
opulent, sensuous, sinful; the inference of great and easy wealth
measured by steamboat loads in place of a tedious inching of sweating
human figures across cotton fields; the flash and glitter of a myriad
carriage wheels, in which women, enthroned and immobile and passing
rapidly across the vision, appeared like painted portraits beside men in
linen a little finer and diamonds a little brighter and in broadcloth a
little trimmer and with hats raked a little more above faces a little
more darkly swaggering than any Henry had ever seen before: and the
mentor, the man for whose sake he had repudiated not only blood and kin
but food and shelter and clothing too, whose clothing and walk and
speech he had tried to ape, along with his attitude toward women and his
ideas of honor and pride too, watching him with that cold and catlike
inscrutable calculation, watching the picture resolve and become fixed
and then telling Henry, But thats not it. Thats just the base, the
foundation. It can belong to anyone: and Henry, You mean, this is not
it? That it is above this, higher than this, more select than this?:
and Bon, Yes. This is only the foundation. This belongs to anybody.: a
dialogue without words, speech, which would fix and then remove without
obliterating one line of the picture, this background, leaving the
background, the plate prepared innocent again: the plate docile, with
that puritans humility toward anything which is a matter of sense
rather than logic, fact, the man, the struggling and suffocating heart
behind it saying _I will believe! I will! I will! Whether it is true or
not, I will believe!_ waiting for the next picture which the mentor, the
corrupter, intended for it: that next picture, following the fixation
and acceptance of which the mentor would say again perhaps with words
now, still watching the sober and thoughtful face but still secure in
his knowledge and trust in that puritan heritage which must show
disapproval instead of surprise or even despair and nothing at all
rather than have the disapprobation construed as surprise or despair:
But even this is not it: and Henry, You mean, it is still higher than
this, still above this? Because he (Bon) would be talking now, lazily,
almost cryptically, stroking onto the plate himself now the picture
which he wanted there; I can imagine how he did itthe calculation, the
surgeons alertness and cold detachment, the exposures brief, so brief
as to be cryptic, almost staccato, the plate unaware of what the
complete picture would show, scarce-seen yet ineradicablea trap, a
riding horse standing before a closed and curiously monastic doorway in
a neighborhood a little decadent, even a little sinister, and Bon
mentioning the owners name casuallythis, corruption subtly anew by
putting into Henrys mind the notion of one man of the world speaking to
another, that Henry knew that Bon believed that Henry would know even
from a disjointed word what Bon was talking about, and Henry the puritan
who must show nothing at all rather than surprise or incomprehensiona
faade shuttered and blank, drowsing in steamy morning sunlight,
invested by the bland and cryptic voice with something of secret and
curious and unimaginable delights. Without his knowing what he saw it
was as though to Henry the blank and scaling barrier in dissolving
produced and revealed not comprehension to the mind, the intellect which
weighs and discards, but striking instead straight and true to some
primary blind and mindless foundation of all young male living dream and
hopea row of faces like a bazaar of flowers, the supreme apotheosis of
chattelry, of human flesh bred of the two races for that salea
corridor of doomed and tragic flower faces walled between the grim
duenna row of old women and the elegant shapes of young men trim
predatory and (at the moment) goatlike: this seen by Henry quickly,
exposed quickly and then removed, the mentors voice still bland,
pleasant, cryptic, postulating still the fact of one man of the world
talking to another about something they both understand, depending upon,
counting upon still, the puritans provincial horror of revealing
surprise or ignorance, who knew Henry so much better than Henry knew
him, and Henry not showing either, suppressing still that first cry of
terror and grief, _I will believe! I will! I will!_ Yes, that brief,
before Henry had had time to know what he had seen, but now slowing: now
would come the instant for which Bon had buildeda wall, unscalable, a
gate ponderously locked, the sober and thoughtful country youth just
waiting, looking, not yet asking why? or what? the gate of solid beams
in place of the lacelike iron grilling and they passing on, Bon knocking
at a small adjacent doorway from which a swarthy man resembling a
creature out of an old woodcut of the French Revolution erupts,
concerned, even a little aghast, looking first at the daylight and then
at Henry and speaking to Bon in French which Henry does not understand
and Bons teeth glinting for an instant before he answers in French:
With him? An American? He is a guest; I would have to let him choose
weapons and I decline to fight with axes. No, no; not that. Just the
key. Just the key; and now, the solid gates closed behind them instead
of before, no sight or evidence above the high thick walls of the low
city and scarce any sound of it, the labyrinthine mass of oleander and
jasmine, lantana and mimosa walling yet again the strip of bare earth
combed and curried with powdered shell, raked and immaculate and only
the most recent of the brown stains showing now, and the voicethe
mentor, the guide standing aside now to watch the grave provincial
facecasually and pleasantly anecdotal: The customary way is to stand
back to back, the pistol in your right hand and the corner of the other
cloak in your left. Then at the signal you begin to walk and when you
feel the cloak tauten you turn and fire. Though there are some now and
then, when the blood is especially hot or when it is still peasant
blood, who prefer knives and one cloak. They face one another inside the
same cloak, you see, each holding the others wrist with the left hand.
But that was never my waycasual, chatty, you see, waiting for the
countrymans slow question, who knew already now before he asked it:
What would youthey be fighting for?

Yes, Henry would know now, or believe that he knew now; anymore he
would probably consider anti-climax though it would not be, it would be
anything but that, the final blow, stroke, touch, the keen surgeonlike
compounding which the now shocked nerves of the patient would not even
feel, not know that the first hard shocks were the random and crude.
Because there was that ceremony. Bon knew that that would be what Henry
would resist, find hard to stomach and retain. Oh he was shrewd, this
man whom for weeks now Henry was realizing that he knew less and less,
this stranger immersed, and oblivious now in the formal, almost ritual,
preparations for the visit, finicking almost like a woman over the fit
of the new coat which he would have ordered for Henry, forced Henry to
accept for this occasion, by means of which the entire impression which
Henry was to receive from the visit would be established before they
even left the house, before Henry ever saw the woman: and Henry, the
countryman, the bewildered, with the subtle tide already setting beneath
him toward the point where he must either betray himself and his entire
upbringing and thinking, or deny the friend for whom he had already
repudiated home and kin and all; the bewildered, the (for that time)
helpless, who wanted to believe yet did not see how he could, being
carried by the friend, the mentor, through one of those inscrutable and
curiously lifeless doorways like that before which he had seen the horse
or the trap, and so into a place which to his puritans provincial mind
all of morality was upside down and all of honor perisheda place
created for and by voluptuousness, the abashless and unabashed senses,
and the country boy with his simple and erstwhile untroubled code, in
which females were ladies or whores or slaves looked at the apotheosis
of two doomed races presided over by its own victima woman with a face
like a tragic magnolia, the eternal female the eternal Who-suffers; the
child, the boy, sleeping in silk and lace to be sure yet complete
chattel of him who, begetting him, owned him body and soul to sell (if
he chose) like a calf or puppy or sheep; and the mentor watching again,
perhaps even the gambler now thinking _Have I won or lost?_ as they
emerged and returned to Bons rooms, for that while impotent even with
talk, shrewdness, no longer counting upon that puritan character which
must show neither surprise nor despair, having to count now (if on
anything) on the corruption itself, the love; he could not even say,
Well? What do you say about it? He could only wait, and that upon the
absolutely unpredictable actions of a man who lived by instinct and not
reason, until Henry should speak, But a bought woman. A whore: and
Bon, even gently now, Not whore. Dont say that. In fact, never refer to
one of them by that name in New Orleans: otherwise you may be forced to
purchase that privilege with some of your blood from probably a thousand
men, and perhaps still gently, perhaps now even with something of pity:
that pessimistic and sardonic cerebral pity of the intelligent for any
human injustice or folly or suffering: Not whores. And not whores
because of us, the thousand. Wethe thousand, the white menmade them,
created and produced them; we even made the laws which declare that one
eighth of a specified kind of blood shall outweigh seven eights of
another kind. I admit that. But that same white race would have made
them slaves too, laborers, cooks, maybe even field hands, if it were not
for this thousand, these few men like myself without principles or honor
either, perhaps you will say. We cannot, perhaps we do not even want to,
save all of them; perhaps the thousand we save are not one in a
thousand. But we save that one. God may mark every sparrow, but we do
not pretend to be God, you see. Perhaps we do not even want to be God,
since no man would want but one of these sparrows. And perhaps when God
looks into one of these establishments like you saw tonight, He would
not choose one of us to be God either; now that He is old. Though He
must have been young once, surely He was young once, and surely someone
who has existed as long as He has, who has looked at as much crude and
promiscuous sinning without grace or restraint or decorum as He has had
to, to contemplate at last, even though the instances are not one in a
thousand thousand, the principles of honor, decorum and gentleness
applied to perfectly normal human instinct which you Anglo-Saxons insist
upon calling lust and in whose service you revert in sabbaticals to the
primordial caverns, the fall from what you call grace fogged and clouded
by Heaven-defying words of extenuation and explanation, the return to
grace heralded by Heaven-placating cries of satiated abasement and
flagellation, in neither of whichthe defiance or the placationcan
Heaven find interest or even, after the first two or three times,
diversion. So perhaps, now that God is an old man, he is not interested
in the way we serve what you call lust either, perhaps He does not even
require of us that we save this one sparrow, anymore than we save the
one sparrow which we do save for any commendation from Him. But we do
save that one, who but for us would have been sold to any brute who had
the price, not sold to him for the night like a white prostitute, but
body and soul for life to him who could have used her with more impunity
than he would dare to use an animal, heifer or mare, and then discarded
or sold or even murdered when worn out or when her keep and her price no
longer balanced. Yes: a sparrow which God himself neglected to mark.
Because though men, white men, created her, God did not stop it. He
planted the seed which brought her to flowerthe white blood to give
the shape and pigment of what the white man calls female beauty, to
female principle which existed, queenly and complete, in the hot
equatorial groin of the world long before that white one of ours came
down from trees and lost its hair and bleached outa principle apt
docile and instinct with strange and ancient curious pleasures of the
flesh (which is all: there is nothing else) which her white sisters of a
mushroom yesterday flee from in moral and outraged horrora principle
which, where her white sister must needs try to make an economic matter
of it like someone who insists upon installing a counter or a scales or
a safe in a store or business for a certain percentage of the profits,
reigns, wise supine and all-powerful, from the sunless and silken bed
which is her throne. No: not whores. Not even courtesanscreatures
taken at childhood, culled and chosen and raised more carefully than any
white girl, any nun, than any blooded mare even, by a person who gives
them the unsleeping care and attention which no mother ever gives. For a
price, of course, but a price offered and accepted or declined through a
system more formal than any that white girls are sold under since they
are more valuable as commodities than white girls, raised and trained to
fulfill a womans sole end and purpose: to love, to be beautiful, to
divert; never to see a mans face hardly until brought to the ball and
offered to and chosen by some man who in return, not can and not will
but _must_, supply her with the surroundings proper in which to love and
be beautiful and divert, and who must usually risk his life or at least
his blood for that privilege. No, not whores. Sometimes I believe that
they are the only true chaste women, not to say virgins, in America, and
they remain true and faithful to that man not merely until he dies or
frees them, but until they die. And where will you find whore or lady
either whom you can count on to do that? and Henry, But you married
her. You married her: and Bonit would be a little quicker now,
sharper now, though still gentle, still patient, though still the iron,
the steelthe gambler not quite yet reduced to his final trump: Ah.
That ceremony. I see. Thats it, then. A formula, a shibboleth
meaningless as a childs game, performed by someone created by the
situation whose need it answered: a crone mumbling in a dungeon lighted
by a handful of burning hair, something in a tongue which not even the
girls themselves understand anymore, maybe not even the crone herself,
rooted in nothing of economics for her or for any possible progeny since
the very fact that we acquiesced, suffered the farce, was her proof and
assurance of that which the ceremony itself could never enforce; vesting
no new rights in no one, denying to none the olda ritual as
meaningless as that of college boys in secret rooms at night, even to
the same archaic and forgotten symbols?you call that a marriage, when
the night of a honeymoon and the casual business with a hired prostitute
consists of the same suzerainty over a (temporarily) private room, the
same order of removing the same clothes, the same conjunction in a
single bed? Why not call that a marriage too? and Henry: Oh I know. I
know. You give me two and two and you tell me it makes five and it does
make five. But there is still the marriage. Suppose I assume an
obligation to a man who cannot speak my language, the obligation stated
to him in his own and I agree to it: am I any the less obligated because
I did not happen to know the tongue in which he accepted me in good
faith? No: the more, the more. and Bonthe trump now, the voice gentle
now: Have you forgot that this woman, this child, are niggers? You,
Henry Sutpen of Sutpens Hundred in Mississippi? You, talking of
marriage, a wedding, here? and Henrythe despair now, the last bitter
cry of irrevocable undefeat: Yes. I know. I know that. But its still
there. Its not right. Not even you doing it makes it right. Not even
you.

So that was all. It should have been all; that afternoon four years
later should have happened the next day, the four years, the interval,
mere anti-climax: an attenuation and prolongation of a conclusion
already ripe to happen, by the War by a stupid and bloody aberration in
the high (and impossible) destiny of the United States, maybe instigated
by that family fatality which possessed, along with all circumstance,
that curious lack of economy between cause and effect which is always a
characteristic of fate when reduced to using human beings for tools,
material. Anyway, Henry waited four years, holding the three of them in
that abeyance, that durance, waiting, hoping, for Bon to renounce the
woman and dissolve the marriage which he (Henry) admitted was no
marriage, and which he must have known as soon as he saw the woman and
the child that Bon would not renounce. In fact, as time passed and Henry
became accustomed to the idea of that ceremony which was still no
marriage, that may have been the trouble with Henrynot the two
ceremonies but the two women; not the fact that Bons intention was to
commit bigamy but that it was apparently to make his (Henrys) sister a
sort of junior partner in a harem. Anyway, he waited, hoped, for four
years. That spring they returned north, into Mississippi. Bull Run had
been fought and there was a company organizing at the University, among
the student body. Henry and Bon joined it. Probably Henry wrote Judith
where they were and what they intended to do. They enlisted together,
you see, Henry watching Bon and Bon permitting himself to be watched,
the probation, the durance: the one who dared not let the other out of
his sight, not from fear that Bon would marry Judith with Henry not
there to stop it, but that Bon would marry Judith and then he (Henry)
would have to live for the rest of his life with the knowledge that he
was glad that he had been so betrayed, with the cowards joy of
surrendering without having been vanquished; the other for that same
reason too, who could not have wanted Judith without Henry since he must
never have doubted but what he could marry Judith when he wished, in
spite of brother and father both, because as I said before, it was not
Judith who was the object of Bons love or of Henrys solicitude. She
was just the blank shape, the empty vessel in which each of them strove
to preserve, not the illusion of himself nor his illusion of the other
but what each conceived the other to believe him to bethe man and the
youth, seducer and seduced, who had known one another, seduced and been
seduced, victimized in turn each by the other, conquerer vanquished by
his own strength, vanquished conquering by his own weakness, before
Judith came into their joint lives even by so much as girlname. And who
knows? there was the War now; who knows but what the fatality and the
fatalitys victims did not both think, hope, that the War would settle
the matter, leave free one of the two irreconcilables, since it would
not be the first time that youth has taken catastrophe as a direct act
of Providence for the sole purpose of solving a personal problem which
youth itself could not solve.

And Judith: how else to explain her but this way? Surely Bon could not
have corrupted her to fatalism in twelve days, who not only had not
tried to corrupt her to unchastity but not even to defy her father. No:
anything but a fatalist, who was the Sutpen with the ruthless Sutpen
code of taking what it wanted provided it were strong enough, of the two
children as Henry was the Coldfield with the Coldfield cluttering of
morality and rules of right and wrong; who while Henry screamed and
vomited, looked down from the loft that night on the spectacle of Sutpen
fighting halfnaked with one of his halfnaked niggers with the same cold
and attentive interest with which Sutpen would have watched Henry
fighting with a negro boy of his own age and weight. Because she could
not have known the reason for her fathers objection to the marriage.
Henry would not have told her, and she would not have asked her father.
Because, even if she had known it, it would have made no difference to
her. She would have acted as Sutpen would have acted with anyone who
tried to cross him: she would have taken Bon anyway. I can imagine her
if necessary even murdering the other woman. But she certainly would
have made no investigation and then held a moral debate between what she
wanted and what she thought was right. Yet she waited. She waited four
years, with no word from him save through Henry that he (Bon) was alive.
It was the probation, the durance; they all three accepted it; I dont
believe there was ever any promise between Henry and Bon demanded or
offered. But Judith, who could not have known what happened nor
why.Have you noticed how so often when we try to reconstruct the
causes which lead up to the actions of men and women, how with a sort of
astonishment we find ourselves now and then reduced to the belief, the
only possible belief, that they stemmed from some of the old virtues?
the thief who steals not for greed but for love, the murderer who kills
not out of lust but pity? Judith, giving implicit trust where she had
given love, giving implicit love where she had derived breath and pride:
that true pride, not that false kind which transforms what it does not
at the moment understand into scorn and outrage and so vents itself in
pique and lacerations, but true pride which can say to itself without
abasement _I love, I will accept no substitute; something has happened
between him and my father; if my father was right, I will never see him
again, if wrong he will come or send for me; if happy I can be I will,
if suffer I must I can_. Because she waited; she made no effort to do
anything else; her relations with her father had not altered one jot; to
see them together, Bon might never have even existedthe same two calm
impenetrable faces seen together in the carriage in town during the next
few months after Ellen took to her bed, between that Christmas day and
the day when Sutpen rode away with his and Sartoris regiment. They
didnt talk, tell one another anything, you seeSutpen, what he had
learned about Bon; Judith, that she knew where Bon and Henry now were.
They did not need to talk. They were too much alike. They were as two
people become now and then, who seem to know one another so well or are
so much alike that the power, the need, to communicate by speech
atrophies from disuse and, comprehending without need of the medium of
ear or intellect, they no longer understand one anothers actual words.
So she did not tell him where Henry and Bon were and he did not discover
it until after the University company departed, because Bon and Henry
enrolled and then hid themselves somewhere. They must have; they must
have paused in Oxford only long enough to enroll before riding on,
because no one who knew them either in Oxford or in Jefferson knew that
they were members of the company at the time, which would have been
almost impossible to conceal otherwise. Because now peoplefathers and
mothers and sisters and kin and sweethearts of those young menwere
coming to Oxford from further away than Jeffersonfamilies with food
and bedding and servants, to bivouac among the families, the houses, of
Oxford itself, to watch the gallant mimic marching and countermarching
of the sons and the brothers, drawn all of them, rich and poor,
aristocrat and redneck, by what is probably the most moving mass-sight
of all human mass-experience, far more so than the spectacle of so many
virgins going to be sacrificed to some heathen Principle, some
Priapusthe sight of young men, the light quick bones, the bright
gallant deluded blood and flesh dressed in a martial glitter of brass
and plumes, marching away to a battle. And there would be music at
nightfiddle and triangle among the blazing candles, the blowing of
curtains in tall windows on the April darkness, the swing of crinoline
indiscriminate within the circle of plain gray cuff of the soldier or
the banded gold of rank, of an army even if not a war of gentlemen,
where private and colonel called each other by their given names not as
one farmer to another across a halted plow in a field or across a
counter in a store laden with calico and cheese and strap oil, but as
one man to another above the suave powdered shoulders of women, above
the two raised glasses of scuppernong claret or bought champagnemusic,
the nightly repetitive last waltz as the days passed and the company
waited to move, the brave trivial glitter against a black night not
catastrophic but merely background, the perennial last scented spring of
youth; and Judith not there and Henry the romantic not there and Bon the
fatalist, hidden somewhere, the watcher and the watched: and the
recurrent flower-laden dawns of that April and May and June filled with
bugles, entering a hundred windows where a hundred still unbrided widows
dreamed virgin unmeditant upon the locks of black or brown or yellow
hair and Judith not one of these: and five of the company, mounted, with
grooms and body servants in a forage wagon, in their new and unstained
gray made a tour of the State with the flag, the companys colors, the
segments of silk cut and fitted but not sewn, from house to house until
the sweetheart of each man in the company had taken a few stitches in
it, and Henry and Bon not of these either, since they did not join the
company until after it departed. They must have emerged from whatever
place it was that they lurked in, emerging as though unnoticed from the
roadside brake or thicket, to fall in as the marching company passed;
the two of themthe youth and the man, the youth deprived twice now of
his birthright, who should have made one among the candles and fiddles,
the kisses and the desperate tears, who should have made one of the
color guard itself which toured the State with the unsewn flag; and the
man who should not have been there at all, who was too old to be there
at all, both in years and experience: that mental and spiritual orphan
whose fate it apparently was to exist in some limbo halfway between
where his corporeality was and his mentality and moral equipment desired
to bean undergraduate at the University, yet by the sheer accumulation
of too full years behind him forced into the extra-academic of a law
class containing six members; in the War, by that same force removed
into the isolation of commissioned rank. He received a lieutenancy
before the company entered its first engagement even. I dont think he
wanted it; I can even imagine him trying to avoid it, refuse it. But
there it was, he was, orphaned once more by the very situation to which
and by which he was doomedthe two of them officer and man now but
still watcher and watched, waiting for something but not knowing what,
what act of fate, destiny, what irrevocable sentence of what Judge or
Arbiter between them since nothing less would do, nothing halfway or
reversible would seem to sufficethe officer, the lieutenant who
possessed the slight and authorized advantage of being able to say _You_
go there, of at least sometimes remaining behind the platoon which he
directed; the private who carried that officer, shot through the
shoulder, on his back while the regiment fell back under the Yankee guns
at Pittsburgh Landing, carried him to safety apparently for the sole
purpose of watching him for two years more, writing Judith meanwhile
that they were both alive, and that was all.

And Judith. She lived alone now. Perhaps she had lived alone ever since
that Christmas day last year and then year before last and then three
years and then four years ago, since though Sutpen was gone now with his
and Sartoris regiment and the negroesthe wild stock with which he had
created Sutpens Hundredhad followed the first Yankee troops to pass
through Jefferson, she lived in anything but solitude, what with Ellen
in bed in the shuttered room, requiring the unremitting attention of a
child while she waited with that amazed and passive uncomprehension to
die; and she (Judith) and Clytie making and keeping a kitchen garden of
sorts to keep them alive; and Wash Jones, living in the abandoned and
rotting fishing camp in the river bottom which Sutpen had built after
the first womanEllenentered his house and the last deer and bear
hunter went out of it, where he now permitted Wash and his daughter and
infant granddaughter to live, performing the heavy garden work and
supplying Ellen and Judith and then Judith with fish and game now and
then, even entering the house now, who until Sutpen went away, had never
approached nearer than the scuppernong arbor behind the kitchen where on
Sunday afternoons he and Sutpen would drink from the demijohn and the
bucket of spring water which Wash fetched from almost a mile away,
Sutpen in the barrel stave hammock talking and Wash squatting against a
post, chortling and guffawing. It was not solitude and certainly not
idleness for Judith: the same impenetrable and serene face, only a
little older now, a little thinner now, which had appeared in town in
the carriage beside her fathers within a week after it was learned that
her fiance and her brother had quitted the house in the night and
vanished. When she came to town now, in the made-over dress which all
Southern women now wore, in the carriage still but drawn now by a mule,
a plow mule, soon the plow mule, and no coachman to drive it either, to
put the mule in the harness and take it out, to join the other
womenthere were wounded in Jefferson thenin the improvised hospital
where (the nurtured virgin, the supremely and traditionally idle) they
cleaned and dressed the self-fouled bodies of strange injured and dead
and made lint of the window curtains and sheets and linen of the houses
in which they had been born; there were none to ask her about brother
and sweetheart, while they talked among themselves of sons and brothers
and husbands with tears and grief perhaps, but at least with certainty,
knowledge. Judith waiting too, like Henry and Bon, not knowing for what,
but unlike Henry and Bon, not even knowing for why. Then Ellen died, the
butterfly of a forgotten summer two years defunctive nowthe
substanceless shell, the shade impervious to any alteration of
dissolution because of its very weightlessness: no body to be buried:
just the shape, the recollection, translated on some peaceful afternoon
without bell or catafalque into that cedar grove, to lie in
powderlight paradox beneath the thousand pounds of marble monument
which Sutpen (Colonel Sutpen now, since Sartoris had been deposed at the
annual election of regimental officers the year before) brought in the
regimental forage wagon from Charleston, South Carolina and set above
the faint grassy depression which Judith told him was Ellens grave. And
then her grandfather died, starved to death nailed up in his own attic,
and Judith doubtless inviting Miss Rosa to come out to Sutpens Hundred
to live and Miss Rosa declining, waiting, too, apparently upon this
letter, this first direct word from Bon in four years and which, a week
after she buried him, too, beside her mothers tombstone, she brought to
town herself, in the surrey drawn by the mule which both she and Clytie
had learned to catch and harness, and gave to your grandmother, bringing
the letter voluntarily to your grandmother, who (Judith) never called on
anyone now, had no friends now, doubtless knowing no more why she chose
your grandmother to give the letter to than your grandmother knew; not
thin now but gaunt, the Sutpen skull showing indeed now through the
worn, the Coldfield, flesh, the face which had long since forgotten how
to be young and yet absolutely impenetrable, absolutely serene: no
mourning, not even grief, and your grandmother saying, Me? You want me
to keep it?

Yes, Judith said. Or destroy it. As you like. Read it if you like or
dont read it if you like. Because you make so little impression, you
see. You get born and you try this and you dont know why only you keep
on trying it and you are born at the same time with a lot of other
people, all mixed up with them, like trying to, having to, move your
arms and legs with strings only the same strings are hitched to all the
other arms and legs and the others all trying and they dont know why
either except that the strings are all in one anothers way like five or
six people all trying to make a rug on the same loom only each one wants
to weave his own pattern into the rug; and it cant matter, you know
that, or the Ones that set up the loom would have arranged things a
little better, and yet it must matter because you keep on trying or
having to keep on trying and then all of a sudden its all over and all
you have left is a block of stone with scratches on it provided there
was someone to remember to have the marble scratched and set up or had
time to, and it rains on it and the sun shines on it and after a while
they dont even remember the name and what the scratches were trying to
tell, and it doesnt matter. And so maybe if you could go to someone,
the stranger the better, and give them somethinga scrap of
papersomething, anything, it not to mean anything in itself and them
not even to read it or keep it, not even bother to throw it away or
destroy it, at least it would be something just because it would have
happened, be remembered even if only from passing from one hand to
another, one mind to another, and it would be at least a scratch,
something, something that might make a mark on something that _was_ once
for the reason that it can die someday, while the block of stone cant be
_is_ because it never can become _was_ because it cant ever die or
perish . . . and your grandmother watching her, the impenetrable, the
calm, the absolutely serene face, and crying:

No! No! Not that! Think of your and the face watching her,
comprehending, still serene, not even bitter:

Oh. I? No, not that. Because somebody will have to take care of
Clytie, and father, too, soon, who will want something to eat after he
comes home because it wont last much longer since they have begun to
shoot one another now. No. Not that. Women dont do that for love. I dont
even believe that men do. And not now, anyway. Because there wouldnt be
any room now, for them to go to, wherever it is, if it is. It would be
full already. Glutted. Like a theater, an opera house, if what you
expect to find is forgetting, diversion, entertainment; like a bed
already too full if what you want to find is a chance to lie still and
sleep and sleep and sleep

Mr Compson moved. Half rising, Quentin took the letter from him and
beneath the dim bug-fouled globe opened it, carefully, as though the
sheet, the desiccated square, were not the paper but the intact ash of
its former shape and substance: and meanwhile Mr Compsons voice
speaking on while Quentin heard it without listening: Now you can see
why I said that he loved her. Because there were other letters, many of
them, gallant flowery indolent frequent and insincere, sent by hand over
that forty miles between Oxford and Jefferson after that first
Christmasthe metropolitan gallants idle and delicately flattering
(and doubtless to him, meaningless) gesture to the bucolic maidenand
that bucolic maiden, with that profound and absolutely inexplicable
tranquil patient clairvoyance of women against which that metropolitan
gallants foppish posturing was just the jackanape antics of a small
boy, receiving the letters without understanding them, not even keeping
them, for all their elegant and gallant and tediously contrived turns of
form and metaphor, until the next one arrived. But keeping this one
which must have reached her out of a clear sky after an interval of four
years, considering this one worthy to give to a stranger to keep or not
to keep, even to read or not to read as the stranger saw fit, to make
that scratch, that undying mark on the blank face of the oblivion to
which we are all doomed, of which she spoke Quentin hearing without
having to listen as he read the faint spidery script not like something
impressed upon the paper by a once-living hand but like a shadow cast
upon it which had resolved on the paper the instant before he looked at
it and which might fade, vanish, at any instant while he still read: the
dead tongue speaking after the four years and then after almost fifty
more, gentle sardonic whimsical and incurably pessimistic, without date
or salutation or signature:

    _You will notice how I insult neither of us by claiming this to
    be a voice from the defeated even, let alone from the dead. In
    fact, if I were a philosopher I should deduce and derive a
    curious and apt commentary on the times and augur of the future
    from this letter which you now hold in your handsa sheet of
    notepaper with, as you can see, the best of French watermarks
    dated seventy years ago, salvaged (stolen if you will) from the
    gutted mansion of a ruined aristocrat; and written upon in the
    best of stove polish manufactured not twelve months ago in a New
    England factory. Yes. Stove polish. We captured it: a story in
    itself. Imagine us, an assortment of homogeneous scarecrows, I
    wont say hungry because to a woman, lady or female either, below
    Masons and Dixons in this year of grace 1865, that word would
    be sheer redundancy, like saying that we were breathing. And I
    wont say ragged or even shoeless, since we have been both long
    enough to have grown accustomed to it, only, thank God (and this
    restores my faith not in human nature perhaps but at least in
    man) that he really does not become inured to hardship and
    privation: it is only the mind, the gross omnivorous
    carrion-heavy soul which becomes inured; the body itself, thank
    God, never reconciled from the old soft feel of soap and clean
    linen and something between the sole of the foot and the earth
    to distinguish it from the foot of a beast. So say we merely
    needed ammunition. And imagine us, the scarecrows with one of
    those concocted plans of scarecrow desperation which not only
    must but do work, for the reason that there is absolutely no
    room for alternative before man or heaven, no niche on earth or
    under it for failure to find space either to pause or breathe or
    be graved and sepulchered; and we (the scarecrows) bringing it
    off with a great deal of elan, not to say noise; imagine, I say,
    the prey and prize, the ten plump defenseless sutlers wagons,
    the scarecrows tumbling out box after beautiful box after
    beautiful box stenciled each with that U. and that S. which for
    four years now has been to us the symbol of the spoils which
    belong to the vanquished, of the loaves and the fishes as was
    once the incandescent Brow, the shining nimbus of the Thorny
    Crown; and the scarecrows clawing at the boxes with stones and
    bayonets and even with bare hands and opening them at last and
    findingWhat? Stove polish. Gallons and gallons and gallons of
    the best stove polish, not a box of it a year old yet and
    doubtless still trying to overtake General Sherman with some
    belated amended field order requiring him to polish the stove
    before firing the house. How we laughed. Yes, we laughed,
    because I have learned this at least during these four years,
    that it really requires an empty stomach to laugh with, that
    only when you are hungry or frightened do you extract some
    ultimate essence out of laughing just as the empty stomach
    extracts the ultimate essence out of alcohol. But at least we
    have stove polish. We have plenty of it. We have too much,
    because it does not take much to say what I have to say, as you
    can see. And so the conclusion and augury which I draw, even
    though no philosopher, is this._

    _We have waited long enough. You will notice how I do not insult
    you either by saying I have waited long enough. And therefore,
    since I do not insult you by saying that only I have waited, I
    do not add, expect me. Because I cannot say when to expect me.
    Because what_ WAS _is one thing, and now it is not because it is
    dead, it died in 1861, and therefore what_ IS _(There. They
    have started firing again. Whichto mention itis redundancy
    too, like the breathing or the need of ammunition. Because
    sometimes I think it has never stopped. It hasnt stopped of
    course; I dont mean that. I mean, there has never been any more
    of it, that there was that one fusillade four years ago which
    sounded once and then was arrested, mesmerized raised muzzle by
    raised muzzle, in the frozen attitude of its own aghast
    amazement and never repeated and it now only the loud aghast
    echo jarred by the dropped musket of a weary sentry or by the
    fall of the spent body itself, out of the air which lies over
    the land where that fusillade first sounded and where it must
    remain yet because no other space under Heaven will receive it.
    So that means that it is dawn again and that I must stop. Stop
    what? you will say. Why, thinking, rememberingremark that I do
    not say, hoping; to become once more for a period without
    boundaries or location in time, mindless and irrational
    companion and inmate of a body which, even after four years,
    with a sort of dismal and incorruptible fidelity which is
    incredibly admirable to me, is still immersed and obliviously
    bemused in recollections of old peace and contentment the very
    names of whose scents and sounds I do not know that I remember,
    which ignores even the presence and threat of a torn arm or leg
    as though through some secretly incurred and infallible promise
    and conviction of immortality. But to finish.) I cannot say when
    to expect me. Because what_ IS _is something else again because
    it was not even alive then. And since because within this sheet
    of paper you now hold the best of the old South which is dead,
    and the words you read were written upon it with the best (each
    box said, the very best) of the new North which has conquered
    and which therefore, whether it likes it or not, will have to
    survive, I now believe that you and I are, strangely enough,
    included among those who are doomed to live._

And thats all, Mr Compson said. She received it and she and Clytie
made the wedding gown and the veil from scrapsperhaps scraps intended
for, which should have gone for, lint and did not. She didnt know when
he would come because he didnt know himself: and maybe he told Henry,
showed Henry the letter before he sent it, and maybe he did not; maybe
still just the watching and the waiting, the one saying to Henry _I have
waited long enough_ and Henry saying to the other _Do you renounce then?
Do you renounce?_ and the other saying _I do not renounce. For four
years now I have given chance the opportunity to renounce for me, but it
seems that I am doomed to live, that she and I both are doomed to
live_the defiance and the ultimatum delivered beside a bivouac fire,
the ultimatum discharged before the gate to which the two of them must
have ridden side by side almost: the one calm and undeviating, perhaps
unresisting even, the fatalist to the last; the other remorseless with
implacable and unalterable grief and despair (It seemed to Quentin
that he could actually see them, facing one another at the gate. Inside
the gate what was once a park now spread, unkempt, in shaggy desolation,
with an air dreamy, remote and aghast like the unshaven face of a man
just waking from ether, up to a huge house where a young girl waited in
a wedding dress made from stolen scraps, the house partaking too of that
air of scaling desolation, not having suffered from invasion but a shell
marooned and forgotten in a backwater of catastrophea skeleton giving
of itself in slow driblets of furniture and carpet, linen and silver, to
help to die torn and anguished men who knew, even while dying, that for
months now the sacrifice and the anguish were in vain. They faced one
another on the two gaunt horses, two men, young, not yet in the world,
not yet breathed over long enough, to be old but with old eyes, with
unkempt hair and faces gaunt and weathered as if cast by some spartan
and even niggard hand from bronze, in worn and patched gray weathered
now to the color of dead leaves, the one with the tarnished braid of an
officer, the other plain of cuff, the pistol lying yet across the saddle
bow unaimed, the two faces calm, the voices not even raised: _Dont you
pass the shadow of this post, this branch, Charles; and I am going to
pass it, Henry_)  and then Wash Jones sitting that saddleless mule
before Miss Rosas gate, shouting her name into the sunny and peaceful
quiet of the street, saying, Air you Rosie Coldfield? Then you better
come on out yon. Henry has done shot that durn French feller. Kilt him
dead as a beef.




                               [*  V  *]


          _So they will have told you doubtless already how I told that
Jones to take that mule which was not his around to the barn and harness
it to our buggy while I put on my hat and shawl and locked the house.
That was all I needed to do since they will have told you doubtless that
I would have had no need for either trunk or bag since what clothing I
possessed, now that the garments which I had been fortunate enough to
inherit from my aunts kindness or haste or oversight were long since
worn out, consisted of the ones which Ellen had remembered from time to
time to give me and now Ellen these two years dead; that I had only to
lock the house and take my place in the buggy and traverse those twelve
miles which I had not done since Ellen died, beside that brute who until
Ellen died was not even permitted to approach the house from the
frontthat brute progenitor of brutes whose granddaughter was to
supplant me, if not in my sisters house at least in my sisters bed to
which (so they will tell you) I aspiredthat brute who (brute
instrument of that justice which presides over human events which,
incept in the individual, runs smooth, less claw than velvet: but which,
by man or woman flouted, drives on like fiery steel and overrides both
weakly just and unjust strong, both vanquisher and innocent victimized,
ruthless for appointed right and truth) brute who was not only to
preside upon the various shapes and avatars of Thomas Sutpens devils
fate but was to provide at the last the female flesh in which his name
and lineage should be sepulcheredthat brute who appeared to believe
that he had served and performed his appointed end by yelling of blood
and pistols in the street before my house, who seemed to believe that
what further information he might have given me was too scant or too
bland and free of moment to warrant the discarding of his tobacco cud,
because during the entire subsequent twelve miles he could not even tell
me what had happened._

_And how I traversed those same twelve miles once more after the two
years since Ellen died (or was it the four years since Henry vanished or
was it the nineteen years since I saw light and breathed?) knowing
nothing, able to learn nothing save this: a shot heard, faint and far
away and even direction and source indeterminate, by two women, two
young women alone in a rotting house where no mans footstep had sounded
in two yearsa shot, then an interval of aghast surmise above the cloth
and needles which engaged them, then feet, in the hall and then on the
stairs, running, hurrying, the feet of a man: and Judith with just time
to snatch up the unfinished dress and hold it before her as the door
burst open upon her brother, the wild murderer whom she had not seen in
four years and whom she believed to be (if he was, still lived and
breathed at all) a thousand miles away: and then the two of them, the
two accursed children on whom the first blow of their devils heritage
had but that moment fallen, looking at one another across the up-raised
and unfinished wedding dress. Twelve miles toward that I rode, beside an
animal who could stand in the street before my house and bellow placidly
to the populous and listening solitude that my nephew had just murdered
his sisters fiance, yet who could not permit himself to force the mule
which drew us beyond a walk because hit warnt none of mine nor hisn
neither and besides hit aint had a decent bait of vittles since the corn
give out in February; who, turning into the actual gate at last, must
stop the mule and, pointing with the whip and spitting first, say Hit
was right yonder.What was right there, fool? I cried, and he: Hit
was until I took the whip from him into my own hand and struck the
mule._

_But they cannot tell you how I went on up the drive, past Ellens
ruined and weed-choked flower beds and reached the house, the shell, the
(so I thought) cocoon-casket marriage-bed of youth and grief and found
that I had come, not too late as I had thought, but come too soon.
Rotting portico and scaling walls, it stood, not ravaged, not invaded,
marked by no bullet nor soldiers iron heel but rather as though
reserved for something more: some desolation more profound than ruin, as
if it had stood in iron juxtaposition to iron flame, to a holocaust
which had found itself less fierce and less implacable, not hurled but
rather fallen back before the impervious and indomitable skeleton which
the flames durst not, at the instants final crisis, assail; there was
even one step, one plank rotted free and tilting beneath the foot (or
would have if I had not touched it light and fast) as I ran up and into
the hallway whose carpet had long since gone with the bed- and
table-linen for lint, and saw the Sutpen face and even as I cried
Henry! Henry! What have you done? What has that fool been trying to
tell me? realized that I had come, not too late as I had thought, but
come too soon. Because it was not Henrys face. It was Sutpen face
enough, but not his; Sutpen coffee-colored face enough there in the dim
light, barring the stairs: and I running out of the bright afternoon,
into the thunderous silence of that brooding house where I could see
nothing at first: then gradually the face, the Sutpen face not
approaching, not swimming up out of the gloom, but already there,
rocklike and firm and antedating time and house and doom and all,
waiting there (oh yes, he chose well; he bettered choosing, who created
in his own image the cold Cerberus of his private hell)the face
without sex or age because it had never possessed either: the same
sphinx face which she had been born with, which had looked down from the
loft that night beside Judiths and which she still wears now at
seventy-four, looking at me with no change, no alteration in it at all,
as though it had known to the second when I was to enter, had waited
there during that entire twelve miles behind that walking mule and
watched me draw nearer and nearer and enter the door at last as it had
known (ay, perhaps decreed, since there is that justice whose Molochs
palate-paunch makes no distinction between gristle bone and tender
flesh) that I would enterThe face stopping me dead (not my body: it
still advanced, ran on: but I, myself, that deep existence which we
lead, to which the movement of limbs is but a clumsy and belated
accompaniment like so many unnecessary instruments played crudely and
amateurishly out of time to the tune itself) in that barren hall with
its naked stair (that carpet gone too) rising into the dim upper hallway
where an echo spoke which was not mine but rather that of the lost
irrevocable might-have-been which haunts all houses, all enclosed walls
erected by human hands, not for shelter, not for warmth, but to hide
from the worlds curious looking and seeing the dark turnings which the
ancient young delusions of pride and hope and ambition (ay, and love
too) take. Judith! I said. Judith!_

_There was no answer. I had expected none; possibly even then I did not
expect Judith to answer, just as a child, before the full instant of
comprehended terror, calls on the parent whom it actually knows (this
before the terror destroys all judgment whatever) is not even there to
hear it. I was crying not to someone, something, but (trying to cry)
through something, through that force, that furious yet absolutely
rocklike and immobile antagonism which had stopped methat presence,
that familiar coffee-colored face, that body (the bare coffee-colored
feet motionless on the bare floor, the curve of the stair rising just
beyond her) no larger than my own which, without moving, with no
alteration of visual displacement whatever (she did not even remove her
gaze from mine for the reason that she was not looking at me but through
me, apparently still musing upon the open doors serene rectangle which
I had broken) seemed to elongate and project upward somethingnot soul,
not spirit, but something rather of a profoundly attentive and
distracted listening to or for something which I myself could not hear
and was not intended to heara brooding awareness and acceptance of the
inexplicable unseen, inherited from an older and a purer race than mine,
which created postulated and shaped in the empty air between us that
which I believed I had come to find (nay, which I must find, else
breathing and standing there, I would have denied that I was ever
born)that bedroom long-closed and musty, that sheetless bed (that
nuptial couch of love and grief) with the pale and bloody corpse in its
patched and weathered gray crimsoning the bare mattress, the bowed and
unwived widow kneeling beside itand I (my body) not stopping yet (yes,
it needed the hand, the touch, for that)I, self-mesmered fool who
still believed that what must be would be, could not but be, else I must
deny sanity as well as breath, running, hurling myself into that
inscrutable coffee-colored face, that cold implacable mindless (no, not
mindless: anything but mindless: his own clairvoyant will tempered to
amoral evils undeviating absolute by the black willing blood with which
he had crossed it) replica of his own which he had created and decreed
to preside upon his absence, as you might watch a wild distracted
nightbound bird flutter into the brazen and fatal lamp. Wait, she
said. Dont you go up there. Still I did not stop; it would require the
hand; and I still running on, accomplishing those last few feet across
which we seemed to glare at one another not as two faces but as the two
abstract contradictions which we actually were, neither of our voices
raised, as though we spoke to one another free of the limitations and
restrictions of speech and hearing. What? I said._

_Dont you go up there, Rosa. That was how she said it: that quiet,
that still, and again it was as though it had not been she who spoke but
the house itself that said the wordsthe house which he had built,
which some suppuration of himself had created about him as the sweat of
his body might have produced some (even if invisible) cocoon-like and
complementary shell in which Ellen had had to live and die a stranger,
in which Henry and Judith would have to be victims and prisoners, or
die. Because it was not the name, the word, the fact that she had called
me Rosa. As children she had called me that, just as she had called them
Henry and Judith; I knew that even now she still called Judith (and
Henry too when she spoke of him) by her given name. And she might very
naturally have called me Rosa still, since to everyone else whom I knew
I was still a child. But it was not that. That was not what she meant at
all; in fact, during that instant while we stood face to face (that
instant before my still advancing body should brush past her and reach
the stair) she did me more grace and respect than anyone else I knew; I
knew that from the instant I had entered that door, to her of all who
knew me I was no child. Rosa? I cried. To me? To my face? Then she
touched me, and then I did stop dead. Possibly even then my body did not
stop, since I seemed to be aware of it thrusting blindly still against
the solid yet imponderable weight (she not owner: instrument; I still
say that) of that will to bar me from the stairs; possibly the sound of
the other voice, the single word spoken from the stairhead above us, had
already broken and parted us before it (my body) had even paused. I do
not know. I know only that my entire being seemed to run at blind full
tilt into something monstrous and immobile, with a shocking impact too
soon and too quick to be mere amazement and outrage at that black
arresting and un-timorous hand on my white womans flesh. Because there
is something in the touch of flesh with flesh which abrogates, cuts
sharp and straight across the devious intricate channels of decorous
ordering, which enemies as well as lovers know because it makes them
bothtouch and touch of that which is the citadel of the central I-Ams
private own: not spirit, soul; the liquorish and ungirdled mind is
anyones to take in any darkened hallway of this earthly tenement. But
let flesh touch with flesh, and watch the fall of all the eggshell
shibboleth of caste and color too. Yes, I stopped deadno womans hand,
no negros hand, but bitted bridle-curb to check and guide the furious
and unbending willI crying not to her, to it; speaking to it through
the negro, the woman, only because of the shock which was not yet
outrage because it would be terror soon, expecting and receiving no
answer because we both knew it was not to her I spoke: Take your hand
off me, nigger!_

_I got none. We just stood thereI motionless in the attitude and
action of running, she rigid in that furious immobility, the two of us
joined by that hand and arm which held us, like a fierce rigid umbilical
cord, twin sistered to the fell darkness which had produced her. As a
child I had more than once watched her and Judith and even Henry
scuffling in the rough games which they (possibly all children; I do not
know) played, and (so I have heard) she and Judith even slept together,
in the same room but with Judith in the bed and she on a pallet on the
floor ostensibly. But I have heard how on more than once occasion Ellen
has found them both on the pallet, and once in the bed together. But not
I. Even as a child, I would not even play with the same objects which
she and Judith played with, as though that warped and spartan solitude
which I called my childhood, which had taught me (and little else) to
listen before I could comprehend and to understand before I even heard,
had also taught me not only to instinctively fear her and what she was,
but to shun the very objects which she had touched. We stood there so.
And then suddenly it was not outrage that I waited for, out of which I
had instinctively cried; it was not terror: it was some cumulative
over-reach of despair itself. I remember how as we stood there joined by
that volitionless (yes: it too sentient victim just as she and I were)
hand, I criedperhaps not aloud, not with words (and not to Judith,
mind: perhaps I knew already, on the instant I entered the house and saw
that face which was at once both more and less than Sutpen, perhaps I
knew even then what I could not, would not, must not believe)I cried
And you too? And you too, sister, sister? What did I expect? I,
self-mesmered fool, come twelve miles expectingwhat? Henry perhaps, to
emerge from some door which knew his touch, his hand on the knob, the
weight of his foot on a sill which knew that weight: and so to find
standing in the hall a small plain frightened creature whom neither man
nor woman had ever looked at twice, whom he had not seen himself in four
years and seldom enough before that but whom he would recognize if only
because of the worn brown silk which had once become his mother and
because the creature stood there calling him by his given name? Henry to
emerge and say Why, its Rosa, Aunt Rosa. Wake up, Aunt Rosa; wake
up?I, the dreamer clinging yet to the dream as the patient clings to
the last thin unbearable ecstatic instant of agony in order to sharpen
the savor of the pains surcease, waking into the reality, the more than
reality, not to the unchanged and unaltered old time but into a time
altered to fit the dream which, conjunctive with the dreamer, becomes
immolated and apotheosized: Mother and Judith are in the nursery with
the children, and Father and Charles are walking in the garden. Wake up,
Aunt Rosa; wake up? Or not expect perhaps, not even hope; not even
dream since dreams dont come in pairs, and had I not come twelve miles
drawn not by mortal mule but by some chimaera-foal of nightmares very
self? (Ay, wake up, Rosa; wake upnot from what was, what used to be,
but from what had not, could not have ever, been; wake, Rosanot to
what should, what might have been, but to what cannot, what must not,
be; wake, Rosa, from the hoping, who did believe there is a seemliness
to bereavement even though grief be absent; believed there would be need
for you to save not love perhaps, not happiness nor peace, but what was
left behind by widowingand found that there was nothing there to save;
who hoped to save her as you promised Ellen (not Charles Bon, not Henry:
not either one of these from him or even from one another) and now too
late, who would have been too late if you had come there from the womb
or had been there already at the full strong capable mortal peak when
she was born; who came twelve miles and nineteen years to save what did
not need the saving, and lost instead yourself) I do not know, except
that I did not find it. I found only that dream-state in which you run
without moving from a terror in which you cannot believe, toward a
safety in which you have no faith, held so not by the shifting and
foundationless quicksand of nightmare but by a face which was its souls
own inquisitor, a hand which was the agent of its own crucifixion, until
the voice parted us, broke the spell. It said one word: Clytie, like
that, that cold, that still: not Judith, but the house itself speaking
again, though it was Judiths voice. Oh, I knew it well, who had
believed in grievings seemliness; I knew it as well as
sheClytieknew it. She did not move; it was only the hand, the hand
gone before I realized that it had been removed. I do not know if she
removed it or if I ran out from beneath its touch. But it was gone; and
this too they cannot tell you: How I ran, fled, up the stairs and found
no grieving widowed bride but Judith standing before the closed door to
that chamber, in the gingham dress which she had worn each time I had
seen her since Ellen died, holding something in one hanging hand; and if
there had been grief or anguish she had put them too away, complete or
not complete I do not know, along with that unfinished wedding dress.
Yes, Rosa? she said, like that again, and I stopped in runnings
midstride again though my body, blind unsentient barrow of deluded clay
and breath, still advanced: And how I saw that what she held in that lax
and negligent hand was the photograph, the picture of herself in its
metal case which she had given him, held casual and forgotten against
her flank as any interrupted pastime book._

_Thats what I found. Perhaps its what I expected, knew (even at
nineteen knew, I would say if it were not for my nineteen, my own
particular kind of nineteen years) that I should find. Perhaps I
couldnt even have wanted more than that, couldnt have accepted less,
who even at nineteen must have known that living is one constant and
perpetual instant when the arras-veil before what-is-to-be hangs docile
and even glad to the lightest naked thrust if we had dared, were brave
enough (not wise enough: no wisdom needed here) to make the rending
gash. Or perhaps it is no lack of courage either: not cowardice which
will not face that sickness somewhere at the prime foundation of this
factual scheme from which the prisoner soul, miasmal-distillant, wroils
ever upward sunward, tugs its tenuous prisoner arteries and veins and
prisoning in its turn that spark, that dream which, as the globy and
complete instant of its freedom mirrors and repeats (repeats? creates,
reduces to a fragile evanescent iridescent sphere) all of space and time
and massy earth, relicts the seething and anonymous miasmal mass which
in all the years of time has taught itself no boon of death but only how
to recreate, renew; and dies, is gone, vanished: nothingbut is that
true wisdom which can comprehend that there is a might-have-been which
is more true than truth, from which the dreamer, waking, says not Did I
but dream? but rather says, indicts high heavens very self with: Why
did I wake since waking I shall never sleep again?_

_Once there wasDo you mark how the wistaria, sun-impacted on this wall
here, distills and penetrates this room as though (light-unimpeded) by
secret and attritive progress from mote to mote of obscuritys myriad
components? That is the substance of rememberingsense, sight, smell:
the muscles with which we see and hear and feelnot mind, not thought:
there is no such thing as memory: the brain recalls just what the
muscles grope for: no more, no less: and its resultant sum is usually
incorrect and false and worthy only of the name of dream.See how the
sleeping outflung hand, touching the bedside candle, remembers pain,
springs back and free while mind and brain sleep on and only make of
this adjacent heat some trashy myth of realitys escape: or that same
sleeping hand, in sensuous marriage with some dulcet surface, is
transformed by that same sleeping brain and mind into that same
figment-stuff warped out of all experience. Ay, grief goes, fades; we
know thatbut ask the tear ducts if they have forgotten how to
weep.Once there was (they cannot have told you this either) a summer
of wistaria. It was a pervading everywhere of wistaria (I was fourteen
then) as though of all springs yet to capitulate condensed into one
spring, one summer: the spring and summertime which is every females
who breathed above dust, beholden of all betrayed springs held over from
all irrevocable time, repercussed, bloomed again. It was a vintage year
of wistaria: vintage year being that sweet conjunction of root bloom and
urge and hour and weather; and I (I was fourteen)I will not insist on
bloom, at whom no man had yet to looknor would evertwice, as not as
child but less than even child; as not more child than woman but even as
less than any female flesh. Nor do I say leafwarped bitter pale and
crimped half-fledging intimidate of any claim to green which might have
drawn to it the tender mayfly childhood sweetheart games or given pause
to the male predacious wasps and bees of later lust. But root and urge I
do insist and claim, for had I not heired too from all the unsistered
Eves since the Snake? Yes, urge I do: warped chrysalis of what blind
perfect seed: for who shall say what gnarled forgotten root might not
bloom yet with some globed concentrate more globed and concentrate and
heady-perfect because the neglected root was planted warped and lay not
dead but merely slept forgot?_

_That was the miscast summer of my barren youth which (for that short
time, that short brief unreturning springtime of the female heart) I
lived out not as a woman, a girl, but rather as the man which I perhaps
should have been. I was fourteen then, fourteen in years if they could
have been called years while in that un-paced corridor which I called
childhood, which was not living but rather some projection of the
lightless womb itself; I gestate and complete, not aged, just overdue
because of some caesarean lack, some cold head-nuzzling forceps of the
savage time which should have torn me free, I waited not for light but
for that doom which we call female victory which is: endure and then
endure, without rhyme or reason or hope of rewardand then endure; I
like that blind subterranean fish, that insulated spark whose origin the
fish no longer remembers, which pulses and beats at its crepuscular and
lethargic tenement with the old unsleeping itch which has no words to
speak with other than This was called light that smell, that
touch, that other something which has bequeathed not even name for
sound of bee or bird or flowers scent or light or sun or loveyes, not
even growing and developing, beloved by and loving light, but equipped
only with that cunning, that inverted canker-growth of solitude which
substitutes the omnivorous and unrational hearing-sense for all the
others: so that instead of accomplishing the processional and measured
milestones of the childhoods time I lurked, unapprehended as though,
shod with the very damp and velvet silence of the womb, I displaced no
air, gave off no betraying sound, from one closed forbidden door to the
next and so acquired all I knew of that light and space in which people
moved and breathed as I (that same child) might have gained conception
of the sun from seeing it through a piece of smoky glassfourteen, four
years younger than Judith, four years later than Judiths moment which
only virgins know: when the entire delicate spirits bent is one
anonymous climaxless epicene and unravished nuptialnot that widowed
and nightly violation by the inescapable and scornful dead which is the
meed of twenty and thirty and forty, but a world filled with living
marriage like the light and air which she breathes. But it was no summer
of a virgins itching discontent; no summers caesarean lack which
should have torn me, dead flesh or even embryo, from the living: or
else, by frictions ravishing of the male-furrowed meat, also weaponed
and panoplied as a man instead of hollow woman._

_It was the summer after that first Christmas that Henry brought him
home, the summer following the two days of that June vacation which he
spent at Sutpens Hundred before he rode on to the river to take the
steamboat home, that summer after my aunt left and papa had to go away
on business and I was sent out to Ellen (possibly my father chose Ellen
as a refuge for me because at that time Thomas Sutpen was also absent)
to stay so that she could take care of me, who had been born too late,
born into some curious disjoint of my fathers life and left on his (now
twice) widowed hands, I competent enough to reach a kitchen shelf, count
spoons and hem a sheet and measure milk into a churn yet good for
nothing else, yet still too valuable to be left alone. I had never seen
him (I never saw him. I never even saw him dead. I heard a name, I saw a
photograph, I helped to make a grave: and that was all) though he had
been in my house once, that first New Years Day when Henry brought him
from nephew duty to speak to me on their way back to school and I was
not at home. Until then I had not even heard his name, did not know that
he existed. Yet on the day when I went out there to stay that summer, it
was as though that casual pause at my door had left some seed, some
minute virulence in this cellar earth of mine quick not for love perhaps
(I did not love him; how could I? I had never even heard his voice, had
only Ellens word for it that there was such a person) and quick not for
the spying which you will doubtless call it, which during the past six
months between that New Years and that June gave substance to that
shadow with a name emerging from Ellens vain and garrulous folly, that
shape without even a face yet because I had not even seen the photograph
then, reflected in the secret and bemused gaze of a young girl: because
I who had learned nothing of love, not even parents lovethat fond
dear constant violation of privacy, that stultification of the
burgeoning and incorrigible I which is the meed and due of all mammalian
meat, became not mistress, not beloved, but more than even love; I
became all polymath loves androgynous advocate._

_There must have been some seed he left, to cause a childs vacant fairy
tale to come alive in that garden. Because I was not spying when I would
follow her. I was not spying, though you will say I was. And even if it
was spying, it was not jealousy, because I did not love him. (How could
I have, when I had never seen him?) And even if I did, not as women
love, as Judith loved him, or as we thought she did. If it was love (and
I still say, How could it be?) it was the way that mothers love when,
punishing the child she strikes not it but through it strikes the
neighbor boy whom it has just whipped or been whipped by; caresses not
the rewarded child but rather the nameless man or woman who gave the
palm-sweated penny. But not as women love. Because I asked nothing of
him, you see. And more than that: I gave him nothing, which is the sum
of loving. Why, I didnt even miss him. I dont know even now if I was
ever aware that I had seen nothing of his face but that photograph, that
shadow, that picture in a young girls bedroom: a picture casual and
framed upon a littered dressing table yet bowered and dressed (or so I
thought) with all the maiden and invisible lily roses, because even
before I saw the photograph I could have recognized, nay, described, the
very face. But I never saw it. I do not even know of my own knowledge
that Ellen ever saw it, that Judith ever loved it, that Henry slew it:
so who will dispute me when I say, Why did I not invent, create it?And
I know this: if I were God I would invent out of this seething turmoil
we call progress something (a machine perhaps) which would adorn the
barren mirror altars of every plain girl who breathes with such as
thiswhich is so little since we want so littlethis pictured face. It
would not even need a skull behind it; almost anonymous, it would only
need vague inference of some walking flesh and blood desired by someone
else even if only in some shadow-realm of make-believe.A picture seen
by stealth, by creeping (my childhood taught me that instead of love and
it stood me in good stead; in fact, if it had taught me love, love could
not have stood me so) into the deserted midday room to look at it. Not
to dream, since I dwelt in the dream, but to renew, rehearse, the part
as the faulty though eager amateur might steal wingward in some interim
of the visible scene to hear the prompters momentary voice. And if
jealousy, not mans jealousy, the jealousy of the lover; not even the
lovers self who spies from love, who spies to watch, taste, touch that
maiden revery of solitude which is the first thinning of that veil we
call virginity; not to spring out, force that shame which is such a part
of loves declaring, but to gloat upon the rich instantaneous bosom
already rosy with the flushy sleep though shame itself does not yet need
to wake. No, it was not that; I was not spying, who would walk those
raked and sanded garden paths and think This print was his save for
this obliterating rake, that even despite the rake it is still there and
hers beside it in that slow and mutual rhythm wherein the heart, the
mind, does not need to watch the docile (ay, the willing) feet; would
think What suspiration of the twinning souls have the murmurous myriad
cars of this secluded vine or shrub listened to? what vow, what promise,
what rapt biding fire has the lilac rain of this wistaria, this heavy
roses dissolution, crowned? But best of all, better far than this, the
actual living and the dreamy flesh itself. Oh no, I was not spying while
I dreamed in the lurking harborage of my own shrub or vine as I believed
she dreamed upon the nooky seat which held invisible imprint of his
absent thighs just as the obliterating sand, the million finger-nerves
of frond and leaf, the very sun and moony constellations which had
looked down at him, the circumambient air, held somewhere yet his foot,
his passing shape, his face, his speaking voice, his name: Charles Bon,
Charles Good, Charles Husband-soon-to-be. No, not spying, not even
hiding, who was child enough not to need to hide, whose presence would
have been no violation even though he sat with her, yet woman enough to
have gone to her entitled to be received (perhaps with pleasure,
gratitude) into that maiden shameless confidence where young girls talk
of loveYes, child enough to go to her and say Let me sleep with you;
woman enough to say Let us lie in bed together while you tell me what
love is, yet who did not do it because I should have had to say Dont
talk to me of love but let me tell you, who know already more of love
than you will ever know or need. Then my father returned and came for
me and took me home and I became again that nondescript too long a child
yet too short a woman, in the fitless garments which my aunt had left
behind, keeping a fitless house, who was not spying, hiding, but
waiting, watching, for no reward, no thanks, who did not love him in the
sense we mean it because there is no love of that sort without hope; who
(if it were love) loved with that sort beyond the compass of glib books:
that love which gives up what it never hadthat pennys modicum which
is the donors all yet whose infinitesimal weight adds nothing to the
substance of the lovedand yet I gave it. And not to him, to her; it
was as though I said to her, Here, take this too. You cannot love him
as he should be loved, and though he will no more feel this givings
weight than he would ever know its lack, yet there may come some moment
in your married lives when he will find this atoms particle as you
might find a cramped small pallid hidden shoot in a familiar flower bed
and pause and say, Where did this come from?; you need only answer, I
dont know. And then I went back home and stayed five years, heard an
echoed shot, ran up a nightmare flight of stairs, and found_

_Why, a woman standing calmly in a gingham dress before a closed door
which she would not allow me to entera woman more strange to me than
to any grief for being so less its partnera woman saying Yes, Rosa?
calmly into the midstride of my running which (I know it now) had begun
five years ago, since he had been in my house too, and had left no more
trace than he had left in Ellens, where he had been but a shape, a
shadow: not of a man, a being, but of some esoteric piece of
furniturevase or chair or deskwhich Ellen wanted, as though his very
impression (or lack of it) on Coldfield or Sutpen walls held portentous
prophecy of what was to beYes, running out of that first year (that
year before the War) during which Ellen talked to me of trousseau (and
it my trousseau), of all the dreamy panoply of surrender which was my
surrender, who had so little to surrender that it was all I had because
there is that might-have-been which is the single rock we cling to above
the maelstrom of unbearable realityThe four years while I believed she
waited as I waited, while the stable world we had been taught to know
dissolved in fire and smoke until peace and security were gone, and
pride and hope, and there was left only maimed honors veterans, and
love. Yes, there should, there must, be love and faith: these left with
us by fathers, husbands, sweethearts, brothers, who carried the pride
and the hope of peace in honors vanguard as they did the flags; there
must be these, else what do men fight for? what else worth dying for?
Yes, dying not for honors empty sake, nor pride nor even peace, but for
that love and faith they left behind. Because he was to die; I know
that, knew that, as both pride and peace were: else how to prove loves
immortality? But not love, not faith itself, themselves. Love without
hope perhaps, faith with little to be proud with: but love and faith at
least above the murdering and the folly, to salvage at least from the
humbled indicted dust something anyway of the old lost enchantment of
the heart.Yes, found her standing before that closed door which I was
not to enter (and which she herself did not enter again to my knowledge
until Jones and the other man carried the coffin up the stairs) with the
photograph hanging at her side and her face absolutely calm, looking at
me for a moment and just raising her voice enough to be heard in the
hall below: Clytie. Miss Rosa will be here for dinner; you had better
get out some more meal: then Shall we go downstairs? I will have to
speak to Mr Jones about some planks and nails._

_That was all. Or rather, not all, since there is no all, no finish; it
not the blow we suffer from but the tedious repercussive anti-climax of
it, the rubbishy aftermath to clear away from off the very threshold of
despair. You see, I never saw him. I never even saw him dead. I heard an
echo, but not the shot; I saw a closed door but did not enter it: I
remember how that afternoon when we carried the coffin from the house
(Jones and another white man which he produced, exhumed, from somewhere
made it of boards torn from the carriage house; I remember how while we
ate the food which Judithyes, Judith: the same face calm, cold and
tranquil above the stovehad cooked, ate it in the very room which he
lay over, we could hear them hammering and sawing in the back yard, and
how I saw Judith once, in a faded gingham sunbonnet to match the dress,
giving them directions about making it; I remember how during all that
slow and sunny afternoon they hammered and sawed right under the back
parlor windowthe slow, maddening rasp, rasp, rasp, of the saw, the
flat deliberate hammer blows that seemed as though each would be the
last but was not, repeated and resumed just when the dulled attenuation
of the wearied nerves, stretched beyond all resiliency, relaxed to
silence and then had to scream again: until at last I went out there
(and saw Judith in the barnlot in a cloud of chickens, her apron cradled
about the gathered eggs) and asked them why? why there? why must it be
just there? and they both stopped long and more than long enough for
Jones to turn and spit again and say, Because hit wouldnt be so fur to
tote the box: and how before my very back was turned heone of
themadded further, out of some amazed and fumbling ratiocination of
inertia, how Hit would be simpler yit to fetch him down and nail the
planks around him, only maybe Missus Judy wouldnt like hit.)I
remember how as we carried him down the stairs and out to the waiting
wagon I tried to take the full weight of the coffin to prove to myself
that he was really in it. And I could not tell. I was one of his
pallbearers, yet I could not, would not believe something which I knew
could not but be so. Because I never saw him. You see? There are some
things which happen to us which the intelligence and the senses refuse
just as the stomach sometimes refuses what the palate has accepted but
which digestion cannot compassoccurrences which stop us dead as though
by some impalpable intervention, like a sheet of glass through which we
watch all subsequent events transpire as though in a soundless vacuum,
and fade, vanish; are gone, leaving us immobile, impotent, helpless;
fixed, until we can die. That was I. I was there; something of me walked
in measured cadence with the measured tread of Jones and his companion,
and Theophilus McCaslin who had heard the news somehow back in town, and
Clytie as we bore the awkward and unmanageable box past the stairs
close turning while Judith, following, steadied it from behind, and so
down and out to the wagon; something of me helped to raise that which it
could not have raised alone yet which it still could not believe, into
the waiting wagon; something of me stood beside the gashy earth in the
cedars somber gloom and heard the clumsy knell of clods upon the wood
and answered No when Judith at the graves mounded end said, He was a
Catholic. Do any of you all know how Catholics and Theophilus
McCaslin said, Catholic be damned; he was a soldier. And I can pray for
any Confedrit soldier and then cried in his old mans shrill harsh loud
cacophonous voice: Yaaaay, Forrest! Yaaaay, John Sartoris! Yaaaaaay!
And something walked with Judith and Clytie back across that sunset
field and answered in some curious serene suspension to the serene quiet
voice which talked of plowing corn and cutting winter wood, and in the
lamplit kitchen helped this time to cook the meal and helped to eat it
too within the room beyond whose ceiling he no longer lay, and went to
bed (yes, took a candle from that firm untrembling hand and thought She
did not even weep and then in a lamp-gloomed mirror saw my own face and
thought Nor did you either) within that house where he had sojourned
for another brief (and this time final) space and left no trace of him,
not even tears. Yes. One day he was not. Then he was. Then he was not.
It was too short, too fast, too quick; six hours of a summer afternoon
saw it alla space too short to leave even the imprint of a body on a
mattress, and blood can come from anywhereif there was blood, since I
never saw him. For all I was allowed to know, we had no corpse; we even
had no murderer (we did not even speak of Henry that day, not one of us;
I did not saythe aunt, the spinsterDid he look well or ill? I did
not say one of the thousand trivial things with which the indomitable
woman-blood ignores the mans world in which the blood kinsman shows the
courage or cowardice, the folly or lust or fear, for which his fellows
praise or crucify him) who came and crashed a door and cried his crime
and vanished, who for the fact that he was still alive was just that
much more shadowy than the abstraction which we had nailed into a boxa
shot heard only by its echo, a strange gaunt half-wild horse, bridled
and with empty saddle, the saddle bags containing a pistol, a worn clean
shirt, a lump of iron-like bread, captured by a man four miles away and
two days later while trying to force the crib door in his stable. Yes,
more than that: he was absent, and he was; he returned, and he was not;
three women put something into the earth and covered it, and he had
never been._

_Now you will ask me why I stayed there. I could say, I do not know,
could give ten thousand paltry reasons, all untrue, and be
believedthat I stayed for food, who could have combed ditch-banks and
weed-beds, made and worked a garden as well at my own home in town as
here, not to speak of neighbors, friends whose alms I might have
accepted, since necessity has a way of obliterating from our conduct
various delicate scruples regarding honor and pride; that I stayed for
shelter, who had a roof of my own in fee simple now indeed; or that I
stayed for company, who at home could have had the company of neighbors
who were at least of my own kind, who had known me all my life and even
longer in the sense that they thought not only as I thought but as my
forbears thought, while here I had for company one woman whom, for all
she was blood kin to me, I did not understand and, if what my
observation warranted me to believe was true, I did not wish to
understand, and another who was so foreign to me and to all that I was
that we might have been not only of different races (which we were), not
only of different sexes (which we were not), but of different species,
speaking no language which the other understood, the very simple words
with which we were forced to adjust our days to one another being even
less inferential of thought or intention than the sounds which a beast
and a bird might make to each other. But I dont say any of these. I
stayed there and waited for Thomas Sutpen to come home. Yes. You will
say (or believe) that I waited even then to become engaged to him; if I
said I did not, you would believe I lied. But I do say I did not. I
waited for him exactly as Judith and Clytie waited for him: because now
he was all we had, all that gave us any reason for continuing to exist,
to eat food and sleep and wake and rise again: knowing that he would
need us, knowing as we did (who knew him) that he would begin at once to
salvage what was left of Sutpens Hundred and restore it. Not that we
would or did need him. (I had never for one instant thought of marriage,
never for one instant imagined that he would look at me, see me, since
he never had. You may believe me, because I shall make no bones to say
so when the moment comes to tell you when I did think of it.) No. It did
not even require the first day of the life we were to lead together to
show us that we did not need him, had not the need for any man so long
as Wash Jones lived or stayed thereI who had kept my fathers house
and he alive for almost four years, Judith who had done the same out
here, I and Clytie who could cut a cord of wood or run a furrow better
(or at least quicker) than Jones himself.And this the sad fact, one of
the saddest: that weary tedium which the heart and spirit feel when they
no longer need that to whose need they (the spirit and the heart) are
necessary. No. We did not need him, not even vicariously, who could not
even join him in his furious (that almost mad intention which he brought
home with him, seemed to project, radiate ahead of him before he even
dismounted) desire to restore the place to what it had been that he had
sacrificed pity and gentleness and love and all the soft virtues forif
he had ever had them to sacrifice, felt their lack, desired them of
others. Not even that. Neither Judith nor I wanted that. Perhaps it was
because we did not believe it could be done, but I think it was more
than that: that we now existed in an apathy which was almost peace, like
that of the blind unsentient earth itself which dreams after no flowers
stalk nor bud, envies not the airy musical solitude of the springing
leaves it nourishes._

_So we waited for him. We led the busy eventless lives of three nuns in
a barren and poverty-stricken convent: the walls we had were safe,
impervious enough, even if it did not matter to the walls whether we ate
or not. And amicably, not as two white women and a negress, not as three
negroes or three white, not even as three women, but merely as three
creatures who still possessed the need to eat but took no pleasure in
it, the need to sleep but from no joy in weariness or regeneration, and
in whom sex was some forgotten atrophy like the rudimentary gills we
call the tonsils or the still-opposable thumbs for old climbing. We kept
the house, what part of it we lived in, used; we kept the room which
Thomas Sutpen would return tonot that one which he left, a husband,
but the one to which he should return a sonless widower, barren of that
posterity which he doubtless must have wanted who had gone to the
trouble and expense of getting children and housing them among imported
furniture beneath crystal chandeliersjust as we kept Henrys room, as
Judith and Clytie kept it that is, as if he had not run up the stairs
that summer afternoon and then ran down again; we grew and tended and
harvested with our own hands the food we ate, made and worked that
garden just as we cooked and ate the food which came out of it: with no
distinction among the three of us of age or color but just as to who
could build this fire or stir this pot or weed this bed or carry this
apron full of corn to the mill for meal with least cost to the general
good in time or expense of other duties. It was as though we were one
being, interchangeable and indiscriminate, which kept that garden
growing, spun thread and wove the cloth we wore, hunted and found and
rendered the meager ditch-side herbs to protect and guarantee what
spartan compromise we dared or had the time to make with illness,
harried and nagged that Jones into working the corn and cutting the wood
which was to be our winters warmth and sustenancethe three of us,
three women: I drafted by circumstance at too soon an age into a
pinch-penny housewifery which might have existed just as well upon a
lighthouse rock, which had not even taught me how to cultivate a bed of
flowers, let alone a kitchen garden, which had taught me to look upon
fuel and meat as something appearing by its own volition in a woodbox or
on a pantry shelf; Judith created by circumstance (circumstance? a
hundred years of careful nurturing, perhaps not by blood, not even
Coldfield blood, but certainly by the tradition in which Thomas Sutpens
ruthless will had carved a niche) to pass through the soft insulated and
unscathed cocoon stages: bud, served prolific queen, then potent and
soft-handed matriarch of old ages serene and well-lived contentJudith
handicapped by what in me was a few years ignorance but which in her was
ten generations of iron prohibition, who had not learned that first
principle of penury which is to scrimp and save for the sake of
scrimping and saving, who (and abetted by Clytie) would cook twice what
we could eat and three times what we could afford and give it to anyone,
any stranger in a land already beginning to fill with straggling
soldiers who stopped and asked for it; and (but not least) Clytie.
Clytie, not inept, anything but inept: perverse inscrutable and paradox:
free, yet incapable of freedom who had never once called herself a
slave, holding fidelity to none like the indolent and solitary wolf or
bear (yes, wild: half untamed black, half Sutpen blood: and if untamed
be synonymous with wild, then Sutpen is the silent unsleeping
viciousness of the tamers lash) whose false seeming holds it docile to
fears hand but which is not, which if this be fidelity, fidelity only
to the prime fixed principle of its own savageness;Clytie who in the
very pigmentation of her flesh represented that debacle which had
brought Judith and me to what we were and which had made of her (Clytie)
that which she declined to be just as she had declined to be that from
which its purpose had been to emancipate her, as though presiding aloof
upon the new, she deliberately remained to represent to us the threatful
portent of the old._

_We were three strangers. I do not know what Clytie thought, what life
she led which the food we raised and cooked in unison, the cloth we spun
and wove together, nourished and sheltered. But I expected that because
she and I were open, ay honorable, enemies. But I did not even know what
Judith thought and felt. We slept in the same room, the three of us
(this for more than to conserve the firewood which we had to carry in
ourselves. We did it for safety. It was winter soon and already soldiers
were beginning to come backthe stragglers, not all of them tramps,
ruffians, but men who had risked and lost everything, suffered beyond
endurance and had returned now to a ruined land, not the same men who
had marched away but transformedand this the worst, the ultimate
degradation to which war brings the spirit, the soulinto the likeness
of that man who abuses from very despair and pity the beloved wife or
mistress who in his absence has been raped. We were afraid. We fed them;
we gave them what and all we had and we would have assumed their wounds
and left them whole again if we could. But we were afraid of them.), we
waked and fulfilled the endless tedious obligations which the sheer
holding to life and breath entailed; we would sit before the fire after
supper, the three of us in that state where the very bones and muscles
are too tired to rest, when the attenuated and invincible spirit has
changed and shaped even hopelessness into the easy obliviousness of a
worn garment, and talk, talk of a hundred thingsthe weary recurrent
trivia of our daily lives, of a thousand things but not of one. We
talked of him, Thomas Sutpen, of the end of the War (we could all see it
now) and when he would return, of what he would do: how begin the
Herculean task which we knew he would set himself into which (oh yes, we
knew this too) he would undoubtedly sweep us with the old ruthlessness
whether we would or no; we talked of Henry, quietlythat normal useless
impotent woman-worrying about the absent maleas to how he fared, if he
were cold or hungry or not, just as we talked of his father, as if both
they and we still lived in that time which that shot, those running mad
feet, had put a period to and then obliterated, as though that afternoon
had never been. But not once did we mention Charles Bon. There were two
afternoons in the late fall when Judith was absent, returning at supper
time serene and calm. I did not ask and I did not follow her, yet I knew
and I knew that Clytie knew that she had gone to clear that grave of
dead leaves and the sere brown refuse of the cedarsthat mound
vanishing slowly back into the earth, beneath which we had buried
nothing. No, there had been no shot. That sound was merely the sharp and
final clap-to of a door between us and all that was, all that might have
beena retroactive severance of the stream of event: a forever
crystallized instant in imponderable time accomplished by three weak yet
indomitable women which, preceding the accomplished fact which we
declined, refused, robbed the brother of the prey, reft the murderer of
a victim for his very bullet. That was how we lived for seven months.
And then one afternoon in January Thomas Sutpen came home; someone
looked up where we were preparing the garden for another years food and
saw him riding up the drive. And then one evening I became engaged to
marry him._

_It took me just three months. (Do you mind that I dont say he, but I?)
Yes, I, just three months, who for twenty years had looked on him (when
I didhad to toolook) as an ogre, some beast out of a tale to
frighten children with; who had seen his own get upon my dead sisters
body already begin to destroy one another, yet who must come to him like
a whistled dog at that first opportunity, that noon when he who had been
seeing me for twenty years should first raise his head and pause and
look at me. Oh, I hold no brief for myself who could (and would; ay,
doubtless have already) give you a thousand specious reasons good enough
for women, ranging from womans natural inconsistency to the desire (or
even hope) for possible wealth, position, or even the fear of dying
manless which (so they will doubtless tell you) old maids always have,
or for revenge. No. I hold no brief for me. I could have gone home and I
did not. Perhaps I should have gone home. But I did not. As Judith and
Clytie did, I stood there before the rotting portico and watched him
ride up on that gaunt and jaded horse on which he did not seem to sit
but rather seemed to project himself ahead like a mirage, in some fierce
dynamic rigidity of impatience which the gaunt horse, the saddle, the
boots, the leaf-colored and threadbare coat with its tarnished and
flapping braid containing the sentient though nerveless shell, which
seemed to precede him as he dismounted and out of which he said Well,
daughter and stooped and touched his beard to Judiths forehead, who
had not, did not, move, who stood rigid and still and immobile of face,
and within which they spoke four sentences, four sentences of simple
direct words behind beneath above which I felt that same rapport of
communal blood which I had sensed that day while Clytie held me from the
stairs: Henrys not? No. Hes not here.Ah. And? Yes.
Henry killed him. And then burst into tears. Yes, burst, who had not
wept yet, who had brought down the stairs that afternoon and worn ever
since that cold, calm face which had stopped me in midrunning at that
closed door; yes, burst, as if that entire accumulation of seven months
were erupting spontaneously from every pore in one incredible evacuation
(she not moving, not moving a muscle) and then vanishing, disappearing
as instantaneously as if the very fierce and arid aura which he had
enclosed her in were drying the tears faster than they emerged: and
still standing with his hands on her shoulders and looked at Clytie and
said, Ah, Clytie and then at methe same face which I had last seen,
only a little thinner, the same ruthless eyes, the hair grizzled a
little now, and no recognition in the face at all until Judith said,
Its Rosa. Aunt Rosa. She lives here now._

_That was all. He rode up the drive and into our lives again and left no
ripple save those instantaneous and incredible tears. Because he himself
was not there, not in the house where we spent our days, had not stopped
there. The shell of him was there, using the room which we had kept for
him and eating the food which we produced and prepared as if it could
neither feel the softness of the bed nor make distinction between the
viands either as to quality or taste. Yes. He wasnt there. Something
ate with us; we talked to it and it answered questions; it sat with us
before the fire at night and, rousing without any warning from some
profound and bemused complete inertia, talked, not to us, the six ears,
the three minds capable of listening, but to the air, the waiting grim
decaying presence, spirit, of the house itself, talking that which
sounded like the bombast of a madman who creates within his very coffin
walls his fabulous immeasurable Camelots and Carcassonnes. Not absent
from the place, the arbitrary square of earth which he had named
Sutpens Hundred: not that at all. He was absent only from the room, and
that because he had to be elsewhere, a part of him encompassing each
ruined field and fallen fence and crumbling wall of cabin or cotton
house or crib; himself diffused and in solution held by that electric
furious immobile urgency and awareness of short time and the need for
haste as if he had just drawn breath and looked about and realized that
he was old (he was fifty-nine) and was concerned (not afraid: concerned)
not that old age might have left him impotent to do what he intended to
do, but that he might not have time to do it in before he would have to
die. We were right about what he would intend to do: that he would not
even pause for breath before undertaking to restore his house and
plantation as near as possible to what it had been. We did not know how
he would go about it, nor I believe did he. He could not have known, who
came home with nothing, to nothing, to four years less than nothing. But
it did not stop him, intimidate him. His was that cold alert fury of the
gambler who knows that he may lose anyway but that with a seconds
flagging of the fierce constant will he is sure to: and who keeps
suspense from ever quite crystallizing by sheer fierce manipulation of
the cards or dice until the ducts and glands of luck begin to flow
again. He did not pause, did not take that day or two to let the bones
and flesh of fifty-nine recuperatethe day or two in which he might
have talked, not about us and what we had been doing, but about himself,
the past four years (for all he ever told us, there might not have been
any war at all, or it on another planet and no stake of his risked on
it, no flesh and blood of his to suffer by it)that natural period
during which bitter though unmaimed defeat might have exhausted itself
to something like peace, like quiet in the raging and incredulous
recounting (which enables man to bear with living) of that feathers
balance between victory and disaster which makes that defeat unbearable
which, turning against him, yet declined to slay him who, still alive,
yet cannot bear to live with it._

_We hardly ever saw him. He would be gone from dawn until dark, he and
Jones and another man or two that he had got from somewhere and paid
with something, perhaps the same coin in which he had paid that foreign
architectcajolery, promise, threat, and at last force. That was the
winter when we began to learn what carpet-bagger meant and
peoplewomenlocked doors and windows at night and began to frighten
each other with tales of negro uprisings, when the ruined, the four
years fallow and neglected land lay more idle yet while men with
pistols in their pockets gathered daily at secret meeting places in the
towns. He did not make one of these; I remember how one night a
deputation called, rode out through the mud of early March and put him
to the point of definite yes or no, with them or against them, friend or
enemy: and he refused, declined, offered them (with no change of gaunt
ruthless face nor level voice) defiance if it was defiance they wanted,
telling them that if every man in the South would do as he himself was
doing, would see to the restoration of his own land, the general land
and South would save itself, and ushered them from the room and from the
house and stood plain in the doorway holding the lamp above his head
while their spokesman delivered his ultimatum: This may be war,
Sutpen, and answered, I am used to it. Oh yes, I watched him, watched
his old mans solitary fury fighting now not with the stubborn yet
slowly tractable earth as it had done before, but now against the
ponderable weight of the changed new time itself as though he were
trying to dam a river with his bare hands and a shingle: and this for
the same spurious delusion of reward which had failed (failed? betrayed:
and would this time destroy) him once; I see the analogy myself now: the
accelerating circles fatal curving course of his ruthless pride, his
lust for vain magnificence, though I did not then. And how could I?
turned twenty true enough yet still a child, still living in that
womb-like corridor where the world came not even as living echo but as
dead incomprehensible shadow, where with the quiet and unalarmed
amazement of a child I watched the miragy antics of men and womenmy
father, my sister, Thomas Sutpen, Judith, Henry, Charles Boncalled
honor, principle, marriage, love, bereavement, death; the child who
watching him was not a child but one of that triumvirate mother-woman
which we three, Judith, Clytie and I, made, which fed and clothed and
warmed the static shell and so gave vent and scope to the fierce vain
illusion and so said, At last my life is worth something, even though
it only shields and guards the antic fury of an insane child. And then
one afternoon (I was in the garden with a hoe, where the path came up
from the stable lot) I looked up and saw him looking at me. He had seen
me for twenty years, but now he was looking at me; he stood there in the
path looking at me, in the middle of the afternoon. That was it: that it
should have been in the middle of the afternoon, when he should not have
been anywhere near the house at all but miles away and invisible
somewhere among his hundred square miles which they had not troubled to
begin to take away from him yet, perhaps not even at this point or at
that point but diffused (not attenuated to thinness but enlarged,
magnified, encompassing as though in a prolonged and unbroken instant of
tremendous effort embracing and holding intact that ten-mile square
while he faced from the brink of disaster, invincible and unafraid, what
he must have known would be the final defeat) but instead of that
standing there in the path looking at me with something curious and
strange in his face as if the barnlot, the path at the instant when he
came in sight of me had been a swamp out of which he had emerged without
having been forewarned that he was about to enter light, and then went
onthe face, the same face: it was not love; I do not say that, not
gentleness or pity: just a sudden over-burst of light, illumination, who
had been told that his son had done murder and vanished and said
Ah.Well, Clytie. He went on to the house. But it was not love: I do
not claim that; I hold no brief for myself, I do not excuse it. I could
have said that he had needed, used me; why should I rebel now, because
he would use me more? but I did not say it; I could say this time, I do
not know, and I would tell the truth. Because I do not know. He was
gone; I did not even know that either since there is a metabolism of the
spirit as well as of the entrails, in which the stored accumulations of
long time burn, generate, create and break some maidenhead of the
ravening meat; ay, in a seconds timeyes, lost all the shibboleth
erupting of cannot, will not, never will in one red instants fierce
obliteration. This was my instant, who could have fled then and did not,
who found that he had gone on and did not remember when he had walked
away, who found my okra bed finished without remembering the completing
of it, who sat at the supper table that night with the familiar
dream-cloudy shell which we had grown used to (he did not look at me
again during the meal; I might have said then, To what deluded
sewer-gush of dreaming does the incorrigible flesh betray us: but I did
not) and then before the fire in Judiths bedroom sat as we always did
until he came in the door and looked at us and said, Judith, you and
Clytie and ceased, still entering, then said, No, never mind. Rosa
will not mind if you both hear it too, since we are short for time and
busy with what we have of it and came and stopped and put his hand on
my head and (I do not know what he looked at while he spoke, save that
by the sound of his voice it was not at us nor at anything in that room)
said, You may think I made your sister Ellen no very good husband. You
probably do think so. But even if you will not discount the fact that I
am older now, I believe I can promise that I shall do no worse at least
for you._

_That was my courtship. That minutes exchanged look in a kitchen
garden, that hand upon my head in his daughters bedroom; a ukase, a
decree, a serene and florid boast like a sentence (ay, and delivered in
the same attitude) not to be spoken and heard but to be read carved in
the bland stone which pediments a forgotten and nameless effigy. I do
not excuse it. I claim no brief, no pity, who did not answer I will
not because I was not asked, because there was no place, no niche, no
interval for reply. Because I could have made one. I could have forced
that niche myself if I had willed toa niche not shaped to fit mild
Yes but some blind desperate female weapons frenzied slash whose very
gaping wound had cried No! No! and Help! and Save me! No, no
brief, no pity, who did not even move, who sat beneath that hard
oblivious childhood ogres hand and heard him speak to Judith now, heard
Judiths feet, saw Judiths hand, not Judiththat palm in which I read
as from a printed chronicle the orphaning, the hardship, the bereave of
love; the four hard barren years of scoriating loom, of axe and hoe and
all the other tools decreed for men to use: and upon it lying the ring
which he gave Ellen in the church almost thirty years ago. Yes, analogy
and paradox and madness too. I sat there and felt, not watched, him slip
the ring onto my finger in my turn (he was sitting now also, in the
chair which we called Clyties while she stood just beyond the
firelights range beside the chimney) and listened to his voice as Ellen
must have listened in her own spirits April thirty years ago: he
talking not about me or love or marriage, not even about himself and to
no sane mortal listening nor out of any sanity, but to the very dark
forces of fate which he had evoked and dared, out of that wild braggart
dream where an intact Sutpens Hundred which no more had actual being
now (and would never have again) than it had when Ellen first heard it,
as though in the restoration of that ring to a living finger he had
turned all time back twenty years and stopped it, froze it. Yes. I sat
there and listened to his voice and told myself, Why, he is mad. He
will decree this marriage for tonight and perform his own ceremony,
himself both groom and minister; pronounce his own wild benediction on
it with the very bedward candle in his hand: and I mad too, for I will
acquiesce, succumb; abet him and plunge down. No, I hold no brief, ask
no pity. If I was saved that night (and I was saved; mine was to be some
later, colder sacrifice when weIshould be free of all excuse of the
surprised importunate traitorous flesh) it was no fault, no doing of my
own but rather because, once he had restored the ring, he ceased to look
at me save as he had looked for the twenty years before that afternoon,
as if he had reached for the moment some interval of sanity such as the
mad know, just as the sane have intervals of madness to keep them aware
that they are sane. It was more than that even. For three months now he
had seen me daily though he had not looked at me since I merely made one
of that triumvirate who received his gruff unspoken mans gratitude for
the spartan ease we supplied, not to his comfort perhaps but at least to
the mad dream he lived in. But for the next two months he did not even
see me. Perhaps the reason was the obvious one: he was too busy; that
having accomplished his engagement (granted that was what he wanted) he
did not need to see me. Certainly he did not: there was not even any
date set for the wedding. It was almost as though that very afternoon
did not exist, had never happened. I might not have even been there in
the house. Worse: I could have gone, returned home, and he would not
have missed me. I was (whatever it was he wanted of menot my being, my
presence: just my existence, whatever it was that Rosa Coldfield or any
young female no blood kin to him represented in whatever it was he
wantedbecause I will do him this credit: he had never once thought
about what he asked me to do until the moment he asked it because I know
that he would not have waited two months or even two days to ask it)my
presence was to him only the absence of black morass and snarled vine
and creeper to that man who had struggled through a swamp with nothing
to guide or drive himno hope, no light: only some incorrigibility of
undefeatand blundered at last and without warning onto dry solid
ground and sun and airif there could have been such thing as sun to
him, if anyone or anything could have competed with the white glare of
his madness. Yes, mad, yet not so mad. Because there is a practicality
to viciousness: the thief, the liar, the murderer even, has faster rules
than virtue ever has; why not madness too? If he was mad, it was only
his compelling dream which was insane and not his methods: it was no
madman who bargained and cajoled hard manual labor out of men like
Jones; it was no madman who kept clear of the sheets and hoods and
night-galloping horses with which men who were once his acquaintances
even if not his friends discharged the canker suppuration of defeat; it
was no madmans plan or tactics which gained him at the lowest possible
price the sole woman available to wive him, and by the one device which
could have gained his pointnot madman, no: since surely there is
something in madness, even the demoniac, which Satan flees, aghast at
his own handiwork, and which God looks on in pitysome spark, some
crumb to leaven and redeem that articulated flesh, that speech sight
hearing taste and being which we call human man. But no matter. I will
tell you what he did and let you be the judge. (Or try to tell you,
because there are some things for which three words are three too many,
and three thousand words that many words too less, and this is one of
them. It can be told; I could take that many sentences, repeat the bold
blank naked and outrageous words just as he spoke them, and bequeath you
only that same aghast and outraged unbelief I knew when I comprehended
what he meant; or take three thousand sentences and leave you only that
Why? Why? and Why? that I have asked and listened to for almost fifty
years.) But I will let you be the judge and let you tell me if I was not
right._

_You see, I was that sun, or thought I was who did believe there was
that spark, that crumb in madness which is divine, though madness know
no word itself for terror or for pity. There was an ogre of my childhood
which before my birth removed my only sister to its grim ogre-borne and
produced two half phantom children whom I was not encouraged, and did
not desire, to associate with as if my late-born solitude had taught me
presentiment of that fateful intertwining, warned me of that fatal
snarly climax before I knew the name for murderand I forgave it; there
was a shape which rode away beneath a flag and (demon or no)
courageously sufferedand I did more than just forgive: I slew it,
because the body, the blood, the memory which that ogre had dwelt in
returned five years later and held out its hand and said Come as you
might say it to a dog, and I came. Yes, the body, the face, with the
right name and memory, even the correct remembering of what and whom
(except myself: and was that not but further proof?) it had left behind
and returned to: but not the ogre; villain true enough, but a mortal
fallible one less to invoke fear than pity: but no ogre; mad true
enough, but I told myself, Why should not madness be its own victim
also? or, Why may it be not even madness but solitary despair in titan
conflict with the lonely and foredoomed and indomitable iron spirit: but
no ogre, because it was dead, vanished, consumed somewhere in flame and
sulphur-reek perhaps among the lonely craggy peaks of my childhoods
solitary rememberingor forgetting; I was that sun, who believed that
he (after that evening in Judiths room) was not oblivious of me but
only unconscious and receptive like the swamp-freed pilgrim feeling
earth and tasting sun and light again and aware of neither but only of
darkness and morass lackwho did believe there was that magic in
unkin blood which we call by the pallid name of love that would be,
might be sun for him (though I the youngest, weakest) where Judith and
Clytie both would cast no shadow; yes, I the youngest there yet potently
without measured and measurable age since I alone of them could say, O
furious mad old man, I hold no substance that will fit your dream but I
can give you airy space and scope for your delirium. And then one
afternoonoh there was a fate in it: afternoon and afternoon and
afternoon: do you see? the death of hope and love, the death of pride
and principle, and then the death of everything save the old outraged
and aghast unbelieving which has lasted for forty-three yearshe
returned to the house and called me, shouting from the back gallery
until I came down; oh I told you he had not thought of it until that
moment, that prolonged moment which contained the distance between the
house and wherever it was he had been standing when he thought of it:
and this too coincident: it was the very day on which he knew definitely
and at last exactly how much of his hundred square miles he would be
able to save and keep and call his own on the day when he would have to
die, that no matter what happened to him now, he would at least retain
the shell of Sutpens Hundred even though a better name for it would now
be Sutpens Onecalled, shouted for me until I came down. He had not
even waited to tether his horse; he stood with the reins over his arm
(and no hand on my head now) and spoke the bald outrageous words exactly
as if he were consulting with Jones or with some other man about a bitch
dog or a cow or mare._

_They will have told you how I came back home. Oh yes, I know: Rosie
Coldfield, lose him, weep him; caught a man but couldnt keep himOh
yes, I know (and kind too; they would be kind): Rosa Coldfield, warped
bitter orphaned country stick called Rosa Coldfield, safely engaged at
last and so off the town, the county; they will have told you: How I
went out there to live for the rest of my life, seeing in my nephews
murdering an act of God enabling me ostensibly to obey my dying sisters
request that I save at least one of the two children which she had
doomed by conceiving them but actually to be in the house when he
returned who, being a demon, would therefore be impervious to shot and
shell and so would return; I waiting for him because I was young still
(who had buried no hopes to bugles, beneath a flag) and ripe for
marrying in this time and place where most of the young men were dead
and all the living ones either old or already married or tired, too
tired for love; he my best, my only chance in this: an environment where
at best and even lacking war my chances would have been slender enough
since I was not only a Southern gentlewoman but the very modest
character of whose background and circumstances must needs be their own
affirmation since had I been the daughter of a wealthy planter I could
have married almost anyone but being the daughter merely of a small
store-keeper I could even afford to accept flowers from almost no one
and so would have been doomed to marry at last some casual
apprentice-clerk in my fathers businessYes, they will have told you:
who was young and had buried hopes only during that night which was four
years long when beside a shuttered and unsleeping candle she embalmed
the War and its heritage of suffering and injustice and sorrow on the
backsides of the pages within an old account book, embalming blotting
from the breathable air the poisonous secret effluvium of lusting and
hating and killingthey will have told you: daughter of an embusque who
had to turn to a demon, a villain: and therefore she had been right in
hating her father since if he had not died in that attic she would not
have had to go out there to find food and protection and shelter and if
she had not had to depend on his food and clothing (even if she did help
to grow and weave it) to keep her alive and warm, until simple justice
demanded that she make what return for it he might require of her
commensurate with honor, she would not have become engaged to him and if
she had not become engaged to him she would not have had to lie at night
asking herself Why and Why and Why as she has done for forty-three
years: as if she had been instinctively right even as a child in hating
her father and so these forty-three years of impotent and unbearable
outrage were the revenge on her of some sophisticated and ironic sterile
nature for having hated that which gave her life.Yes, Rosa Coldfield
engaged at last who, lacking the fact that her sister had bequeathed her
at least something of shelter and kin, might have become a charge upon
the town: and now Rosie Coldfield, lose him, weep him; found a man but
failed to keep him; Rosa Coldfield who would be right, only being right
is not enough for women, who had rather be wrong than just that; who
want the man who was wrong to admit it. And thats what she cant forgive
him for: not for the insult, not even for having jilted him: but for
being dead. Oh yes, I know, I know: How two months later they learned
that she had packed up her belongings (that is, put on the shawl and hat
again) and come back to town, to live alone in the house where her
parents were dead and gone and where Judith would come now and then and
bring her some of what food they had out at Sutpens Hundred and which
only dire necessity, the brute inexplicable fleshs stubborn will to
live, brought her (Miss Coldfield) to accept. And it dire indeed:
because now the townfarmers passing, negro servants going to work in
white kitchenswould see her before sunup gathering greens along garden
fences, pulling them through the fence since she had no garden of her
own, no seed to plant one with, no tools to work it with herself, even
if she had known completely how, who had had only the freshman year at
gardening and doubtless would not have worked it if she had known;
reaching through the garden fence and gathering vegetables though she
would have been welcome to enter the garden and get them, and they would
have even done the gathering and sent them to her, since there were more
people than Judge Benbow who would leave baskets of provisions on her
front porch at night. But she would not permit them and would not even
use a stick to reach through the fence and draw the vegetables to where
she could grasp them, the reach of her unaided arm being the limit of
brigandage which she never passed. It was not to keep from being seen
stealing that sent her forth before the town was awake, because if she
had had a nigger she would have sent him forth in broad daylight to
forage, where, she would not have cared, exactly as the cavalry heroes
whom she wrote verse about would have sent their men.Yes, Rosie
Coldfield, lose him, weep him; caught a beau but couldnt keep him; (oh
yes, they will tell you) found a beau and was insulted, something heard
and not forgiven, not so much for the saying of it but for having
thought it about her so that when she heard it she realized like
thunderclap that it must have been in his mind for a day, a week, even a
month maybe, he looking at her daily with that in his mind and she not
even knowing it. But I forgave him. They will tell you different, but I
did. Why shouldnt I? I had nothing to forgive; I had not lost him
because I never owned him: a certain segment of rotten mud walked into
my life, spoke that to me which I had never heard before and never shall
again, and then walked out; that was all. I never owned him; certainly
not in that sewer sense which you would mean by that and maybe think
(but you are wrong) I mean. That did not matter. That was not even the
nub of the insult. I mean that he was not owned by anyone or anything in
this world, had never been, would never be, not even by Ellen, not even
by Jones granddaughter. Because he was not articulated in this world.
He was a walking shadow. He was the light-blinded bat-like image of his
own torment cast by the fierce demoniac lantern up from beneath the
earths crust and hence in retrograde, reverse; from abysmal and chaotic
dark to eternal and abysmal dark completing his descending (do you mark
the gradation?) ellipsis, clinging, trying to cling with vain
unsubstantial hands to what he hoped would hold him, save him, arrest
himEllen (do you mark them?), myself then last of all that fatherless
daughter of Wash Jones only child who, so I heard once, died in a
Memphis brothelto find severence (even if not rest and peace) at last
in the stroke of a rusty scythe. I was told, informed of that too,
though not by Jones this time but by someone else kind enough to turn
aside and tell me he was dead. Dead? I cried. Dead? You? You lie;
youre not dead; heaven cannot, and hell dare not, have you!_ But
Quentin was not listening, because there was also something which he too
could not passthat door, the running feet on the stairs beyond it
almost a continuation of the faint shot, the two women, the negress and
the white girl in her underthings (made of flour sacking when there had
been flour, of window curtains when not) pausing, looking at the door,
the yellowed creamy mass of old intricate satin and lace spread
carefully on the bed and then caught swiftly up by the white girl and
held before her as the door crashed in and the brother stood there,
hatless, with his shaggy bayonet-trimmed hair, his gaunt worn unshaven
face, his patched and faded gray tunic, the pistol still hanging against
his flank: the two of them, brother and sister, curiously alike as if
the difference in sex had merely sharpened the common blood to a
terrific, an almost unbearable, similarity, speaking to one another in
short brief staccato sentences like slaps, as if they stood breast to
breast striking one another in turn neither making any attempt to guard
against the blows.

_Now you cant marry him._

_Why cant I marry him?_

_Because hes dead._

_Dead?_

_Yes. I killed him._

He (Quentin) couldnt pass that. He was not even listening to her; he
said, Maam? Whats that? What did you say?

Theres something in that house.

In that house? Its Clytie. Dont she

No. Something living in it. Hidden in it. It has been out there for
four years, living hidden in that house.




                               [*  VI  *]


          There was snow on Shreves overcoat sleeve, his ungloved blond
square hand red and raw with cold, vanishing. Then on the table before
Quentin, lying on the open text book beneath the lamp, the white oblong
of envelope, the familiar blurred mechanical _Jefferson Jan 10 1910
Miss_ and then, opened, the _My dear son_ in his fathers sloped fine
hand out of that dead dusty summer where he had prepared for Harvard so
that his fathers hand could lie on a strange lamplit table in
Cambridge; that dead summer twilightthe wistaria, the cigar-smell, the
firefliesattenuated up from Mississippi and into this strange room,
across this strange iron New England snow:

    _My dear son,_

    _Miss Rosa Coldfield was buried yesterday. She remained in the
    coma for almost two weeks and two days ago she died without
    regaining consciousness and without pain they say, and whatever
    they mean by that since it has always seemed to me that the only
    painless death must be that which takes the intelligence by
    violent surprise and from the rear so to speak, since if death
    be anything at all beyond a brief and peculiar emotional state
    of the bereaved it must be a brief and likewise peculiar state
    of the subject as well. And if aught can be more painful to any
    intelligence above that of a child or an idiot than a slow and
    gradual confronting with that which over a long period of
    bewilderment and dread it has been taught to regard as an
    irrevocable and unplumbable finality, I do not know it. And if
    there can be either access of comfort or cessation of pain in
    the ultimate escape from a stubborn and amazed outrage which
    over a period of forty-three years has been companionship and
    bread and fire and all, I do not know that either_

the letter bringing with it that very September evening itself (and
he soon needing, required, to say No, neither aunt, cousin, nor uncle,
Rosa. Miss Rosa Coldfield, an old lady that died young of outrage in
1866 one summer and then Shreve said, You mean she was no kin to you,
no kin to you at all, that there was actually one Southern Bayard or
Guinevere who was no kin to you? then what did she die for? and that
not Shreves first time, nobodys first time in Cambridge since
September: _Tell about the South. Whats it like there. What do they do
there. Why do they live there. Why do they live at all)_that very
September evening when Mr Compson stopped talking at last, he (Quentin)
walked out of his fathers talking at last because it was now time to
go, not because he had heard it all because he had not been listening,
since he had something which he still was unable to pass: that door,
that gaunt tragic dramatic self-hypnotized youthful face like the
tragedian in a college play, an academic Hamlet waked from some
trancement of the curtains falling and blundering across the dusty
stage from which the rest of the cast had departed last Commencement,
the sister facing him across the wedding dress which she was not to use,
not even to finish, the two of them slashing at one another with twelve
or fourteen words and most of these the same words repeated two or three
times so that when you boiled it down they did it with eight or ten.

And she (Miss Coldfield) had on the shawl, as he had known she would,
and the bonnet (black once but faded now to that fierce muted metallic
green of old peacock feathers) and the black reticule almost as large as
a carpet-bag containing all the keys which the house possessed: cupboard
closet and door, some of which would not even turn in locks which, shot
home, could be solved by any child with a hairpin or a wad of chewing
gum, some of which no longer even fitted the locks they had been made
for like old married people who no longer have anything in common, to do
or to talk about, save the same general weight of air to displace and
breathe and general oblivious biding earth to bear their weightThat
evening, the twelve miles behind the fat mare in the moonless September
dust, the trees along the road not rising soaring as trees should but
squatting like huge fowl, their leaves ruffled and heavily separate like
the feathers of panting fowls, heavy with sixty days of dust, the
roadside undergrowth coated with heat-vulcanized dust and, seen through
the dustcloud in which the horse and buggy moved, appeared like masses
straining delicate and rigid and immobly upward at perpendiculars
absolute in some old dead volcanic water refined to the oxygenless first
principle of liquid, the dustcloud in which the buggy moved not blowing
away because it had been raised by no wind and was supported by no air
but evoked, materialized about them, instantaneous and eternal, cubic
foot for cubic foot of dust to cubic foot for cubic foot of horse and
buggy, peripatetic beneath the branch-shredded vistas of flat black
fiercely and heavily starred sky, the dustcloud moving on, enclosing
them with not threat exactly but maybe warning, bland, almost friendly,
warning, as if to say, _Come on if you like. But I will get there first;
accumulating ahead of you I will arrive first, lifting, sloping gently
upward under hooves and wheels so that you will find no destination but
will merely abrupt gently onto a plateau and a panorama of harmless and
inscrutable night and there will be nothing for you to do but return and
so I would advise you not to go, to turn back now and let what is, be_;
he (Quentin) agreeing to this, sitting in the buggy beside the
implacable doll-sized old woman clutching her cotton umbrella, smelling
the heat-distilled old woman-flesh, the heat-distilled camphor in the
old fold-creases of the shawl, feeling exactly like an electric bulb,
blood and skin, since the buggy disturbed not enough air to cool him
with motion, created not enough motion within him to make his skin
sweat, thinking _Good Lord yes, lets dont find him or it, try to find
him or it, risk disturbing him or it_: then Shreve again, Wait. Wait.
You mean that this old gal, this Aunt Rosa

Miss Rosa, Quentin said.

All right all right.that this old dame, this Aunt Rosa

Miss Rosa, I tell you.

All right all right all right.that this oldthis Aunt R All
right all right all right all right.that hadnt been out there,
hadnt set foot in the house even in forty-three years, yet who not only
said there was somebody hidden in it but found somebody that would
believe her, would drive that twelve miles out there in a buggy at
midnight to see if she was right or not?

Yes, Quentin said.

That this old dame that grew up in a household like an overpopulated
mausoleum, with no call or claim on her time but the hating of her
father and aunt and her sisters husband in peace and comfort and
waiting for the day when they would prove not only to themselves but to
everybody else that she had been right. So one night the aunt slid down
the rainpipe with a horse-trader, and she was right about the aunt so
that fixed that: then her father nailed himself up in the attic to keep
from being drafted into the Rebel army and starved to death, so that
fixed that except for the unavoidable possibility that when the moment
came for him to admit to himself that she had been right he may not have
been able to speak or may not have had anyone to tell it to: so she was
right about the father too, since if he hadnt made General Lee and Jeff
Davis mad he wouldnt have had to nail himself up and die and if he
hadnt died he wouldnt have left her an orphan and a pauper and so
situated, left susceptible to a situation where she could receive this
mortal affront: and right about the brother-in-law because if he hadnt
been a demon his children wouldnt have needed protection from him and
she wouldnt have had to go out there and be betrayed by the old meat
and find instead of a widowed Agamemnon to her Cassandra an ancient
stiff-jointed Pyramus to her eager though untried Thisbe who could
approach her in this unbidden Aprils compounded demonry and suggest
that they breed together for test and sample and if it was a boy they
would marry; would not have had to be blown back to town on the initial
blast of that horror and outrage to eat of gall and wormwood stolen
through paling fences at dawn. So this was not fixed at all and forever
because she couldnt even tell it because of who her successor was, not
because he found a successor by just turning around, and no days loss
of time even, but because of who the successor was, that she might
conceivably have ever suffered a situation where she could or would have
to decline any office which her successor could have been deemed worthy,
even by a demon, to fill; this not fixed at all since when the moment
came for him to admit he had been wrong she would have the same trouble
with him she had with her father, he would be dead too since she
doubtless foresaw the scythe if for no other reason than that it would
be the final outrage and affront like the hammer and nails in her
fathers businessthat scythe, symbolic laurel of a caesars
triumphthat rusty scythe loaned by the demon himself to Jones more
than two years ago to cut the weeds away from the shanty doorway to
smooth the path for ruttingthat rusty blade garlanded with each
successive days gaudy ribbon or cheap bead for the (how did she put it?
slut wasnt all, was it?) to walk inthat scythe beyond whose symbolic
shape he, even though dead, even when earth itself declined any longer
to bear his weight, jeered at her?

Yes, Quentin said.

That this Faustus, this demon, this Beelzebub fled hiding from some
momentary flashy glare of his Creditors outraged face exasperated
beyond all endurance, hiding, scuttling into respectability like a
jackal into a rockpile, so she thought at first, until she realized that
he was not hiding, did not want to hide, was merely engaged in one final
frenzy of evil and harm-doing before the Creditor overtook him next time
for good and allthis Faustus who appeared suddenly one Sunday with two
pistols and twenty subsidiary demons and skulldugged a hundred miles of
land out of a poor ignorant Indian and built the biggest house on it you
ever saw and went away with six wagons and came back with the crystal
tapestries and the Wedgwood chairs to furnish it and nobody knew if he
had robbed another steamboat or had just dug up a little more of the old
loot, who hid horns and tail beneath human raiment and a beaver hat and
chose (bought her, outswapped his father-in-law, wasnt it) a wife after
three years to scrutinize, weigh and compare, not from one of the local
ducal houses but from the lesser baronage whose principality was so far
decayed that there would be no risk of his wife bringing him for dowry
delusions of grandeur before he should be equipped for it, yet not so
far decayed but that she might keep them both from getting lost among
the new knives and forks and spoons that he had boughta wife who not
only would consolidate the hiding but could would and did breed him two
children to fend and shield both in themselves and in their progeny the
brittle bones and tired flesh of an old man against the day when the
Creditor would run him to earth for the last time and he couldnt get
away: and so sure enough the daughter fell in love, the son the agent
for the providing of that living bulwark between him (the demon) and the
Creditors bailiff hand until the son should marry and thus insure him
doubled and compoundedand then the demon must turn square around and
run not only the fiance out of the house and not only the son out of the
house but so corrupt, seduce and mesmerize the son that he (the son)
should do the office of the outraged fathers pistol-hand when
fornication threatened: so that the demon should return from the war
five years later and find accomplished and complete the situation he had
been working for: son fled for good now with a noose behind him,
daughter doomed to spinsterhoodand then almost before his foot was out
of the stirrup he (the demon) set out and got himself engaged again in
order to replace that progeny the hopes of which he had himself
destroyed?

Yes, Quentin said.

Came back home and found his chances of descendants gone where his
children had attended to that, and his plantation ruined, fields fallow
except for a fine stand of weeds, and taxes and levies and penalties
sowed by United States marshals and such and all his niggers gone where
the Yankees had attended to that, and you would have thought he would
have been satisfied: yet before his foot was out of the stirrup he not
only set out to try to restore his plantation to what it used to be,
like maybe he was hoping to fool the Creditor by illusion and
obfuscation by concealing behind the illusion that time had not elapsed
and change occurred the fact that he was now almost sixty years old,
until he could get himself a new batch of children to bulwark him, but
chose for this purpose the last woman on earth he might have hoped to
prevail on, this Aunt Rall right all right all right.that hated
him, that had always hated him, yet choosing her with a kind of
outrageous bravado as if a kind of despairing conviction of his
irresistibility or invulnerability were a part of the price he had got
for whatever it was he had sold the Creditor, since according to the old
dame he never had had a soul; proposed to her and was acceptedthen
three months later, with no date ever set for the wedding and marriage
itself not mentioned one time since, and on the very day when he
established definitely that he would be able to keep at least some of
his land and how much, he approached her and suggested they breed a
couple of dogs together, inventing with fiendish cunning the thing which
husbands and fiances have been trying to invent for ten million years:
the thing that without harming her or giving her grounds for civil or
tribal action would not only blast the little dream-woman out of the
dovecote but leave her irrevocably husbanded (and himself, husband or
fiance, already safely cuckolded before she can draw breath) with the
abstract carcass of outrage and revenge. He said it and was free now,
forevermore now of threat or meddling from anyone since he had at last
eliminated the last member of his late wifes family, free now: son fled
to Texas or California or maybe even South America, daughter doomed to
spinsterhood to live until he died, since after that it wouldnt matter,
in that rotting house, caring for him and feeding him, raising chickens
and peddling the eggs for the clothes she and Clytie couldnt make: so
that he didnt even need to be a demon now but just mad impotent old man
who had realized at last that his dream of restoring his Sutpens
Hundred was not only vain but that what he had left of it would never
support him and his family and so running his little crossroads store
with a stock of plowshares and hame strings and calico and kerosene and
cheap beads and ribbons and a clientele of freed niggers and (what is
it? the word? white what?Yes, trash) with Jones for clerk and who
knows maybe what delusions of making money out of the store to rebuild
the plantation; who had escaped twice now, got himself into it and been
freed by the Creditor who set his children to destroying one another
before he had posterity, and he decided that maybe he was wrong in being
free and so got into it again and then decided that he was wrong in
being unfree and so got out of it againand then turned right around
and bought his way back into it with beads and calico and striped candy
out of his own showcase and off his shelves?

Yes, Quentin said. _He sounds just like father_ he thought, glancing
(his face quiet, reposed, curiously almost sullen) for a moment at
Shreve leaning forward into the lamp, his naked torso pink-gleaming and
baby-smooth, cherubic, almost hairless, the twin moons of his spectacles
glinting against his moonlike rubicund face, smelling (Quentin) the
cigar and the wistaria, seeing the fireflies blowing and winking in the
September dusk. _Just exactly like father if father had known as much
about it the night before I went out there as he did the day after I
came back_ thinking _Mad impotent old man who realized at last that
there must be some limit even to the capabilities of a demon for doing
harm, who must have seen his situation as that of the show girl, the
pony, who realizes that the principle tune she prances comes not from
horn and fiddle and drum but from a clock and calendar, must have seen
himself as the old wornout cannon which realizes that it can deliver
just one more fierce shot and crumble to dust in its own furious blast
and recoil, who looked about upon the scene which was still within his
scope and compass and saw son gone, vanished, more insuperable to him
now than if the son were dead since now (if the son still lived) his
name would be different and those to call him by it strangers, and
whatever dragons outcropping of Sutpen blood the son might sow on the
body of whatever strange woman would therefore carry on the tradition,
accomplish the hereditary evil and harm under another name and upon and
among people who will never have heard the right one; daughter doomed to
spinsterhood who had chosen spinsterhood already before there was anyone
named Charles Bon since the aunt who came to succor her in bereavement
and sorrow found neither but instead that calm absolutely impenetrable
face between a homespun dress and sunbonnet seen before a closed door
and again in a cloudy swirl of chickens while Jones was building the
coffin and which she wore during the next year while the aunt lived
there and the three women wove their own garments and raised their own
food and cut the wood they cooked it with (excusing what help they had
from Jones who lived with his granddaughter in the abandoned fishing
camp with its collapsing roof and rotting porch against which the rusty
scythe which Sutpen was to lend him, make him borrow to cut away the
weeds from the doorand at last forced him to use though not to cut
weeds, at least not vegetable weedswould lean for two years) and wore
still after the aunts indignation had swept her back to town to live on
stolen garden truck and out of anonymous baskets left on her front steps
at night, the three of them, the two daughters negro and white and the
aunt twelve miles away watching from her distance as the two daughters
watched from theirs the old demon, the ancient varicose and despairing
Faustus fling his final main now with the Creditors hand already on his
shoulder, running his little country store now for his bread and meat,
haggling tediously over nickels and dimes with rapacious and
poverty-stricken whites and negroes, who at one time could have galloped
for ten miles in any direction without crossing his own boundary, using
out of his meager stock the cheap ribbons and beads and the stale
violently-colored candy with which even an old man can seduce a
fifteen-year-old country girl, to ruin the granddaughter of his partner,
this Jonesthis gangling malaria-ridden white man whom he had given
permission fourteen years ago to squat in the abandoned fishing camp
with the year old grandchildJones, partner porter and clerk who at the
demons command removed with his own hand (and maybe delivered too) from
the showcase the candy beads and ribbons, measured the very cloth from
which Judith (who had not been bereaved and did not mourn) helped the
granddaughter to fashion a dress to walk past the lounging men in, the
side-looking and the tongues, until her increasing belly taught her
embarrassmentor perhaps fearJones who before 61 had not even been
allowed to approach the front of the house and who during the next four
years got no nearer than the kitchen door and that only when he brought
the game and fish and vegetables on which the seducer-to-bes wife and
daughter (and Clytie too, the one remaining servant, negro, the one who
would forbid him to pass the kitchen door with what he brought) depended
on to keep life in them, but who now entered the house itself on the
(quite frequent now) afternoons when the demon would suddenly curse the
store empty of customers and lock the door and repair to the rear and in
the same tone in which he used to address his orderly or even his house
servants when he had them (and in which he doubtless ordered Jones to
fetch from the showcase the ribbons and beads and candy) direct Jones to
fetch the jug, the two of them (and Jones even sitting now who in the
old days, the old dead Sunday afternoons of monotonous peace which they
spent beneath the scuppernong arbor in the back yard, the demon lying in
the hammock while Jones squatted against a post, rising from time to
time to pour for the demon from the demijohn and the bucket of spring
water which he had fetched from the spring more than a mile away then
squatting again, chortling and chuckling and saying Sho, Mister Tawm
each time the demon paused)the two of them drinking turn and turn
about from the jug and the demon not lying down now nor even sitting but
reaching after the third or second drink that old mans state of
impotent and furious undefeat in which he would rise, swaying and
plunging and shouting for his horse and pistols to ride singlehanded
into Washington and shoot Lincoln (a year or so too late here) and
Sherman both, shouting, Kill them! Shoot them down like the dogs they
are! and Jones: Sho, Kernel; sho now and catching him as he fell and
commandeering the first passing wagon to take him to the house and carry
him up the front steps and through the paintless formal door beneath its
fanlight imported pane by pane from Europe which Judith held open for
him to enter with no change, no alteration in that calm frozen face
which she had worn for four years now, and on up the stairs and into the
bedroom and put him to bed like a baby and then lie down himself on the
floor beside the bed though not to sleep since before dawn the man on
the bed would stir and groan and Jones would say, Hyer I am, Kernel.
Hits all right. They aint whupped us yit, air they?this Jones who
after the demon rode away with the regiment when the granddaughter was
only eight years old would tell people that he was lookin after Majors
place and niggers even before they had time to ask him why he was not
with the troops and perhaps in time came to believe the lie himself, who
was among the first to greet the demon when he returned, to meet him at
the gate and say, Well, Kernel, they kilt us but they aint whupped us
yit, air they? who even worked, labored, sweat at the demons behest
during that first furious period while the demon believed he could
restore by sheer indomitable willing the Sutpens Hundred which he
remembered and had lost, labored with no hope of pay or reward who must
have seen long before the demon did (or would admit it) that the task
was hopelessblind Jones who apparently saw still in that furious
lecherous wreck the old fine figure of the man who once galloped on the
black thoroughbred about that domain two boundaries of which the eye
could not see from any point._

Yes, Quentin said.

_So that Sunday morning came and the demon up and away before dawn,
Judith thinking she knew why since that morning the black stallion which
he rode to Virginia and led back had a son born on his wife Penelope,
only it was not that foal which the demon had got up early to look at
and it was almost a week before they caught, found, the old negress, the
midwife who was squatting beside the quilt pallet that dawn while Jones
sat on the porch where the rusty scythe had leaned for two years, so
that she could tell how she heard the horse and then the demon entered
and stood over the pallet with the riding whip in his hand and looked
down at the mother and the child and said, Well, Milly, too bad youre
not a mare like Penelope. Then I could give you a decent stall in the
stable and turned and went out and the old negress squatted there and
heard them, the voices, he and Jones: Stand back. Dont you touch me,
Wash.Im going to tech you, Kernel and she heard the whip too
though not the scythe, no whistling air, no blow, nothing since always
that which merely consummates punishment evokes a cry while that which
evokes the last silence occurs in silence. And that night they finally
found him and fetched him home in a wagon and carried him, quiet and
bloody and with his teeth still showing in his parted beard (which was
hardly grizzled although his hair was almost white now) in the light of
the lanterns and the pine torches, up the steps where the tearless and
stone-faced daughter held the door open for him too who used to like to
drive fast to church and who rode fast there this time, only when it was
all over he had never reached the church, since the daughter decided
that he should be driven into that same Methodist Church in town where
he had married her mother, before returning to the grave in the cedar
grove. Judith was a woman of thirty now and looking older, not as the
weak grow old, either enclosed in a static ballooning of already
lifeless flesh or through a series of stages of gradual collapsing whose
particles adhere, not to some iron and still impervious framework but to
one another, as though in some communal and oblivious and mindless life
of their own like a colony of maggots, but as the demon himself had
grown old: with a kind of condensation, an anguished emergence of the
primary indomitable ossification which the soft color and texture, the
light electric aura of youth, had merely temporarily assuaged but never
concealed. The spinster in homemade and shapeless clothing, with hands
which could either transfer eggs or hold a plow straight in furrow,
borrowed two half-wild young mules to pull the wagon: so he rode fast
toward church as far as he went, in his homemade coffin, in his
regimentals and saber and embroidered gauntlets, until the young mules
bolted and turned the wagon over and tumbled him, saber plumes and all,
into a ditch from which the daughter extricated him and fetched him back
to the cedar grove and read the service herself. And no tears, no
bereavement this time too, whether or not it was because she had no time
to mourn since she ran the store herself now until she found a buyer for
it, not keeping it open but carrying the keys to it in her apron pocket,
hailed from the kitchen or the garden or even from the field since she
and Clytie now did all the plowing which was done, now that Jones was
gone too. He had followed the demon within twelve hours on that same
Sunday (and maybe to the same place; maybe They would even have a
scuppernong vine for them there and no compulsions now of bread or
ambition or fornication or vengeance, and maybe they wouldnt even have
to drink, only they would miss this now and then without knowing what it
was that they missed but not often; serene, pleasant, unmarked by time
or change of weather, only just now and then something, a wind, a
shadow, and the demon would stop talking and Jones would stop guffawing
and they would look at one another, groping, grave, intent, and the
demon would say, What was it, Wash? Something happened. What was it?
and Jones looking at the demon, groping too, sober too, saying, I dont
know, Kernel. Whut? each watching the other. Then the shadow would
fade, the wind die away until at last Jones would say, serene, not even
triumphant: They mought have kilt us, but they aint whupped us yit, air
they?) She would be hailed by women and children with pails and
baskets, whereupon she or Clytie would go to the store, unlock it, serve
the customer, lock the store and return: until she sold the store at
last and spent the money for a tombstone._

(How was it? Shreve said. You told me; how was it? you and your
father shooting quail, the gray day after it had rained all night and
the ditch the horses couldnt cross so you and your father got down and
gave the reins towhat was his name? the nigger on the mule?
Luster.Luster to lead them around the ditch) and he and his father
crossed just as the rain began to come down again gray and solid and
slow, making no sound, Quentin not aware yet of just where they were
because he had been riding with his head lowered against the drizzle,
until he looked up the slope before them where the wet yellow sedge died
upward into the rain like melting gold and saw the grove, the clump of
cedars on the crest of the hill dissolving into the rain as if the trees
had been drawn in ink on a wet blotterthe cedars beyond which, beyond
the ruined fields beyond which, would be the oak grove and the gray huge
rotting deserted house half a mile away. Mr Compson had stopped to look
back at Luster on the mule, the towsack he had been using for saddle now
wrapped around his head, his knees drawn up under it, leading the horses
on down the ditch to find a place to cross. Better get on out of the
rain, Mr Compson said. Hes not going to come within a hundred yards
of those cedars anyway.

They went on up the slope. They could not see the two dogs at all, only
the steady furrowing of the sedge where, invisible, the dogs quartered
the slope until one of them flung up his head to look back. Mr Compson
gestured with his hand toward the trees, he and Quentin following. It
was dark among the cedars, the light more dark than gray even, the quiet
rain, the faint pearly globules, materializing on the gun barrels and
the five headstones like drops of not-quite-congealed meltings from cold
candles on the marble: the two flat heavy vaulted slabs, the other three
headstones leaning a little awry, with here and there a carved letter or
even an entire word momentary and legible in the faint light which the
raindrops brought particle by particle into the gloom and released; now
the two dogs came in, drifted in like smoke, their hair close-plastered
with damp, and curled down in one indistinguishable and apparently
inextricable ball for warmth. Both the flat slabs were cracked across
the middle by their own weight (and vanishing into the hole where the
brick coping of one vault had fallen in was a smooth faint path worn by
some small animalpossum probablyby generations of some small animal
since there could have been nothing to eat in the grave for a long time)
though the lettering was quite legible: _Ellen Coldfield Sutpen. Born
October 9, 1817. Died January 23, 1863_ and the other: _Thomas Sutpen,
Colonel, 23rd Mississippi Infantry, C.S.A. Died August 12, 1869_: this
last, the date, added later, crudely with a chisel, who even dead did
not divulge where and when he had been born. Quentin looked at the
stones quietly, thinking _Not beloved wife of. No. Ellen Coldfield
Sutpen_ I wouldnt have thought they would have had any money to buy
marble with in 1869, he said.

He bought them himself, Mr Compson said. He bought the two of them
while the regiment was in Virginia, after Judith got word to him that
her mother was dead. He ordered them from Italy, the best, the finest to
be hadhis wifes complete and his with the date left blank: and this
while on active service with an army which had not only the highest
mortality rate of any before or since but which had a custom of electing
a new set of regimental officers each year (and by which system he was
at the moment entitled to call himself colonel, since he had been voted
in and Colonel Sartoris voted out only last summer) so that for all he
could know, before his order could be filled or even received he might
be already under ground and his grave marked (if at all) by a shattered
musket thrust into the earth, or lacking that he might be a second
lieutenant or even a privateprovided of course that his men would have
the courage to demote himyet he not only ordered the stones and
managed to pay for them, but stranger still he managed to get them past
a seacoast so closely blockaded that the incoming runners refused any
cargo except ammunition It seemed to Quentin that he could actually
see them: the ragged and starving troops without shoes, the gaunt
powder-blackened faces looking backward over tattered shoulders, the
glaring eyes in which burned some indomitable desperation of undefeat
watching that dark interdict ocean across which a grim lightless
solitary ship fled with in its hold two thousand precious pounds-space
containing not bullets, not even something to eat, but that much
bombastic and inert carven rock which for the next year was to be a part
of the regiment, to follow it into Pennsylvania and be present at
Gettysburg, moving behind the regiment in a wagon driven by the demons
body servant through swamp and plain and mountain pass, the regiment
moving no faster than the wagon could, with starved gaunt men and gaunt
spent horses knee deep in icy mud or snow, sweating and cursing it
through bog and morass like a piece of artillery, speaking of the two
stones as Colonel and Mrs Colonel; then through the Cumberland Gap
and down through the Tennessee mountains, traveling at night to dodge
Yankee patrols, and into Mississippi in the late fall of 64, where the
daughter waited whose marriage he had interdict and who was to be a
widow the next summer though apparently not bereaved, where his wife was
dead and his son self-excommunicated and -banished, and put one of the
stones over his wifes grave and set the other upright in the hall of
the house, where Miss Coldfield possibly (maybe doubtless) looked at it
every day as though it were his portrait, possibly (maybe doubtless here
too) reading among the lettering more of maiden hope and virgin
expectation than she ever told Quentin about, since she never mentioned
the stone to him at all, and (the demon) drank the parched corn coffee
and ate the hoecake which Judith and Clytie prepared for him and kissed
Judith on the forehead and said, Well, Clytie and returned to the war,
all in twenty-four hours; he could see it; he might even have been
there. Then he thought _No. If I had been there I could not have seen it
this plain._

But that dont explain the other three, he said. They must have cost
something too.

Who would have paid for them? Mr Compson said. Quentin could feel him
looking at him. Think. Quentin looked at the three identical
headstones with their faint identical lettering, slanted a little in the
soft loamy decay of accumulated cedar needles, these decipherable too
when he looked close, the first one: _Charles Bon. Born in New Orleans,
Louisiana. Died at Sutpens Hundred, Mississippi, May 3, 1865. Aged 33
years and 5 months_. He could feel his father watching him.

She did it, he said. With that money she got when she sold the
store.

Yes, Mr Compson said. Quentin had to stoop and brush away some of the
cedar needles to read the next one. As he did so one of the dogs rose
and approached him, thrusting its head in to see what he was looking at
like a human being would, as if from association with human beings it
had acquired the quality of curiosity which is an attribute only of men
and apes.

Get away, he said, thrusting the dog back with one hand while with the
other he brushed the cedar needles away, smoothing with his hand into
legibility the faint lettering, the graved words: _Charles Etienne
Saint-Valery Bon. 1859-1884_ feeling his father watching him, remarking
before he rose that the third stone bore that same date, 1884. It
couldnt have been the store this time, he said. Because she sold the
store in 70, and besides 1884 is the same date thats on hers thinking
how it would have been terrible for her sure enough if she had wanted to
put _Beloved Husband of_ on that first one.

Ah, Mr Compson said. That was the one your grandfather attended to.
Judith came into town one day and brought him the money, some of it,
where she got it from he never knew, unless it was what she had left out
of the price of the store which he sold for her; brought the money in
with the inscription (except the date of death of course) all written
out as you see it, during that three weeks while Clytie was in New
Orleans finding the boy to fetch him back, though your grandfather of
course did not know this, money and inscription not for herself but for
him.

Oh, Quentin said.

Yes. They lead beautiful liveswomen. Lives not only divorced from,
but irrevocably excommunicated from, all reality. Thats why although
their deaths, the instant of dissolution, are of no importance to them
since they have a courage and fortitude in the face of pain and
annihilation which would make the most spartan man resemble a puling
boy, yet to them their funerals and graves, the little puny affirmations
of spurious immortality set above their slumber, are of incalculable
importance. You had an aunt once (you do not remember her because I
never saw her myself but only heard the tale) who was faced with a
serious operation which she became convinced she would not survive, at a
time when her nearest female kin was a woman between whom and herself
there had existed for years one of those bitter inexplicable (to the man
mind) amicable enmities which occur between women of the same blood,
whose sole worry about departing this world was to get rid of a certain
brown dress which she owned and knew that the kinswoman knew she had
never liked, which must be burned, not given away but burned in the back
yard beneath the window where, by being held up to the window (and
suffering excrutiating pain) she could see it burned with her own eyes,
because she was convinced that after she died the kinswoman, the logical
one to take charge, would bury her in it.

And did she die? Quentin said.

No. As soon as the dress was consumed she began to mend. She stood the
operation and recovered and outlived the kinswoman by several years.
Then one afternoon she died peacefully of no particular ailment and was
buried in her wedding gown.

Oh, Quentin said.

Yes. But there was one afternoon in the summer of 70 when one of these
graves (there were only three here then) was actually watered by tears.
Your grandfather saw it; that was the year Judith sold the store and
your grandfather attended to it for her and he had ridden out to see her
about the matter and he witnessed it: the interlude, the ceremonial
widowhoods bright dramatic pageantry. He didnt know at the time how
the octoroon came to be here, how Judith could even have known about her
to write her where Bon was dead. But there she was, with the
eleven-year-old boy who looked more like eight. It must have resembled a
garden scene by the Irish poet, Wilde: the late afternoon, the dark
cedars with the level sun in them, even the light exactly right and the
graves, the three pieces of marble (your grandfather had advanced Judith
the money to buy the third stone with against the price of the store)
looking as though they had been cleaned and polished and arranged by
scene shifters who with the passing of twilight would return and strike
them and carry them, hollow fragile and without weight, back to the
warehouse until they should be needed again; the pageant, the scene, the
act, entering upon the stagethe magnolia-faced woman a little plumper
now, a woman created of by and for darkness whom the artist Beardsley
might have dressed, in a soft flowing gown designed not to infer
bereavement or widowhood but to dress some interlude of slumbrous and
fatal insatiation, of passionate and inexorable hunger of the flesh,
walking beneath a lace parasol and followed by a bright gigantic negress
carrying a silk cushion and leading by the hand the little boy whom
Beardsley might not only have dressed but drawna thin delicate child
with a smooth ivory sexless face who, after his mother handed the
negress the parasol and took the cushion and knelt beside the grave and
arranged her skirts and wept, never released the negress apron but
stood blinking quietly who, having been born and lived all his life in a
kind of silken prison lighted by perpetual shaded candles, breathing for
air the milklike and absolutely physical lambence which his mothers
days and hours emanated, had seen little enough of sunlight before, let
alone out-of-doors, trees and grass and earth; and last of all, the
other woman, Judith (_who, not bereaved, did not need to mourn_ Quentin
thought, thinking _Yes, I have had to listen too long_) who stood just
inside the cedars, in the calico dress and the sunbonnet to match it,
both faded and shapelessthe calm face, the hands which could plow or
cut wood and cook or weave cloth folded before her, standing in the
attitude of an indifferent guide in a museum, waiting, probably not even
watching. Then the negress came and handed the octoroon a crystal bottle
to smell and helped her to rise and took up the silk cushion and gave
the octoroon the parasol and they returned to the house, the little boy
still holding to the negress apron, the negress supporting the woman
with one arm and Judith following with that face like a mask or like
marble, back to the house, across the tall scaling portico and into the
house where Clytie was cooking the eggs and the cornbread on which she
and Judith lived.

She stayed a week. She passed the rest of that week in the one
remaining room in the house whose bed had linen sheets, passed it in
bed, in the new lace and silk and satin negligees subdued to the mauve
and lilac of mourningthat room airless and shuttered, impregnated
behind the sagging closed blinds with the heavy fainting odor of her
flesh, her days, her hours, her garments, of eau-de-cologne from the
cloth upon her temples, of the crystal phial which the negress
alternated with the fan as she sat beside the bed between trips to the
door to receive the trays which Clytie carried up the stairsClytie,
who did that fetching and carrying as Judith made her, who must have
perceived whether Judith told her or not that it was another negro whom
she served, yet who served the negress just as she would quit the
kitchen from time to time and search the rooms downstairs until she
found that little strange lonely boy sitting quietly on a straight hard
chair in the dim and shadowy library or parlor, with his four names and
his sixteenth-part black blood and his expensive esoteric Fauntleroy
clothing who regarded with an aghast fatalistic terror the grim
coffee-colored woman who would come on bare feet to the door and look in
at him, who gave him not teacakes but the coarsest cornbread spread with
as coarse molasses (this surreptitiously, not that the mother or the
duenna might object, but because the household did not have food for
eating between meals), gave it to him, thrust it at him with restrained
savageness, and who found him one afternoon playing with a negro boy
about his own size in the road outside the gates and cursed the negro
child out of sight with level and deadly violence and sent him, the
other, back to the house in a voice from which the very absence of
vituperation or rage made it seem just that much more deadly and cold.

Yes, Clytie, who stood impassive beside the wagon on that last day,
following the second ceremonial to the grave with the silk cushion and
the parasol and the smelling-bottle, when mother and child and duenna
departed for New Orleans. And your grandfather never knew if it was
Clytie who watched, kept in touch by some means, waited for the day, the
moment, to come, the hour when the little boy would be an orphan, and so
went herself to fetch him; or if it was Judith who did the waiting and
the watching and sent Clytie for him that winter, that December of
1871Clytie who had never been further from Sutpens Hundred than
Jefferson in her life, yet who made that journey alone to New Orleans
and returned with the child, the boy of twelve now and looking ten, in
one of the outgrown Fauntleroy suits but with a new oversize overall
jumper coat which Clytie had bought for him (and made him wear, whether
against the cold or whether not your grandfather could not say either)
over it and what else he owned tied up in a bandanna handkerchiefthis
child who could speak no English as the woman could speak no French, who
had found him, hunted him down, in a French city and brought him away,
this child with a face not old but without age, as if he had had no
childhood, not in the sense that Miss Rosa Coldfield says she had no
childhood, but as if he had not been human born but instead created
without agency of man or agony of woman and orphaned by no human being.
Your grandfather said you did not wonder what had become of the mother,
you did not even care: death or elopement or marriage: she would not
grow from one metamorphosisdissolution or adulteryto the next
carrying along with her all the old accumulated rubbish-years which we
call memory, the recognizable _I_, but changing from phase to phase as
the butterfly changes once the cocoon is cleared, carrying nothing of
what was into what is, leaving nothing of what is behind but eliding
complete and intact and unresisting into the next avatar as the
overblown rose or magnolia elides from one rich June to the next,
leaving no bones, no substance, no dust of whatever dead pristine
soulless rich surrender anywhere between sun and earth. The boy had been
produced complete and subject to no microbe in that cloyed and scented
maze of shuttered silk as if he were the delicate and perverse
spirit-symbol, immortal page of the ancient immortal Lilith, entering
the actual world not at the age of one second but of twelve years, the
delicate garments of his pagehood already half concealed beneath that
harsh and shapeless denim cut to an iron pattern and sold by the
millionsthat burlesque uniform and regalia of the tragic burlesque of
the sons of Hama slight silent child who could not even speak English,
picked suddenly up out of whatever debacle the only life he knew had
disintegrated into, by a creature whom he had seen once and learned to
dread and fear yet could not flee, held helpless and passive in a state
which must have been some incredible compound of horror and trust, since
although he could not even talk to her (they made, they must have made,
that weeks journey by steamboat among the cotton bales on the freight
deck, eating and sleeping with negroes, where he could not even tell his
companion when he was hungry or when he had to relieve himself) and so
could have only suspected, surmised, where she was taking him, could
have known nothing certainly except that all he had ever been familiar
with was vanishing about him like smoke. Yet he made no resistance,
returning quietly and docilely to that decaying house which he had seen
one time, where the fierce brooding woman who had come and got him lived
with the calm white one who was not even fierce, who was not anything
except calm, who to him did not even have a name yet, but who was
somehow so closely related to him as to be the owner of the one spot on
earth where he had ever seen his mother weep. He crossed that strange
threshold, that irrevocable demarcation, not led, not dragged, but
driven and herded by that stern implacable presence, into that gaunt and
barren household where his very silken remaining clothes, his delicate
shirt and stockings and shoes which still remained to remind him of what
he had once been, vanished, fled from arms and body and legs as if they
had been woven of chimaeras or of smoke.Yes, sleeping in the trundle
bed beside Judiths, beside that of the woman who looked upon him and
treated him with a cold unbending detached gentleness more discouraging
than the fierce ruthless constant guardianship of the negress who, with
a sort of invincible spurious humility slept on a pallet on the floor,
the child lying there between them unasleep in some hiatus of passive
and hopeless despair aware of this, aware of the woman on the bed whose
every look and action toward him, whose every touch of the capable hands
seemed at the moment of touching his body to lose all warmth and become
imbued with cold implacable antipathy, and the woman on the pallet upon
whom he had already come to look as might some delicate talonless and
fangless wild beast crouched in its cage in some hopeless and desperate
similitude of ferocity look upon the human creature who feeds it (and
your grandfather said, Suffer little children to come unto Me: and
what did He mean by that? how, if He meant that little children should
need to _be_ suffered to approach Him, what sort of earth had He
created; that if they had to _suffer_ in order to approach Him, what
sort of Heaven did He have?) who fed him, thrust food which he himself
could discern to be the choicest of what they had, food which he
realized had been prepared for him by deliberate sacrifice, with that
curious blend of savageness and pity, of yearning and hatred; who
dressed him and washed him, thrust him into tubs of water too hot or too
cold yet against which he dared make no outcry, and scrubbed him with
harsh rags and soap, sometimes scrubbing at him with repressed fury as
if she were trying to wash the smooth faint tinge from his skin as you
might watch a child scrubbing at a wall long after the epithet, the
chalked insult, has been obliteratedlying there unsleeping in the dark
between them, feeling them unasleep too, feeling them thinking about
him, projecting about him and filling the thunderous solitude of his
despair louder than speech could: _You are not up here in this bed with
me, where through no fault nor willing of your own you should be, and
you are not down here on this pallet floor with me, where through no
fault nor willing of your own you must and will be, not through any
fault or willing of our own who would not what we cannot._

And your grandfather did not know either just which of them it was who
told him that he was, must be, a negro. He could neither have heard yet
nor recognized the term nigger, who even had no word for it in the
tongue he knew who had been born and grown up in a padded silken vacuum
cell which might have been suspended on a cable a thousand fathoms in
the sea, where pigmentation had no more moral value than the silk walls
and the scent and the rose-colored candle shades, where the very
abstractions which he might have observedmonogamy and fidelity and
decorum and gentleness and affectionwere as purely rooted in the
fleshs offices as the digestive processes. Your grandfather did not
know if he was sent from the trundle bed at last or if he quitted it by
his own wish and will; if when the time came when his loneliness and
grief became calloused, he retired himself from Judiths bedroom or was
sent from it, to sleep in the hall (where Clytie had likewise moved her
pallet) though not on a pallet like her but on a cot, elevated still and
perhaps not by Judiths decree either but by the negress fierce
inexorable spurious humility. And then the cot was moved in the attic,
and the few garments hanging behind a curtain contrived of a piece of
old carpet nailed across a corner, the rags of the silk and broadcloth
in which he had arrived, the harsh jeans and homespun which the two
women bought and made for him, he accepting them with no thanks, no
comment, accepting his garret room in the same way, asking for and
making no alteration in its spartan arrangements that they knew of until
that second year when he was fourteen and one of them, Clytie or Judith,
found hidden beneath his mattress the shard of broken mirror: and who to
know what hours of amazed and tearless grief he might have spent before
it, examining himself in the delicate and outgrown tatters in which he
perhaps could not even remember himself, with quiet and incredulous
incomprehension. And Clytie sleeping in the hall below, barring the foot
of the attic stairs, guarding his escape or exit as inexorably as a
Spanish duenna, teaching him to chop wood and to work the garden and
then to plow as his strength increased. His resiliency rather, since he
would never be other than light in the bone and almost delicatethe boy
with his light bones and womanish hands struggling with what anonymous
avatar of intractable Mule, whatever tragic and barren clown was his
bound fellow and complement beneath his first fathers curse, getting
the hang of it gradually and the two of them, linked by the savage
steel-and-wood male symbol, ripping from the prone rich female earth
corn to feed them both. While Clytie watched, never out of sight of him,
with that brooding fierce unflagging jealous care, hurrying out whenever
anyone white or black stopped in the road as if to wait for the boy to
complete the furrow and pause long enough to be spoken to, sending the
boy on with a single quiet word or even gesture a hundred times more
fierce than the level murmur of vituperation with which she drove the
passerby on. So he (your grandfather) believed that it was neither of
them who was responsible for his going with negroes. Not Clytie, who
guarded him as if he were a Spanish virgin, who even before she could
have even suspected that he would ever come there to live, had
interrupted his first contact with a nigger and sent him back to the
house; not Judith who could have refused at any time to let him sleep in
that white childs bed in her room, who even if she could not have
reconciled herself to his sleeping on the floor could have forced Clytie
to take him into another bed with her, who would have made a monk, a
celibate, of him, perhaps yet not a eunuch, who may not have permitted
him to pass himself for a foreigner, yet who certainly would not have
driven him to consort with negroes. Your grandfather didnt know, even
though he did know more than the town, the countryside, knew, which was
that there was a strange little boy living out there who had apparently
emerged from the house for the first time at the age of about twelve
years, whose presence was not even unaccountable to the town and county
since they now believed they knew why Henry had shot Bon. They wondered
only where and how Clytie and Judith had managed to keep him concealed
all the time, believing now that it had been a widow who had buried Bon,
even though she had no paper to show for it, and only the incredulous
(and shocked) speculation of your grandfather (who, though he had that
hundred dollars and the written directions in Judiths hand for this
fourth tombstone in his safe at the time, had not yet associated the boy
with the child he had seen two years ago when the octoroon came there to
weep at the grave), to believe that the child might be Clyties, got by
its father on the body of his own daughter. A boy seen always near the
house with Clytie always nearby, then a youth learning to plow and
Clytie somewhere nearby too and it soon well known with what grim and
unflagging alertness she discovered and interrupted any attempt to speak
to him, and there was only your grandfather to couple at last the boy,
the youth, with the child who had been there three or four years ago to
visit that grave.

It was your grandfather to whose office Judith came that afternoon five
years later, and he could not remember when he had seen her in Jefferson
beforethe woman of forty now, in the same shapeless calico and faded
sunbonnet, who would not even sit down, who despite the impenetrable
mask which she used for face emanated a terrible urgency, who insisted
that they walk on toward the courthouse while she talked, toward the
crowded room where the justices court sat, the crowded room which they
entered and where your grandfather saw him, the boy (only a man now)
handcuffed to an officer, his other arm in a sling and his head bandaged
since they had taken him to the doctor first, your grandfather gradually
learning what had happened or as much of it as he could since the Court
itself couldnt get very much out of the witnesses, the ones who had
fled and sent for the sheriff, the ones (excepting that one whom he had
injured too badly to be present) with whom he had fought. It had
happened at a negro ball held in a cabin a few miles from Sutpens
Hundred and he there, present and your grandfather never to know how
often he had done this before, whether he had gone there to engage in
the dancing or for the dice game in progress in the kitchen where the
trouble started, trouble which he and not the negroes started according
to the witnesses and for no reason, for no accusation of cheating,
nothing. And he made no denial, saying nothing, refusing to speak at
all, sitting there in court sullen, pale and silent: so that at this
point all truth, evidence vanished into a moiling clump of negro backs
and heads and black arms and hands clutching sticks of stove wood and
cooking implements and razors, the white man the focal point of it and
using a knife which he had produced from somewhere, clumsily, with
obvious lack of skill and practice, yet with deadly earnestness and a
strength which his slight build denied, a strength composed of sheer
desperate will and imperviousness to the punishment, the blows and
slashes which he took in return and did not even seem to feel. There had
been no cause, no reason for it; none to ever know exactly what
happened, what curses and ejaculations which might have indicated what
it was that drove him, and there was only your grandfather to fumble,
grope, grasp the presence of that furious protest, that indictment of
heavens ordering, that gage flung into the face of what is with a
furious and indomitable desperation which the demon himself might have
shown, as if the child and then the youth had acquired it from the walls
in which the demon had lived, the air which he had once walked in and
breathed until that moment when his own fate which he had dared in his
turn struck back at him; only your grandfather to sense that protest,
because the justice and the others present did not recognize him, did
not recognize this slight man with his bandaged head and arm, his sullen
impassive (and now bloodless) olive face, who refused to answer any
questions, make any statement: so that the justice (Jim Hamblett it was)
was already making his speech of indictment when your grandfather
entered, utilizing opportunity and audience to orate, his eyes already
glazed with that cessation of vision of people who like to hear
themselves talk in public: At this time, while our country is
struggling to rise from beneath the iron heel of a tyrant oppressor,
when the very future of the South as a place bearable for our women and
children to live in depends on the labor of our own hands, when the
tools which we have to use, to depend on, are the pride and integrity
and forbearance of black men and the pride and integrity and forbearance
of white; that you, I say, a white man, a white  and your
grandfather trying to reach him, stop him, trying to push through the
crowd, saying Jim. Jim. _Jim!_ and it already too late, as if
Hambletts own voice had waked him at last or as if someone had snapped
his fingers under his nose and waked him, he looking at the prisoner now
but saying white again even while his voice died away as if the order
to stop the voice had been shocked into short circuit, and every face in
the room turned toward the prisoner as Hamblett cried, _What are you?
Who and where did you come from?_

Your grandfather got him out, quashed the indictment and paid the fine
and brought him back to his office and talked to him while Judith waited
in the anteroom. You are Charles Bons son, he said. I dont know,
the other answered, harsh and sullen. You dont remember? your
grandfather said. The other did not answer. Then your grandfather told
him he must go away, disappear, giving him money to go on: What ever
you are, once you are among strangers, people who dont know you, you can
be whatever you will. I will make it all right; I will talk toto 
What do you call her? And he had gone too far now, but it was too late
to stop; he sat there and looked at that still face which had no more
expression than Judiths, nothing of hope nor pain: just sullen and
inscrutable and looking down at the calloused womanish hands with their
cracked nails which held the money while your grandfather thought how he
could not say Miss Judith, since that would postulate the blood more
than ever. Then he thought _I dont even know whether he wants to hide it
or not_. So he said Miss Sutpen. I will tell Miss Sutpen, not where you
are going of course, because I wont know that myself. But just that you
are gone and that I knew you were going and that you will be all right.

So he departed, and your grandfather rode out to tell Judith, and
Clytie came to the door and looked full and steadily at his face and
said nothing and went to call Judith, and your grandfather waited in
that dim shrouded parlor and knew that he would not have to tell either
of them. He did not have to. Judith came presently and stood and looked
at him and said, I suppose you wont tell me.Not wont, cant, your
grandfather said. But not now because of any promise I made him. But he
has money; he will be and stopped, with that forlorn little boy
invisible between them who had come there eight years ago with the
overall jumper over what remained of his silk and broadcloth, who had
become the youth in the uniformthe tattered hat and the overallsof
his ancient curse, who had become the young man with a young mans
potence, yet was still that lonely child in his parchment-and-denim
hairshirt, and your grandfather speaking the lame vain words, the
specious and empty fallacies which we call comfort, thinking _Better
that he were dead, better that he had never lived_: then thinking what
vain and empty recapitulation that would be to her if he were to say it,
who doubtless had already said it, thought it, changing only the person
and the number. He returned to town. And now, next time, he was not sent
for; he learned it as the town learned it: by that country grapevine
whose source is among negroes, and he, Charles Etienne Saint-Valery Bon,
already returned (not home again; returned) before your grandfather
learned how he had come back, appeared, with a coal-black and ape-like
woman and an authentic wedding license, brought back by the woman since
he had been so severely beaten and mauled recently that he could not
even hold himself on the spavined and saddleless mule on which he rode
while his wife walked beside it to keep him from falling off; rode up to
the house and apparently flung the wedding license in Judiths face with
something of that invincible despair with which he had attacked the
negroes in the dice game. And none ever to know what incredible tale lay
behind that years absence which he never referred to and which the
woman, who, even a year later and after their son was born, still
existed in that aghast and automaton-like state in which she had
arrived, did not, possibly could not, recount but which she seemed to
exude gradually and by a process of terrific and incredulous excretion
like the sweat of fear or anguish: how he had found her, dragged her out
of whatever two dimensional backwater (the very name of which, town or
village, she either had never known or the shock of her exodus from it
had driven the name forever from her mind and memory) her mentality had
been capable of coercing food and shelter from, and married her, held
her very hand doubtless while she made the laborious cross on the
register before she even knew his name or knew that he was not a white
man (and this last none knew even now if she knew for certain, even
after the son was born in one of the dilapidated slave cabins which he
rebuilt after renting his parcel of land from Judith); how there
followed something like a year composed of a succession of periods of
utter immobility like a broken cinema film, which the white-colored man
who had married her spent on his back recovering from the last mauling
he had received, in frowzy stinking rooms in placestowns and
citieswhich likewise had no names to her, broken by other periods,
intervals, of furious and incomprehensible and apparently reasonless
moving, progressiona maelstrom of faces and bodies through which the
man thrust, dragging her behind him, toward or from what, driven by what
fury which would not let him rest, she did not know, each one to end,
finish, as the one before it had so that it was almost a ritual. The man
apparently hunting out situations in order to flaunt and fling the
ape-like body of his charcoal companion in the faces of all and any who
would retaliate: the negro stevedores and deckhands on steamboats or in
city honky-tonks who thought he was a white man and believed it only the
more strongly when he denied it; the white men who, when he said he was
a negro, believed that he lied in order to save his skin, or worse: from
sheer besotment of sexual perversion; in either case the result the
same: the man with body and limbs almost as light and delicate as a
girls giving the first blow, usually unarmed and heedless of the
numbers opposed to him, with that same fury and implacability and
physical imperviousness to pain and punishment, neither cursing nor
panting, but laughing.

So he showed Judith the license and took his wife, already far gone
with the child, to the ruined cabin which he had chosen to repair and
installed her, kenneled her with a gesture perhaps, and returned to the
house. And there was nobody to know what transpired that evening between
him and Judith, in whatever carpetless room furnished with whatever
chairs and such which they had not had to chop up and burn to cook food
or for warmth or maybe to heat water for illness from time to
timebetween the woman who had been widowed before she had been a
bride, and the son of the man who had bereaved her and a hereditary
negro concubine, who had not resented his black blood so much as he had
denied the white, and this with a curious and outrageous exaggeration in
which was inherent its own irrevocability, almost exactly as the demon
himself might have done it.

(_Because there was love_ Mr Compson said _There was that letter she
brought and gave to your grandmother to keep_. He (Quentin) could see
it, as plainly as he saw the one open upon the open text book on the
table before him, white in his fathers dark hand against his linen leg
in the September twilight where the cigar-smell, the wistaria-smell, the
fireflies drifted, thinking _Yes. I have heard too much, I have been
told too much; I have had to listen to too much, too long_ thinking
_Yes, Shreve sounds almost exactly like father: that letter. And who to
know what moral restoration she might have contemplated in the privacy
of that house, that room, that night, what hurdling of iron old
traditions since she had seen almost everything else she had learned to
call stable vanish like straws in a galeshe sitting there beside the
lamp in a straight chair, erect, in the same calico save that the
sunbonnet would be missing now, the head bare now, the once coal-black
hair streaked with gray now while he faced her, standing. He would not
have sat; perhaps she would not even have asked him to, and the cold
level voice would not be much louder than the sound of the lamps flame:
I was wrong. I admit it. I believed that there were things which still
mattered just because they had mattered once. But I was wrong. Nothing
matters but breath, breathing, to know and to be alive. And the child,
the license, the paper. What about it? That paper is between you and one
who is inescapably negro; it can be put aside, no one will anymore dare
bring it up than any other prank of a young man in his wild youth. And
as for the child, all right. Didnt my own father beget one? and he none
the worse for it? We will even keep the woman and the child if you wish;
they can stay here and Clytie will . . . watching him, staring at him
yet not moving, immobile, erect, her hands folded motionless on her lap,
hardly breathing as if he were some wild bird or beast which might take
flight at the expansion and contraction of her nostrils or the movement
of her breast: No: I. I will. I will raise it, see that it . . . It
does not need to have any name; you will neither have to see it again
nor to worry. We will have General Compson sell some of the land; he
will do it, and you can go. Into the North, the cities, where it will
not matter even if But they will not. They will not dare. I will
tell them that you are Henrys son and who could or would dare to
dispute  and he standing there, looking at her or not looking at
her she cannot tell since his face would be loweredthe still
expressionless thin face, she watching him, not daring to move, her
voice murmuring, clear enough and full enough yet hardly reaching him:
Charles: and he: No, Miss Sutpen: and she again, still without
moving, not stirring so much as a muscle, as if she stood on the outside
of the thicket into which she had cajoled the animal which she knew was
watching her though she could not see it, not quite cringing, not in any
terror or even alarm but in that restive light incorrigibility of the
free which would leave not even a print on the earth which lightly bore
it and she not daring to put out the hand with which she could have
actually touched it but instead just speaking to it, her voice soft and
swooning, filled with that seduction, that celestial promise which is
the females weapon: Call me Aunt Judith, Charles_) Yes, who to know
if he said anything or nothing, turning, going out, she still sitting
there, not moving, not stirring, watching him, still seeing him,
penetrating walls and darkness too to watch him walk back down the weedy
lane between the deserted collapsed cabins toward that one where his
wife waited, treading the thorny and flint-paved path toward the
Gethsemane which he had decreed and created for himself, where he had
crucified himself and come down from his cross for a moment and now
returned to it.

Not your grandfather. He knew only what the town, the county, knew:
that the strange little boy whom Clytie had used to watch and had taught
to farm, who had sat, a grown man, in the justices court that day with
his head bandaged and one arm in a sling and the other in a handcuff,
who had vanished and then returned with an authentic wife resembling
something in a zoo, now farmed on shares a portion of the Sutpen
plantation, farmed it pretty well, with solitary and steady husbandry
within his physical limitations, the body and limbs which still looked
too light for the task which he had set himself, who lived like a hermit
in the cabin which he rebuilt and where his son was presently born, who
consorted with neither white nor black (Clytie did not watch him now;
she did not need to) and who was not seen in Jefferson but three times
during the next four years and then to appear, be reported by the
negroes who seemed to fear either him or Clytie or Judith, as being
either blind or violently drunk in the negro store district on Depot
Street, where your grandfather would come and take him away (or if he
were too drunk, had become violent, the town officers) and keep him
until his wife, the black gargoyle, could hitch the team back into the
wagon and come, with nothing alive about her but her eyes and hands, and
load him into it and take him home. So they did not even miss him from
town at first; it was the County Medical Officer who told your
grandfather that he had yellow fever and, that Judith had had him moved
into the big house and was nursing him and now Judith had the disease
too, and your grandfather told him to notify Miss Coldfield and he (your
grandfather) rode out there one day. He did not dismount; he sat his
horse and called until Clytie looked down at him from one of the upper
windows and told him they didnt need nothing. Within the week your
grandfather learned that Clytie had been right, or was right, now
anyway, though it was Judith who died first.

Oh, Quentin said_Yes_ he thought _Too much, too long_ remembering
how he had looked at the fifth grave and thought how whoever had buried
Judith must have been afraid that the other dead would contract the
disease from her, since her grave was at the opposite side of the
enclosure, as far from the other four as the enclosure would permit,
thinking _Father wont have to say think this time_ because he knew who
had ordered and bought that headstone before he read the inscription on
it, thinking about, imagining what careful printed directions Judith
must have roused herself (from delirium possibly) to write down for
Clytie when she knew that she was going to die; and how Clytie must have
lived during the next twelve years while she raised the child which had
been born in the old slave cabin and scrimped and saved the money to
finish paying out for the stone on which Judith had paid his grandfather
the hundred dollars twenty-four years ago and which, when his
grandfather tried to refuse it, she (Clytie) set the rusty can full of
nickels and dimes and frayed paper money on the desk and walked out of
the office without a word. He had to brush the clinging cedar needles
from this one also to read it, watching these letters also emerge
beneath his hand, wondering quietly how they could have clung there, not
have been blistered to ashes at the instant of contact with the harsh
and unforgiving threat: _Judith Coldfield Sutpen. Daughter of Ellen
Coldfield. Born October 3, 1841. Suffered the Indignities and Travails
of this World for 42 Years, 4 Months, 9 Days, and went to Rest at Last
February 12, 1884. Pause, Mortal; Remember Vanity and Folly and Beware_
thinking (Quentin) _Yes. I didnt need to ask who invented that, put
that one up_ thinking _Yes, too much, too long. I didnt need to listen
then but I had to hear it and now I am having to hear it all over again
because he sounds just like father: Beautiful lives women livewomen
do. In very breathing they draw meat and drink from some beautiful
attenuation of unreality in which the shades and shapes of factsof
birth and bereavement, of suffering and bewilderment and despairmove
with the substanceless decorum of lawn party charades, perfect in
gesture and without significance or any ability to hurt. Miss Rosa
ordered that one. She decreed that headstone of Judge Benbow. He had
been the executor of her fathers estate, appointed by no will since Mr
Coldfield left neither will nor estate except the house and the rifled
shell of the store. So he appointed himself, elected himself probably
out of some conclave of neighbors and citizens who came together to
discuss her affairs and what to do with her after they realized that
nothing under the sun, certainly no man nor committee of men, would ever
persuade her to go back to her niece and brother-in-lawthe same
citizens and neighbors who left baskets of food on her doorstep at
night, the dishes (the plate containing the food, the napkins which
covered it) from which she never washed but returned soiled to the empty
basket and set the basket back on the same step where she had found it
as if to carry completely out the illusion that it had never existed or
at least that she had never touched, emptied, it, had not come out and
taken the basket up with that air which had nothing whatever of
furtiveness in it nor even defiance, who doubtless tasted the food,
criticized its quality or cooking, chewed and swallowed it and felt it
digest yet still clung to that delusion, that calm incorrigible
insistence that that which all incontrovertible evidence tells her is so
does not exist, as women canthat same self deluding which declined to
admit that the liquidation of the store had left her something, that she
had been left anything but a complete pauper, she would not accept the
actual money from the sale of the store from Judge Benbow yet would
accept the moneys value (and after a few years, over-value) in a dozen
ways: would use casual negro boys who happened to pass the house,
stopping them and commanding them to rake her yard and they doubtless as
aware as the town was that there would be no mention of pay from her,
that they would not even see her again though they knew she was watching
them from behind the curtains of a window, but that Judge Benbow would
pay them. She would enter the stores and command objects from the
shelves and showcases exactly as she commanded that two hundred dollar
headstone from Judge Benbow, and walk out of the store with themand
with the same aberrant cunning which would not wash the dishes and
napkins from the baskets she declined to have any discussion of her
affairs with Benbow since she must have known that the sums which she
had received from him must have years ago overbalanced (he, Benbow, had
in his office a portfolio, a fat one, with_ Estate of Goodhue Coldfield.
Private _written across it in indelible ink. After the Judge died his
son Percy opened it. It was filed with racing forms and cancelled
betting tickets on horses whose very bones were no man knew where now,
which had won and lost races on the Memphis track forty years ago, and a
ledger, a careful tabulation in the Judges hand, each entry indicating
the date and the horses name and his wager and whether he won or lost;
and another one showing how for forty years he had put each winning and
an amount equal to each loss, to that mythical account) whatever the
store had brought._

_But you were not listening, because you knew it all already, had
learned, absorbed it already without the medium of speech somehow from
having been born and living beside it, with it, as children will and do:
so that what your father was saying did not tell you anything so much as
it struck, word by word, the resonant strings of remembering. You had
been here before, seen these graves more than once in the rambling
expeditions of boyhood whose aim was more than the mere hunting of game,
just as you had seen the old house too, been familiar with how it would
look before you even saw it, became large enough to go out there one day
with four or five other boys of your size and age and dare one another
to evoke the ghost, since it would have to be haunted, could not but be
haunted although it had stood there empty and unthreatening for
twenty-six years and nobody to meet or report any ghost, until the wagon
full of strangers moving from Arkansas tried to stop and spend the night
in it and something happened before they could begin to unload the wagon
even. What it was they did not or could not or would not tell but it had
them back in the wagon, and the mules going back down the drive at a
gallop, all in about ten minutes, not to stop until they reached
Jefferson. You have seen the rotting shell of the house with its sagging
portico and scaling walls, its sagging blinds and plank-shuttered
windows, set in the middle of the domain which had reverted to the state
and had been bought and sold and bought and sold again and again and
again. No, you were not listening; you didnt have to: then the dogs
stirred, rose; you looked up and sure enough, just as your father had
said he would, Luster had halted the mule and the two horses in the rain
about fifty yards from the cedars, sitting there with his knees drawn up
under the towsack and enclosed by the cloudy vapor of the streaming
animals as though he were looking at you and your father out of some
lugubrious and painless purgatory. Come on in out of the rain, Luster,
your father said. I wont let the old Colonel hurt youYawl come on
and less go home, Luster said. Aint no more hunting todayWell get
wet, your father said. Ill tell you what: well ride on over to that
old house. We can keep good and dry there. But Luster didnt budge,
sitting there in the rain and inventing reasons not to go to the
housethat the roof would leak or that you would all three catch cold
with no fire or that you would all get so wet before you reached it that
the best thing to do would be to go straight home: and your father
laughing at Luster but you not laughing so much because even though you
were not black like Luster was, you were not any older, and you and
Luster had both been there that day when the five of you, the five boys
all of an age, began daring one another to enter the house long before
you reached it, coming up from the rear, into the old street of the
slave quartersa jungle of sumach and persimmon and briers and
honeysuckle, and the rotting piles of what had once been log walls and
stone chimneys and shingle roofs among the undergrowth except one, that
one; you coming up to it; you didnt see the old woman at all at first
because you were watching the boy, the Jim Bond, the hulking
slack-mouthed saddle-colored boy a few years older and bigger than you
were, in patched and faded yet quite clean shirt and overalls too small
for him, working in the garden patch beside the cabin: so you didnt
even know she was there until all of you started and whirled as one and
found her watching you from a chair tilted back against the cabin
walla little dried-up woman not much bigger than a monkey and who
might have been any age up to ten thousand years, in faded voluminous
skirts and an immaculate headrag, her bare coffee-colored feet wrapped
around the chair rung like monkeys do, smoking a clay pipe and watching
you with eyes like two shoe buttons buried in the myriad wrinkles of her
coffee-colored face, who just looked at you and said without even
removing the pipe and in a voice almost like a white womans: What do
you want? and after a moment one of you said Nothing and then you
were all running without knowing which of you began to run first nor why
since you were not scared, back across the fallow and rain-gutted and
brier-choked old fields until you came to the old rotting snake fence
and crossed it, hurled yourselves over it, and then the earth, the land,
the sky and trees and woods, looked different again, all right again_.

Yes, Quentin said.

And that was the one Luster was talking about now, Shreve said. And
your father watching you again because you hadnt heard the name before,
hadnt even thought that he must have a name that day when you saw him
in the vegetable patch, and you said, Who? Jim what? and Luster said,
Das him. Bright-colored boy whut stay wid dat ole woman and your
father still watching you and you said, Spell it and Luster said,
Dats a lawyer word. Whut dey puts you under when de Law ketches you. I
des spells readin words. And that was him, the name was Bond now, and
he wouldnt care about that, who had inherited what he was from his
mother and only what he could never have been from his father. And if
your father had asked him if he was Charles Bons son he not only would
not have known either, he wouldnt have cared: and if you had told him
he was, it would have touched and then vanished from what you (not he)
would have had to call his mind long before it could have set up any
reaction at all, either of pride or pleasure, anger or grief?

Yes, Quentin said.

And he lived in that cabin behind the haunted house for twenty-six
years, he and the old woman who must be more than seventy now yet who
had no white hair under that headrag, whose flesh had not sagged but
looked instead like she had grown old up to a certain point just like
normal people do, then had stopped, and instead of turning gray and soft
she had begun to shrink so that the skin of her face and hands broke
into a million tiny cross-hair wrinkles and her body just grew smaller
and smaller like something being shrunk in a furnace, like the Bornese
do their captured headswho might well have been the ghost if one was
ever needed, if anybody ever had so little else to do as to prowl around
the house, which there was not; if there could have been anything in it
to protect from prowlers, which there was not; if there had been any one
of them left to hide or need concealment in it, which there was not. And
yet this old gal, this Aunt Rosa, told you that some one was hiding out
there and you said it was Clytie or Jim Bond and she said No and you
said it would have to be because the demon was dead and Judith was dead
and Bon was dead and Henry gone so far he hadnt even left a grave: and
she said No and so you went out there, drove the twelve miles at night
in a buggy and you found Clytie and Jim Bond both in it and you said You
see? and she (the Aunt Rosa) still said No and so you went on: and there
was?

Yes.

Wait then, Shreve said. For Gods sake wait.




                              [*  VII  *]


          There was no snow on Shreves arm now, no sleeve on his arm at
all now: only the smooth cupid-fleshed forearm and hand coming back into
the lamp and taking a pipe from the empty coffee can where he kept them,
filling it and lighting it. So it is zero outside, Quentin thought; soon
he will raise the window and do deep-breathing in it, clench-fisted and
naked to the waist, in the warm and rosy orifice above the iron quad.
But he had not done so yet, and now the moment, the thought, was an hour
past and the pipe lay smoked out and overturned and cold, with a light
sprinkling of ashes about it, on the table before Shreves crossed pink
bright-haired arms while he watched Quentin from behind the two opaque
and lamp-glared moons of his spectacles. So he just wanted a grandson,
Shreve said. That was all he was after. Jesus, the South is fine, isnt
it. Its better than the theatre, isnt it. Its better than Ben Hur,
isnt it. No wonder you have to come away now and then, isnt it.

Quentin did not answer. He sat quite still, facing the table, his hands
lying on either side of the open text book on which the letter rested:
the rectangle of paper folded across the middle and now open, three
quarters open, whose bulk had raised half itself by the leverage of the
old crease in weightless and paradoxical levitation, lying at such an
angle that he could not possibly have read it, deciphered it, even
without this added distortion. Yet he seemed to be looking at it, or as
near as Shreve could tell, he was, his face lowered a little, brooding,
almost sullen. He told Grandfather about it, he said. That time when
the architect escaped, tried to escape into the river bottom and go back
to New Orleans or wherever it was, and he (The demon, hey? Shreve
said. Quentin did not answer him, did not pause, his voice level,
curious, a little dreamy yet still with that overtone of sullen
bemusement, of smoldering outrage: so that Shreve, still too, resembling
in his spectacles and nothing else (from the waist down the table
concealed him; so anyone entering the room would have taken him to be
stark naked) a baroque effigy created out of colored cake dough by
someone with a faintly nightmarish affinity for the perverse, watched
him with thoughtful and intent curiosity.) and he sent word in to
Grandfather, Quentin said, and some others and got his dogs and his
wild niggers out and hunted the architect down and made him take earth
in a cave under the river bank two days later. That was in the second
summer, when they had finished all the brick and had the foundations
laid and most of the big timbers cut and trimmed, and one day the
architect couldnt stand it anymore or he was afraid he would starve or
that the wild niggers (and maybe Colonel Sutpen too) would run out of
grub and eat him or maybe he got homesick or maybe he just had to
go (Maybe he had a girl, Shreve said. Or maybe he just wanted a
girl. You said the demon and the niggers didnt have but two. Quentin
did not answer this either; again he might not have heard, talking in
that curious repressed calm voice as though to the table before him or
the book upon it or the letter upon the book or his hands lying on
either side of the book.)  and so he went. He seemed to vanish in
broad daylight, right out from the middle of twenty-one people. Or maybe
it was just Sutpens back that was turned, and that the niggers saw him
go and didnt think it needed mentioning; that being wild men they
probably didnt know what Sutpen himself was up to and him naked in the
mud with them all day. So I reckon the niggers never did know what the
architect was there for, supposed to do or had done or could do or was,
so maybe they thought Sutpen had sent him, told him to go away and drown
himself, go away and die, or maybe just go away. So he did, jumped up in
broad daylight, in his embroidered vest and Fauntleroy tie and a hat
like a Baptist congressman and probably carrying the hat in his hand,
and ran into the swamp and the niggers watched him out of sight and then
went back to work and Sutpen didnt even miss him until night, supper
time probably, and the niggers told him and he declared a holiday
tomorrow because he would have to get out and borrow some dogs. Not that
he would have needed dogs, with his niggers to trail, but maybe he
thought that the guests, the others, would not be used to trailing with
niggers and would expect dogs. And Grandfather (he was young then too)
brought some champagne and some of the others brought whiskey and they
began to gather out there a little after sundown, at Sutpens house that
didnt even have walls yet, that wasnt anything yet but some lines of
bricks sunk into the ground but that was all right because they didnt
go to bed anyhow, Grandfather said. They just sat around the fire with
the champagne and the whiskey and a quarter of the last venison Sutpen
had killed, and about midnight the man with the dogs came. Then it was
daylight and the dogs had a little trouble at first because some of the
wild niggers had run out about a mile of the trail just for fun. But
they got the trail straightened out at last, the dogs and the niggers in
the bottom and most of the men riding along the edge of it where the
going was good. But Grandfather and Colonel Sutpen went with the dogs
and the niggers because Sutpen was afraid the niggers might catch the
architect before he could reach them. He and Grandfather had to walk a
good deal, sending one of the niggers to lead the horses on around the
bad places until they could ride again. Grandfather said it was fine
weather and the trail lay pretty good but Sutpen said it would have been
fine if the architect had just waited until October or November. And so
he told Grandfather something about himself.

Sutpens trouble was innocence. All of a sudden he discovered, not what
he wanted to do but what he just had to do, had to do it whether he
wanted to or not, because if he did not do it he knew that he could
never live with himself for the rest of his life, never live with what
all the men and women that had died to make him had left inside of him
for him to pass on, with all the dead ones waiting and watching to see
if he was going to do it right, fix things right so that he would be
able to look in the face not only the old dead ones but all the living
ones that would come after him when he would be one of the dead. And
that at the very moment when he discovered what it was, he found out
that this was the last thing in the world he was equipped to do because
he not only had not known that he would have to do this, he did not even
know that it existed to be wanted, to need to be done, until he was
almost fourteen years old. Because he was born in West Virginia, in the
mountains (Not in West Virginia, Shreve said.What? Quentin
said. Not in West Virginia, Shreve said. Because if he was
twenty-five years old in Mississippi in 1833, he was born in 1808. And
there wasnt any West Virginia in 1808 because All right, Quentin
said. West Virginia wasnt admitted All right all right,
Quentin said. into the United States until All right all
right all right, Quentin said.) he was born where what few other
people he knew lived in log cabins boiling with children like the one he
was born inmen and grown boys who hunted or lay before the fire on the
floor while the women and older girls stepped back and forth across them
to reach the fire to cook, where the only colored people were Indians
and you only looked down at them over your rifle sights, where he had
never even heard of, never imagined, a place, a land divided neatly up
and actually owned by men who did nothing but ride over it on fine
horses or sit in fine clothes on the galleries of big houses while other
people worked for them; he did not even imagine then that there was any
such way to live or to want to live, or that there existed all the
objects to be wanted which there were, or that the ones who owned the
objects not only could look down on the ones that didnt, but could be
supported in the down-looking not only by the others who owned objects
too but by the very ones that were looked down on that didnt own
objects and knew they never would. Because where he lived the land
belonged to anybody and everybody and so the man who would go to the
trouble and work to fence off a piece of it and say This is mine was
crazy; and as for objects, nobody had any more of them than you did
because everybody had just what he was strong enough or energetic enough
to take and keep, and only that crazy man would go to the trouble to
take or even want more than he could eat or swap for powder and whiskey.
So he didnt even know there was a country all divided and fixed and
neat with a people living on it all divided and fixed and neat because
of what color their skins happened to be and what they happened to own,
and where a certain few men not only had the power of life and death and
barter and sale over others, but they had living human men to perform
the endless repetitive personal offices, such as pouring the very
whiskey from the jug and putting the glass into a mans hand or pulling
off his boots for him to go to bed, that all men have had to do for
themselves since time began and would have to do until they died and
which no man ever has or ever will like to do, but which no man that he
knew had ever thought of evading anymore than he had thought of evading
the effort of chewing and swallowing and breathing. When he was a child
he didnt listen to the vague and cloudy tales of Tidewater splendor
that penetrated even his mountains because then he could not understand
what the people who told about it meant, and when he became a boy he
didnt listen to them because there was nothing in sight to compare and
gauge the tales by and so give the words life and meaning, and no chance
that he ever would understand what they meant because he was too busy
doing the things that boys do; and when he got to be a youth and
curiosity itself exhumed the tales which he did not know he had heard
and speculated on, he was interested and would have liked to see the
places once, but without envy or regret, because he just thought that
some people were spawned in one place and some in another, some spawned
rich (lucky, he may have called it) and some not, and that (so he told
Grandfather) the men themselves had little to do with the choosing and
less of the regret because it had never once occurred to him that any
man should take any such blind accident as that as authority or warrant
to look down at others, any others. So he had hardly heard of such a
world until he fell into it.

Thats how it was. They fell into it, the whole family, returned to the
coast from which the first Sutpen had come (when the ship from the Old
Bailey reached Jamestown probably), tumbled head over heels back to
Tidewater by sheer altitude, elevation and gravity, as if whatever
slight hold the family had had on the mountain had broken. He said
something to Grandfather about his mother dying about that time and how
his pap said she was a fine wearying woman and that he would miss her;
and something about how it was the wife that had got his father even
that far West. And now the whole passel of them from the father through
the grown daughters down to one that couldnt even walk yet, slid back
down out of the mountains, skating in a kind of accelerating and sloven
and inert coherence like a useless collection of flotsam on a flooded
river, moving by some perverse automotivation such as inanimate objects
sometimes show, backward against the very current of the stream, across
the Virginia plateau and into the slack lowlands about the mouth of the
James River. He didnt know why they moved, or didnt remember the
reason if he ever knew itwhether it was optimism, hope in his fathers
breast or nostalgia, since he didnt know just where his father had come
from, whether from the country to which they returned or not, or even if
his father knew, remembered, wanted to remember and find it again. He
didnt know whether somebody, some traveler, had told him of some easy
place or time, some escape from the hardship of getting food and keeping
warm in the mountain way, or if perhaps somebody his father knew once or
who knew his father once and remembered him, happened to think about
him, or someone kin to him who had tried to forget him and couldnt
quite do it, had sent for him and he had obeyed, going not for the
promised job but for the ease, having faith perhaps in the blood kinship
to evade the labor, if it was kinship and in his own inertia and in
whatever gods had watched over him this far if it were not. But all he
remembered (The demon, Shreve said) was that one morning the
father rose and told the older girls to pack what food they had, and
somebody wrapped up the baby and somebody else threw water on the fire
and they walked down the mountain to where roads existed. They had a
lopsided two wheeled cart and two spavined oxen now. He told Grandfather
he did not remember just where nor when nor how his father had got it.
He was ten then; the two older boys had left home some time before and
had not been heard of since. He drove the oxen, since almost as soon as
they got the cart his father began the practice of accomplishing that
part of the translation devoted to motion flat on his back in the cart,
oblivious among the quilts and lanterns and well buckets and bundles of
clothing and children, snoring with alcohol. That was how he told it. He
didnt remember if it was weeks or months or a year they traveled,
except that one of the older girls who had left the cabin unmarried was
still unmarried when they finally stopped, though she had become a
mother before they lost the last blue mountain range. He didnt remember
whether it was that winter and then spring and then summer that overtook
and passed them on the road, or whether they overtook and passed in slow
succession the seasons as they descended, or whether it was the descent
itself that did it, and they not progressing parallel in time but
descending perpendicularly through temperature and climatea (you
couldnt call it a period because as he remembered it or as he told
Grandfather he did, it didnt have either a definite beginning or a
definite ending. Maybe attenuation is better)an attenuation from a
kind of furious inertness and patient immobility, while they sat in the
cart outside the doors of doggeries and taverns and waited for the
father to drink himself insensible, to a sort of dreamy and
destinationless locomotion after they had got the old man out of
whatever shed or outhouse or barn or ditch and loaded him into the cart
again, and during which they did not seem to progress at all but just to
hang suspended while the earth itself altered, flattened and broadened
out of the mountain cove where they had all been born, mounting, rising
about them like a tide in which the strange harsh rough faces about the
doggery doors into which the old man was just entering or was just being
carried or thrown out (and this one time by a huge bull of a nigger, the
first black man, slave, they had ever seen, who emerged with the old man
over his shoulder like a sack of meal and histhe niggersmouth loud
with laughing and full of teeth like tombstones) swam up and vanished
and were replaced; the earth, the world, rising about them and flowing
past as if the cart moved on a treadmill. And it was now spring and now
summer and they still were moving on toward a place they had never seen
and had no conception of, let alone wanted to go to; and from a place, a
little lost spot on the side of a hill back to which probably not one of
them could have led the wayexcepting possibly the usually insensible
father who made one stage of the journey accompanied by the
raspberry-colored elephants and snakes which he seems to have been
huntingbringing into and then removing from their sober static country
astonishment the strange faces and places, both faces and
placesdoggeries and taverns now become hamlets, hamlets now become
villages, villages now towns, and the country flattened out now with
good roads and fields and niggers working in the fields while white men
sat fine horses and watched them, and more fine horses and men in fine
clothes, with a different look in the face from mountain men about the
taverns where the old man was not even allowed to come in by the front
door and from which his mountain drinking manners got him ejected before
he would have time to get drunk good (so that now they began to make
really pretty good time) and no laughter and jeers to the ejecting now,
even if the laughter and jeers had been harsh and without much
gentleness in them.

Thats the way he got it. He had learned the difference not only
between white men and black ones, but he was learning that there was a
difference between white men and white men, not to be measured by
lifting anvils or gouging eyes or how much whiskey you could drink then
get up and walk out of the room. He had begun to discern that without
being aware of it yet. He still thought that that was just a matter of
where you were spawned and how; whether you were lucky or not lucky; and
that the lucky ones would be even slower and loather than the unlucky to
take any advantage of it or credit for it, or to feel that it gave them
anything more than the luck; and he still thought that they would feel
if anything more tender toward the unlucky than the unlucky would ever
need to feel toward them. He was to find all that out later. He
remembered when he found it out, because that was the same second when
he discovered his innocence. It was not the second, the moment, that he
was long about: it was the getting to it: the moment when they must have
realized, believed at last that they were no longer traveling, moving,
going somewherenot the being still at last and in a fashion settled,
because they had done that before on the road; he remembered how one
time the gradual difference in comfort between the presence and absence
of shoes and warm clothing occurred in one place: a cowshed where the
sisters baby was born and, as he told Grandfather, for all he could
remember, conceived too. Because they were stopped now at last. He
didnt know where they were. For a time, during the first days or weeks
or months, the woodsmans instinct which he had acquired from the
environment where he grew up or that maybe had been bequeathed him by
the two brothers who had vanished, one of whom had been as far West as
the Mississippi River one timethe instinct bequeathed him along with
the wornout buckskin garments and such which they left in the cabin when
they departed the last time for good, and which he had sharpened by
boys practice at small game and suchkept him oriented so that he
could have (so he said) found his way back to the mountain cabin in
time. But that was past now, behind him the moment when he last could
have said exactly where he had been born. He was now weeks and months,
maybe a year, since he became confused about his age and was never able
to straighten it out again, so that he told Grandfather that he did not
know within a year on either side just how old he was. So he knew
neither where he had come from nor where he was nor why. He was just
there, surrounded by the faces, almost all the faces which he had ever
known (though the number of them was decreasing, thinning out, despite
the efforts of the unmarried sister who pretty soon, so he told
Grandfather, and still without any wedding had another baby, decreasing
because of the climate, the warmth, the dampness) living in a cabin that
was almost a replica of the mountain one except that it didnt sit up in
the bright wind but sat instead beside a big flat river that sometimes
showed no current at all and even sometimes ran backward, where his
sisters and brothers seemed to take sick after supper and the before the
next meal, where regiments of niggers with white men watching them
planted and raised things that he had never heard of. The old man did
something besides drink now, at least, he would leave the cabin after
breakfast and return sober to supper, and he fed them somehow. And the
man was there who owned all the land and the niggers and apparently the
white men who superintended the work, and who lived in the biggest house
he had ever seen and who spent most of the afternoon (he told how he
would creep up among the tangled shrubbery of the lawn and lie hidden
and watch the man) in a barrel stave hammock between two trees, with his
shoes off, and a nigger who wore every day better clothes than he or his
father and sisters had ever owned and ever expected to, who did nothing
else but fan him and bring him drinks. And he (he was eleven or twelve
or thirteen now because this was where he realized that he had
irrevocably lost count of his age) would lie there all afternoon while
the sisters would come from time to time to the door of the cabin two
miles away and scream at him for wood or water, watching that man who
not only had shoes in the summertime too, but didnt even have to wear
them.

But he still didnt envy the man he was watching. He coveted the shoes,
and probably he would have liked for his father to have a broadcloth
monkey to hand him the jug and to carry the wood and water into the
cabin for his sisters to wash and cook with and keep the house warm so
that he himself would not have to do it. Maybe he even realized,
understood the pleasure it would have given his sisters for their
neighbors (other whites like them, who lived in other cabins not quite
as well built and not at all as well kept and preserved as the ones the
nigger slaves lived in but still nimbused with freedoms bright aura,
which the slave quarters were not for all their sound roofs and
whitewash) to see them being waited on. Because he had not only not lost
the innocence yet, he had not yet discovered that he possessed it. He no
more envied the man than he would have envied a mountain man who
happened to own a fine rifle. He would have coveted the rifle, but he
would himself have supported and confirmed the owners pride and
pleasure in its ownership because he could not have conceived of the
owner taking such crass advantage of the luck which gave the rifle to
him rather than to another as to say to other men: _Because I own this
rifle, my arms and legs and blood and bones are superior to yours_
except as the victorious outcome of a fight with rifles: and how in the
world could a man fight another man with dressed-up niggers and the fact
that he could lie in a hammock all afternoon with his shoes off? and
what in the world would he be fighting for if he did? He didnt even
know he was innocent that day when his father sent him to the big house
with the message. He didnt remember (or did not say) what the message
was, apparently he still didnt know exactly just what his father did
(or maybe was supposed to do), what work the old man had in relation to
the plantation. He was a boy either thirteen or fourteen, he didnt know
which, in garments his father had got from the plantation commissary and
had worn out and which one of the sisters had patched and cut down to
fit him, and he was no more conscious of his appearance in them or of
the possibility that anyone else would be than he was of his skin,
following the road and turning into the gate and following the drive up
past where still more niggers with nothing to do all day but plant
flowers and trim grass were working, and so to the house, the portico,
the front door, thinking how at last he was going to see the inside of
it, see what else a man was bound to own who could have a special nigger
to hand him his liquor and pull off his shoes that he didnt even need
to wear, never for one moment thinking but what the man would be as
pleased to show him the balance of his things as the mountain man would
have been to show the powder horn and bullet mold that went with the
rifle. Because he was still innocent. He knew it without being aware
that he did; he told Grandfather how, before the monkey nigger who came
to the door had finished saying what he said, he seemed to kind of
dissolve and a part of him turn and rush back through the two years they
had lived there, like when you pass through a room fast and look at all
the objects in it and you turn and go back through the room again and
look at all the objects from the other side and you find out you had
never seen them before, rushing back through those two years and seeing
a dozen things that had happened and he hadnt even seen them before:
the certain flat level silent way his older sisters and the other white
women of their kind had of looking at niggers, not with fear or dread
but with a kind of speculative antagonism not because of any known fact
or reason but inherited, by both white and black, the sense, effluvium
of it passing between the white women in the doors of the sagging cabins
and the niggers in the road and which was not quite explainable by the
fact that the niggers had better clothes, and which the niggers did not
return as antagonism or in any sense of dare or taunt but through the
very fact that they were apparently oblivious of it, too oblivious of
it. You knew that you could hit them, he told Grandfather, and they
would not hit back or even resist. But you did not want to, because they
(the niggers) were not it, not what you wanted to hit; that you knew
when you hit them you would just be hitting a childs toy balloon with a
face painted on it, a face slick and smooth and distended and about to
burst into laughing, and so you did not dare strike it because it would
merely burst and you would rather let it walk on out of your sight than
to have stood there in the loud laughing. He remembered talk at night
before the fire when they had company or had themselves gone visiting
after supper to another cabin, the voices of the women sober enough,
even calm, yet filled with a quality dark and sullen and only some man,
usually his father in drink, to break out into harsh recapitulation of
his own worth, the respect which his own physical prowess commanded from
his fellows, and the boy of either thirteen or fourteen or maybe twelve
knowing that the men and the women were talking about the same thing
though it had never once been mentioned by name, as when people talk
about privation without mentioning the siege, about sickness without
ever naming the epidemic. He remembered one afternoon when he and his
sister were walking along the road and he heard the carriage coming up
behind them and stepped off the road and then realized that his sister
was not going to give way to it, that she still walked in the middle of
the road with a sort of sullen implacability in the very angle of her
head and he shouted at her: and then it was all dust and rearing horses
and glinting harness buckles and wheel spokes; he saw two parasols in
the carriage and the nigger coachman in a plug hat shouting: Hoo dar,
gal! Git outen de way dar! and then it was over, gone: the carriage and
the dust, the two faces beneath the parasols glaring down at his sister:
then he was throwing vain clods of dirt after the dust as it spun on. He
knew now, while the monkey-dressed nigger butler kept the door barred
with his body while he spoke, that it had not been the nigger coachman
that he threw at at all, that it was the actual dust raised by the proud
delicate wheels, and just that vain. He thought of one night late when
his father came home, blundered into the cabin; he could smell the
whiskey even while still dulled with broken sleep, hearing that same
fierce exultation, vindication, in his fathers voice: We whupped one
of Pettibones niggers tonight and he roused at that, waked at that,
asking which one of Pettibones niggers and his father said he did not
know, had never seen the nigger before: and he asked what the nigger had
done and his father said, Hell fire, that goddam son of a bitch
Pettibones nigger. He must have meant the question the same way his
father meant the answer without knowing it then, since he had not yet
discovered innocence: no actual nigger, living creature, living flesh to
feel pain and writhe and cry out. He could even seem to see them: the
torch-disturbed darkness among trees, the fierce hysterical faces of the
white men, the balloon face of the nigger. Maybe the niggers hands
would be tied or held but that would be all right because they were not
the hands with which the balloon face would struggle and writhe for
freedom, not the balloon face: it was just poised among them, levitative
and slick with paper-thin distension. Then someone would strike the
balloon one single desperate and despairing blow and then he would seem
to see them fleeing, running, with all about them, overtaking them and
passing and going on and then returning to overwhelm them again, the
roaring waves of mellow laughter meaningless and terrifying and loud.
And now he stood there before that white door with the monkey nigger
barring it and looking down at him in his patched made-over jeans
clothes and no shoes, and I dont reckon he had even ever experimented
with a comb because that would be one of the things that his sisters
would keep hidden good. He had never thought about his own hair or
clothes or anybody elses hair or clothes until he saw that monkey
nigger, who through no doing of his own happened to have had the
felicity of being housebred in Richmond maybe, looking(Or maybe even
in Charleston, Shreve breathed.) at them and he never even
remembered what the nigger said, how it was the nigger told him, even
before he had had time to say what he came for, never to come to that
front door again but to go around to the back.

He didnt even remember leaving. All of a sudden he found himself
running and already some distance from the house, and not toward home.
He was not crying, he said. He wasnt even mad. He just had to think, so
he was going to where he could be quiet and think, and he knew where
that place was. He went into the woods. He says he did not tell himself
where to go: that his body, his feet, just went therea place where a
game trail entered a canebrake and an oak tree had fallen across it and
made a kind of cave where he kept an iron griddle that he would cook
small game on sometimes. He said he crawled back into the cave and sat
with his back against the uptorn roots, and thought. Because he couldnt
get it straight yet. He couldnt even realize yet that his trouble, his
impediment, was innocence because he would not be able to realize that
until he got it straight. So he was seeking among what little he had to
call experience for something to measure it by, and he couldnt find
anything. He had been told to go around to the back door even before he
could state his errand, who had sprung from a people whose houses didnt
have back doors but only windows and anyone entering or leaving by a
window would be either hiding or escaping, neither of which he was
doing. In fact, he had actually come on business, in the good faith of
business which he had believed that all men accepted. Of course he had
not expected to be invited in to eat a meal since time, the distance
from one cooking pot to the next, did not need to be measured in hours
or days; perhaps he had not expected to be asked into the house at all.
But he did expect to be listened to because he had come, been sent, on
some business which, even though he didnt remember what it was and
maybe at the time (he said) he might not even have comprehended, was
certainly connected somehow with the plantation that supported and
endured that smooth white house and that smooth white brass-decorated
door and the very broadcloth and linen and silk stockings the monkey
nigger stood in to tell him to go around to the back before he could
even state the business. It was like he might have been sent with a lump
of lead or even a few molded bullets so that the man who owned the fine
rifle could shoot it, and the man came to the door and told him to leave
the bullets on a stump at the edge of the woods, not even letting him
come close enough to look at the rifle.

Because he was not mad. He insisted on that to Grandfather. He was just
thinking, because he knew that something would have to be done about it;
he would have to do something about it in order to live with himself for
the rest of his life and he could not decide what it was because of that
innocence which he had just discovered he had, which (the innocence, not
the man, the tradition) he would have to compete with. He had nothing to
compare and gauge it by but the rifle analogy, and it would not make
sense by that. He was quite calm about it, he said, sitting there with
his arms around his knees in his little den beside the game trail where
more than once when the wind was right he had seen deer pass within ten
feet of him, arguing with himself quietly and calmly while both debaters
agreed that if there were only someone else, some older and smarter
person to ask. But there was not, there was only himself, the two of
them inside that one body, arguing quiet and calm: _But I can shoot
him_. (Not the monkey nigger. It was not the nigger anymore than it had
been the nigger that his father had helped to whip that night. The
nigger was just another balloon face slick and distended with that
mellow loud and terrible laughing so that he did not dare to burst it,
looking down at him from within the half-closed door during that instant
in which, before he knew it, something in him had escaped andhe unable
to close the eyes of itwas looking out from within the balloon face
just as the man who did not even have to wear the shoes he owned, whom
the laughter which the balloon held barricaded and protected from such
as he, looked out from whatever invisible place he (the man) happened to
be at the moment, at the boy outside the barred door in his patched
garments and splayed bare feet, looking through and beyond the boy, he
himself seeing his own father and sisters and brothers as the owner, the
rich man (not the nigger) must have been seeing them all the timeas
cattle, creatures, heavy and without grace, brutely evacuated into a
world without hope or purpose for them, who would in turn spawn with
brutish and vicious prolixity, populate, double treble and compound,
fill space and earth with a race whose future would be a succession of
cut-down and patched and made-over garments bought on exorbitant credit
because they were white people, from stores where niggers were given the
garments free, with for sole heritage that expression on a balloon face
bursting with laughter which had looked out at some unremembered and
nameless progenitor who had knocked at a door when he was a little boy
and had been told by a nigger to go around to the back): _But I can
shoot him_: he argued with himself and the other: _No. That wouldnt do
no good_: and the first: _What shall we do then?_ and the other: _I dont
know_: and the first: _But I can shoot him. I could slip right up there
through them bushes and lay there until he come out to lay in the
hammock and shoot him_: and the other: _No. That wouldnt do no good_:
and the first: _Then what shall we do?_ and the other: _I dont know._

Now he was hungry. It was before dinner when he went to the big house,
and now there was no sun at all where he crouched though he could still
see sun in the tops of the trees around him. But his stomach had already
told him it was late and that it would be later still when he reached
home. And then he said he began to think _Home_. _Home_ and that he
thought at first that he was trying to laugh and that he kept on telling
himself it was laughing even after he knew better; home, as he came out
of the woods and approached it, still hidden yet, and looked at itthe
rough partly rotten log walls, the sagging roof whose missing shingles
they did not replace but just set pans and buckets under the leaks, the
lean-to room which they used for kitchen and which was all right because
in good weather it didnt even matter that it had no chimney since they
did not attempt to use it at all when it rained, and his sister pumping
rhythmic up and down above a washtub in the yard, her back toward him,
shapeless in a calico dress and a pair of the old mans shoes unlaced
and flapping about her bare ankles and broad in the beam as a cow, the
very labor she was doing brutish and stupidly out of all proportion to
its reward: the very primary essence of labor, toil, reduced to its
crude absolute which only a beast could and would endure; and now (he
said) the thought striking him for the first time as to what he would
tell his father when the old man asked him if he had delivered the
message, whether he would lie or not, since if he did lie he would be
found out maybe at once, since probably the man had already sent a
nigger down to see why whatever it was his father had failed to do was
not done, and had sent the excuse forgranted that that was what his
errand to the house had been, which (granted his old man) it probably
was. But it didnt happen at once because his father was not at home
yet. So it was only the sister, as if she had been waiting not for the
wood but just for him to return, for the opportunity to use her vocal
cords, nagging at him to fetch the wood and he not refusing, not
objecting, just not hearing her, paying any attention to her because he
was still thinking. Then the old man came and the sister told on him and
the old man made him fetch the wood: and still nothing said about the
errand while they ate supper nor when he went and lay down on the pallet
where he slept and where he went to bed by just lying down, only not to
sleep now, just lying there with his hands under his head and still
nothing said about it, and he still not knowing if he was going to lie
or not. Because, he said to Grandfather, the terrible part of it had not
occurred to him yet, he just lay there while the two of them argued
inside of him, speaking in orderly turn, both calm, even leaning
backward to be calm and reasonable and unrancorous: _But I can kill
him.No. That wouldnt do no goodThen what shall we do about it?I
dont know_: and he just listening, not especially interested, he said,
hearing the two of them without listening. Because what he was thinking
about now he hadnt asked for. It was just there, natural in a boy, a
child, and he not paying any attention to it either because it was what
a boy would have thought, and he knew that to do what he had to do in
order to live with himself he would have to think it out straight as a
man would, thinking _The nigger never give me a chance to tell him what
it was and so he_ (not the nigger now either) _wont know it and whatever
it is wont get done and he wont know it aint done until too late so he
will get paid back that much for what he set that nigger to do and if it
only was to tell him that the stable, the house, was on fire and the
nigger wouldnt even let me tell him, warn him._ And then he said that
all of a sudden it was not thinking, it was something shouting it almost
loud enough for his sisters on the other pallet and his father in the
bed with the two youngest and filling the room with alcohol snoring, to
hear too: _He never even give me a chance to say it_: it too fast, too
mixed up to be thinking, it all kind of shouting at him at once, boiling
out and over him like the nigger laughing: _He never give me a chance to
say it and Pap never asked me if I told him or not and so he cant even
know that Pap sent him any message and so whether he got it or not cant
even matter, not even to Pap; I went up to that door for that nigger to
tell me never to come to that front door again and I not only wasnt
doing any good to him by telling it or any harm to him by not telling
it, there aint any good or harm either in the living world that I can do
to him._ It was like that, he said, like an explosiona bright glare
that vanished and left nothing, no ashes nor refuse; just a limitless
flat plain with the severe shape of his intact innocence rising from it
like a monument; that innocence instructing him as calm as the others
had ever spoken, using his own rifle analogy to do it with, and when it
said _them_ in place of _he_ or _him_, it meant more than all the human
puny mortals under the sun that might lie in hammocks all afternoon with
their shoes off: He thought If you were fixing to combat them that had
the fine rifles, the first thing you would do would be to get yourself
the nearest thing to a fine rifle you could borrow or steal or make,
wouldnt it? and he said Yes. But this aint a question of rifles. So
to combat them you have got to have what they have that made them do
what the man did. You got to have land and niggers and a fine house to
combat them with. You see? and he said Yes again. He left that night.
He waked before day and departed just like he went to bed: by rising
from the pallet and tiptoeing out of the house. He never saw any of his
family again.

He went to the West Indies. Quentin had not moved, not even to raise
his head from its attitude of brooding bemusement upon the open letter
which lay on the open text book, his hands lying on the table before him
on either side of the book and the letter, one half of which slanted
upward from the transverse crease without support, as if it had learned
half the secret of levitation. That was how Sutpen said it. He and
Grandfather were sitting on a log now because the dogs had faulted. That
is, they had treeda tree from which he (the architect) could not have
escaped yet which he had undoubtedly mounted because they found the
sapling pole with his suspenders still knotted about one end of it that
he had used to climb the tree, though at first they could not understand
why the suspenders, and it was three hours before they comprehended that
the architect had used architecture, physics, to elude them as a man
always falls back upon what he knows best in a crisisthe murderer upon
murder, the thief thieving, the liar lying. He (the architect) knew
about the wild negroes even if he couldnt have known that Sutpen would
get dogs; he had chosen that tree and hauled that pole up after him and
calculated stress and distance and trajectory and had crossed a gap to
the next nearest tree that a flying squirrel could not have crossed and
traveled from there on from tree to tree for almost half a mile before
he put foot on the ground again. It was three hours before one of the
wild niggers (the dogs wouldnt leave the tree; they said he was in it)
found where he had come down. So he and Grandfather sat on the log and
talked, and one of the wild niggers went back to camp for grub and the
rest of the whiskey and they blew the other men in with horns and they
ate, and he told Grandfather some more of it while they waited.

He went to the West Indies. Thats how Sutpen said it: not how he
managed to find where the West Indies were nor where ships departed from
to go there, nor how he got to where the ships were and got in one, nor
how he liked the sea, nor about the hardships of a sailors life and it
must have been hardship indeed for him, a boy of fourteen or fifteen who
had never seen the ocean before, going to sea in 1823. He just said, So
I went to the West Indies, sitting there on the log with Grandfather
while the dogs still bayed the tree where they believed the architect
was because he would have to be theresaying it just like that day
thirty years later when he sat in Grandfathers office (in his fine
clothes now, even though they were a little soiled and worn with three
years of war, with money to rattle in his pocket and his beard at its
prime too: beard, body and intellect at that peak which all the
different parts that make a man reach, where he can say _I did all that
I set out to do and I could stop here if I wanted to and no man to chide
me with sloth, not even myself_and maybe this the instant which Fate
always picks out to blackjack you, only the peak feels so sound and
stable that the beginning of the falling is hidden for a little
whilesaying it with his head flung up a little in that attitude that
nobody ever knew exactly who he had aped it from or if he did not
perhaps learn it too from the same book out of which he taught himself
the words, the bombastic phrases with which Grandfather said he even
asked you for a match for his cigar or offered you the cigarand there
was nothing of vanity, nothing comic in it either Grandfather said,
because of that innocence which he had never lost, because after it
finally told him what to do that night he forgot about it and didnt
know that he still had it) and he told Grandfathertold him, mind; not
excusing, asking for no pity; not explaining, asking for no exculpation:
just told Grandfather how he had put his first wife aside like
eleventh- and twelfth-century kings did: I found that she was not and
could never be, through no fault of her own, adjunctive or incremental
to the design which I had in mind, so I provided for her and put her
aside.telling Grandfather in that same tone while they sat on the log
waiting for the niggers to come back with the other guests and the
whiskey: So I went to the West Indies. I had had some schooling during
a part of one winter, enough to have learned something about them, to
realize that they would be most suitable to the expediency of my
requirements. He didnt remember how he came to go to the school. That
is, why his father decided all of a sudden to send him, what nebulous
vision or shape might have evolved out of the fog of alcohol and
nigger-beating and scheming to avoid work which his old man called his
mindthe image not of ambition nor glory, not to see his son better
himself for his own sake, probably not even some blind instant of revolt
against that same house whose roof had leaked on probably a hundred
families like his which had come and lived beneath it and vanished and
left no trace, nothing, not even rags and broken crockery, but was
probably mere vindictive envy toward one or two men, planters, whom he
had to see every now and then. Anyway, he was sent to school for about
three months one winteran adolescent boy of thirteen or fourteen in a
room full of children three or four years younger than he and three or
four years further advanced, and he not only probably bigger than the
teacher (the kind of teacher that would be teaching a one-room country
school in a nest of Tidewater plantations) but a good deal more of a
man, who probably brought into the school with him along with his sober
watchful mountain reserve a good deal of latent insubordination that he
would not be aware of any more than he would be aware at first that the
teacher was afraid of him. It would not be intractability and maybe you
couldnt call it pride either, but maybe just the self-reliance of
mountains and solitude, since some of his blood at least (his mother was
a mountain woman, a Scottish woman who, so he told Grandfather, never
did quite learn to speak English) had been bred in mountains, but which,
whatever it was, was that which forbade him to condescend to memorize
dry sums and such but which did permit him to listen when the teacher
read aloud.Sent to school, where, he told Grandfather, I learned
little save that most of the deeds, good and bad both, incurring
opprobrium or plaudits or reward either, within the scope of mans
abilities, had already been performed and were to be learned about only
from books. So I listened when he would read to us. I realize now that
on most of these occasions he resorted to reading aloud only when he saw
that the moment had come when his entire school was on the point of
rising and leaving the room. But whatever the reason, he read to us and
I anyway listened, though I did not know that in that listening I was
equipping myself better for what I should later design to do than if I
had learned all the addition and subtraction in the book. That was how I
learned of the West Indies. Not where they were, though if I had known
at the time that that knowledge would someday serve me, I would have
learned that too. What I learned was that there was a place called the
West Indies to which poor men went in ships and became rich, it didnt
matter how, so long as that man was clever and courageous: the latter of
which I believed that I possessed, the former of which I believed that,
if it were to be learned by energy and will in the school of endeavor
and experience, I should learn. I remember how I remained one afternoon
when school was out and waited for the teacher, waylaid him; he was a
smallish man who always looked dusty, as if he had been born and lived
all his life in attics and store rooms. I recall how he started back
when he saw me and how I thought at the time that if I were to strike
him there would be no resulting outcry but merely the sound of the blow
and a puff of dust in the air as when you strike a rug hanging from a
line. I asked him if it were true, if what he had read us about the men
who got rich in the West Indies were true. Why not? he answered,
starting back. Didnt you hear me read it from the book?How do I
know that what you read was in the book? I said. I was that green, that
countrified, you see. I had not then learned to read my own name;
although I had been attending the school for almost three months, I
daresay I knew no more than I did when I entered the schoolroom for the
first time. But I had to know, you see. Perhaps a man builds for his
future in more ways than one, builds not only toward the body which will
be his tomorrow or next year, but toward actions and the subsequent
irrevocable courses of resultant action which his weak senses and
intellect cannot foresee but which ten or twenty or thirty years from
now he will take, will have to take in order to survive the act. Perhaps
it was that instinct and not I who grasped one of his arms as he drew
back (I did not actually doubt him. I think that even then, even at my
age, I realized that he could not have invented it, that he lacked that
something which is necessary in a man to enable him to fool even a child
by lying. But you see, I had to be sure, had to take whatever method
that came to my hand to make sure. And there was nothing else to hand
except him) glaring at me and beginning to struggle, and I holding him
and sayingI was quite calm, quite calm; I just had to knowsaying,
Suppose I went there and found out that it was not so? and he
shrieking now, shouting Help! Help! so that I let him go. So when the
time came when I realized that to accomplish my design I should need
first of all and above all things money in considerable quantities and
in the quite immediate future, I remembered what he had read to us and I
went to the West Indies.

Then the other guests began to ride up, and after a while the niggers
came back with the coffee pot and a deer haunch and the whiskey (and one
bottle of champagne which they had overlooked, Grandfather said) and
Sutpen stopped talking for a while. He didnt tell anymore of it until
they had eaten and were sitting around smoking while the niggers and the
dogs made casts in all directions. They had to drag the dogs away from
the tree, but especially away from the sapling pole with the architects
suspenders tied to it, as if it was not only that the pole was the last
thing the architect had touched but it was the thing his exultation had
touched when he saw another chance to elude them, and so it was not only
the man but the exultation too which the dogs smelled that made them
wild. The nigger and the dogs were getting further and further away
until just before sundown one of the niggers whooped and he (he hadnt
spoken for some time, Grandfather said, lying there on one elbow, in the
fine boots and the only pants he had and the shirt he had put on when he
came out of the mud and washed himself off after he realized that he
would have to hunt the architect down himself if he wanted him back
alive probably, not talking himself and maybe not even listening while
the men talked about cotton and politics, just smoking the cigar
Grandfather had given him and looking at the fire embers and maybe
making that West Indian voyage again that he had made when he was
fourteen and didnt even know where he was going or if he would ever get
there or not, no more way of knowing whether the men who said the ship
was going there were lying or not than he had of knowing whether or not
the school teacher was telling the truth about what was in the book. And
he never told whether the voyage was hard or not, how much he must have
had to endure to make it. But then he believed that all that was
necessary was courage and shrewdness and the one he knew he had and the
other he believed he could learn if it were to be taught, and it
probably was the hardship of the voyage which comforted him and that the
men who said the ship was going to the West Indies had not lied to him,
because at that time, Grandfather said, he probably could not have
believed in anything that was easy) he said, There it is and got up
and they all went on and found where the architect had come back to the
ground again, with a gain of almost three hours. So they had to go fast
now and there wasnt much time to talk, or at least, Grandfather said,
he did not appear to intend to resume. Then the sun went down and the
other men had to start back to town; they all went except Grandfather,
because he wanted to listen some more. So he sent word in by one of the
others (he was not married then either) that he would not be home, and
he and Sutpen went on until the light failed. Two of the niggers (they
were thirteen miles from Sutpens camp then) had already gone back to
get blankets and more grub. Then it was dark and the niggers began to
light pine knots and they went on for a little while yet, gaining what
they could now since they knew that the architect would have had to den
soon after dark to keep from traveling in a circle. That was how
Grandfather remembered it: he and Sutpen leading their horses (he would
look back now and then and see the horses eyes shining in the torch
light and the horses heads tossing and the shadows slipping along their
shoulders and flanks) and the dogs and the niggers (the niggers mostly
still naked except for a pair of pants here and there) with the pine
torches smoking and flaring above them and the red light on their round
heads and arms and the mud they wore in the swamp to keep the mosquitoes
off dried hard and shiny, glinting like glass or china and the shadows
they cast taller than they were at one moment then gone the next and
even the trees and brakes and thickets there one moment and gone the
next though you knew all the time that they were still there because you
could feel them with your breathing, as though, invisible, they pressed
down and condensed the invisible air you breathed. And he said how
Sutpen was talking about it again, telling him again before he realized
that this was some more of it, and he said how he thought there was
something about a mans destiny (or about the man) that caused the
destiny to shape itself to him like his clothes did, like the same coat
that new might have fitted a thousand men, yet after one man has worn it
for a while it fits no one else and you can tell it anywhere you see it
even if all you see is a sleeve or a lapel: so that his (the
demons, Shreve said) destiny had fitted itself to him, to his
innocence, his pristine aptitude for platform drama and childlike heroic
simplicity, just as the fine broadcloth uniform which you could have
seen on ten thousand men during those four years, which he wore when he
came in the office on that afternoon thirty years later, had fitted
itself to the swaggering of all his gestures and to the forensic
verbiage in which he stated calmly, with that frank innocence which we
call of a child except that a human child is the only living creature
that is never either frank or innocent, the most simple and the most
outrageous things. He was telling some more of it, was already into what
he was telling yet still without telling how he got to where he was, nor
even how what he was now involved in came to occur (he was obviously at
least twenty years old at the time he was telling about, crouching
behind a window in the dark and firing the muskets through it which
someone else loaded and handed to him), getting himself and Grandfather
both into that besieged Haitian room as simply as he got himself to the
West Indies by saying that he decided to go to the West Indies and so he
went there. This anecdote was no deliberate continuation of the other
one but was merely called to his mind by the picture of the niggers and
torches in front of them; he not telling how he got there, what had
happened during the six years between that day when he had decided to go
to the West Indies and become rich, and this night when, overseer or
foreman or something to a French sugar planter, he was barricade in the
house with the planters family. And now Grandfather said there was the
first mentiona shadow that almost emerged for a moment and then faded
again but not completely awayof the (Its a girl, Shreve said.
Dont tell me. Just go on.) woman whom he was to tell Grandfather
thirty years afterward he had found unsuitable to his purpose and so put
aside, though providing for her and there were a few frightened half
breed servants with them who he would have to turn from the window from
time to time and kick and curse into helping the girl load the muskets
which he and the planter fired through the windows. And I reckon
Grandfather was saying Wait, wait for Gods sake wait about like you
are, until he finally did stop and back up and start over again with at
least some regard for cause and effect even if none for logical sequence
and continuity. Or maybe it was the fact that they were sitting again
now, having decided that they had gone far enough for that night, and
the niggers had made camp and cooked supper and they (he and
Grandfather) drank some of the whiskey and ate and then sat before the
fire drinking some more of the whiskey and he telling it all over and
still it was not absolutely clearthe how and the why he was there and
what he wassince he was not talking about himself. He was telling a
story. He was not bragging about something he had done; he was just
telling a story about something a man named Thomas Sutpen had
experienced, which would still have been the same story if the man had
had no name at all, if it had been told about any man or no man over
whiskey at night.

That may have been what slowed him down. But it was not enough to
clarify the story much. He still was not recounting to Grandfather the
career of somebody named Thomas Sutpen. Grandfather said the only
mention he ever made to those six or seven years which must have existed
somewhere, must have actually occurred, was about the patois he had to
learn in order to oversee the plantation, and the French he had to
learn, maybe not to get engaged to be married, but which he would
certainly need to be able to repudiate the wife after he had already got
herhow, so he told Grandfather, he had believed that courage and
shrewdness would be enough but found that he was wrong and how sorry he
was that he had not taken the schooling along with the West Indian lore
when he discovered that all people did not speak the same tongue and
realized that he would not only need courage and skill, he would have to
learn to speak a new language, else that design to which he had
dedicated himself would die stillborn. So he learned the language just
like he learned to be a sailor I reckon, because Grandfather asked him
why he didnt get himself a girl to live with and learn it the easy way
and Grandfather said how he sat there with the firelight on his face and
the beard and his eyes quiet and sort of bright, and saidand
Grandfather said it was the only time he ever knew him to say anything
quiet and simple: On this night I am speaking of (and until my first
marriage, I might add) I was still a virgin. You will probably not
believe that, and if I were to try to explain it you would disbelieve me
more than ever. So I will only say that that too was a part of the
design which I had in my mind and Grandfather said, Why shouldnt I
believe it? and he looking at Grandfather still with that quiet bright
expression about the eyes, saying, But do you? Surely you dont hold me
in such small contempt as to believe that at twenty I could neither have
suffered temptation nor offered it? and Grandfather said, Youre
right. I shouldnt believe it. But I do. So it was no tale about women,
and certainly not about love: the woman, the girl, just that shadow
which could load a musket but could not have been trusted to fire one
out the window that night (or the seven or eight nights while they
huddled in the dark and watched from the windows the barns or granaries
or whatever it is you harvest sugar into, and the fields too, blazing
and smoking: he said how you could smell it, you could smell nothing
else, the rank sweet rich smell as if the hatred and the implacability,
the thousand secret dark years which had created the hatred and
implacability, had intensified the smell of the sugar: and Grandfather
said how he remembered then that he had seen Sutpen each time decline
sugar for his coffee and so he (Grandfather) knew why now but he asked
anyway to be sure and Sutpen told him it was true; that he had not been
afraid until after the fields and barns were all burned and they had
even forgot about the smell of the burning sugar, but that he had never
been able to bear sugar since)the girl just emerging for a second of
the telling, in a single word almost, so that Grandfather said it was
like he had just seen her too for a second by the flash of one of the
musketsa bent face, a single cheek, a chin for an instant beyond a
curtain of fallen hair, a white slender arm raised, a delicate hand
clutching a ramrod, and that was all. No more detail and information
about that than about how he got from the field, his overseeing, into
the besieged house when the niggers rushed at him with their machetes,
than how he got from the rotting cabin in Virginia to the fields he
oversaw: and this, Grandfather said, was more incredible to him than the
getting there from Virginia, because that did infer time, a space the
getting across which did indicate something of leisureliness since time
is longer than any distance, while the other, the getting from the
fields into the barricaded house, seemed to have occurred with a sort of
violent abrogation which must have been almost as short as his telling
about ita very condensation of time which was the gauge of its own
violence, and he telling it in that pleasant faintly forensic anecdotal
manner apparently just as he remembered it, was impressed by it through
detached and impersonal interest and curiosity which even fear (that
once when he mentioned fear by that same inverse process of speaking of
a time when he was not afraid, before he became afraid, he put it)
failed to leaven very much. Because he was not afraid until after it was
all over, Grandfather said, because that was all it was to hima
spectacle, something to be watched because he might not have a chance to
see it again, since his innocence still functioned and he not only did
not know what fear was until afterward, he did not even know that at
first he was not terrified; did not even know that he had found the
place where money was to be had quick if you were courageous and shrewd
(he did not mean shrewdness, Grandfather said. What he meant was
unscrupulousness only he didnt know that word because it would not have
been in the book from which the school teacher read. Or maybe that was
what he meant by courage, Grandfather said) but where high mortality was
concomitant with the money and the sheen on the dollars was not from
gold but from blooda spot of earth which might have been created and
set aside by Heaven itself, Grandfather said, as a theater for violence
and injustice and bloodshed and all the satanic lusts of human greed and
cruelty, for the last despairing fury of all the pariah-interdict and
all the doomeda little island set in a smiling and fury-lurked and
incredible indigo sea, which was the halfway point between what we call
the jungle and what we call civilization, halfway between the dark
inscrutable continent from which the black blood, the black bones and
flesh and thinking and remembering and hopes and desires, was ravished
by violence, and the cold known land to which it was doomed, the
civilized land and people which had expelled some of its own blood and
thinking and desires that had become too crass to be faced and borne
longer, and set it homeless and desperate on the lonely oceana little
lost island in a latitude which would require ten thousand years of
equatorial heritage to bear its climate, a soil manured with black blood
from two hundred years of oppression and exploitation until it sprang
with an incredible paradox of peaceful greenery and crimson flowers and
sugar cane sapling size and three times the height of a man and a little
bulkier of course but valuable pound for pound almost with silver ore,
as if nature held a balance and kept a book and offered a recompense for
the torn limbs and outraged hearts even if man did not, the planting of
nature and man too watered not only by the wasted blood but breathed
over by the winds in which the doomed ships had fled in vain, out of
which the last tatter of sail had sunk into the blue sea, along which
the last vain despairing cry of woman or child had blown awaythe
planting of men too; the yet intact bones and brains in which the old
unsleeping blood that had vanished into the earth they trod still cried
out for vengeance. And he overseeing it, riding peacefully about on his
horse while he learned the language (that meager and fragile thread,
Grandfather said, by which the little surface corners and edges of mens
secret and solitary lives may be joined for an instant now and then
before sinking back into the darkness where the spirit cried for the
first time and was not heard and will cry for the last time and will not
be heard then either), not knowing that what he rode upon was a volcano,
hearing the air tremble and throb at night with the drums and the
chanting and not knowing that it was the heart of the earth itself he
heard, who believed (Grandfather said) that earth was kind and gentle
and that darkness was merely something you saw, or could not see in;
overseeing what he oversaw and not knowing that he was overseeing it,
making his daily expeditions from an armed citadel until the day itself
came. And he not telling that either, how that day happened, the steps
leading up to it because Grandfather said he apparently did not know,
comprehend, what he must have been seeing every day because of that
innocencea pigs bone with a little rotten flesh still clinging to it,
a few chicken feathers, a stained dirty rag with a few pebbles tied up
in it found on the old mans pillow one morning and none knew (least of
all, the planter himself who had been asleep on the pillow) how it had
come there because they learned at the same time that all the servants,
the half breeds, were missing, and he did not know until the planter
told him that the stains on the rag were neither dirt nor grease but
blood, nor that what he took to be the planters gallic rage was
actually fear, terror, and he just curious and quite interested because
he still looked upon the planter and the daughter both as foreigners. He
told Grandfather how until that first night of the siege he had not once
thought that he did not know the girls Christian name, whether he had
ever heard it or not. He also told Grandfather, dropped this into the
telling as you might flick the joker out of a pack of fresh cards
without being able to remember later whether you had removed the joker
or not, that the old mans wife had been a Spaniard, and so it was
Grandfather and not Sutpen who realized that until that first night of
the attack he had possibly not seen the girl as much as a dozen times.
The body of one of the half breeds was found at last; Sutpen found it,
hunted for it for two days without even knowing that what he was meeting
was a blank wall of black secret faces, a wall behind which almost
anything could be preparing to happen and, as he learned later, almost
anything was, and on the third day he found the body where he could not
possibly have missed it during the first hour of the first day if it had
been there. All the time he was speaking he was sitting on the log,
Grandfather said, telling it, making the gestures to tell it with, the
man Grandfather himself had seen fight naked chest to chest with one of
his wild niggers by the light of the campfire while his house was
building and who still fought with them by lantern light in the stable
after he had got at last that wife who would be adjunctive to the
forwarding of that design he had in mind, and no bones made about the
fighting either, no handshaking and gratulations while he washed the
blood off and donned his shirt because at the end of it the nigger would
be flat on his back with his chest heaving and another nigger throwing
water on him. He was sitting there on the log telling Grandfather how at
last he found the half breed, or what used to be the half breed, and so
began to comprehend that the situation might become serious; then the
house, the barricade, the five of themthe planter, the daughter, two
women servants and himselfshut up in it and the air filled with the
smoke and smell of burning cane and the glare and smoke of it on the sky
and the air throbbing and trembling with the drums and the chantingthe
little lost island beneath its down-cupped bowl of alternating day and
night like a vacuum into which no help could come, where not even winds
from the outer world came but only the trades, the same weary winds
blowing back and forth across it and burdened still with the weary
voices of murdered women and children homeless and graveless about the
isolating and solitary seawhile the two servants and the girl whose
Christian name he did not yet know loaded the muskets which he and the
father fired at no enemy but at the Haitian night itself, lancing their
little vain and puny flashes into the brooding and blood-weary and
throbbing darkness: and it the very time of year, the season between
hurricanes and any hope of rain. And he told how on the eighth night the
water gave out and something had to be done so he put the musket down
and went out and subdued them. That was how he told it: he went out and
subdued them, and when he returned he and the girl became engaged to
marry and Grandfather saying Wait wait sure enough now, saying, But
you didnt even know her; you told me that when the siege began you
didnt even know her name and he looked at Grandfather and said, Yes.
But you see, it took me some time to recover. Not how he did it. He
didnt tell that either, that of no moment to the story either; he just
put the musket down and had someone unbar the door and then bar it
behind him, and walked out into the darkness and subdued them, maybe by
yelling louder, maybe by standing, bearing more than they believed any
bones and flesh could or should (should, yes: that would be the terrible
thing: to find flesh to stand more than flesh should be asked to stand);
maybe at last they themselves turning in horror and fleeing from the
white arms and legs shaped like theirs and from which blood could be
made to spurt and flow as it could from theirs and containing an
indomitable spirit which should have come from the same primary fire
which theirs came from but which could not have, could not possibly
have. He showed Grandfather the scars, one of which, Grandfather said,
came pretty near leaving him that virgin for the rest of his life too.
And then daylight came with no drums in it for the first time in eight
days, and they emerged (probably the man and the daughter) and walked
across the burned land with the bright sun shining down on it as if
nothing had happened, walking now in what must have been an incredible
desolate solitude and peaceful quiet, and found him and brought him to
the house: and when he recovered he and the girl were engaged. Then he
stopped.

All right, Shreve said. Go on.

I said he stopped, Quentin said.

I heard you. Stopped what? How got engaged and then stopped, yet still
had a wife to repudiate later? You said he didnt remember how he got to
Haiti, and then he didnt remember how he got into the house with the
niggers surrounding it. Now are you going to tell me he didnt even
remember getting married? That he got engaged and then he decided he
would stop, only one day he found out he hadnt stopped but on the
contrary he was married? And all you called him was just a virgin?

He stopped talking, telling it, Quentin said. He had not moved,
talking apparently (if to anything) to the letter lying on the open book
on the table between his hands. Opposite him Shreve had filled the pipe
and smoked it out again. It lay again overturned, a scattering of white
ashes fanning out from the bowl, onto the table before his crossed naked
arms with which he appeared at the same time both to support and hug
himself, since although it was only eleven oclock the room was beginning
to cool toward that point where about midnight there would be only
enough heat in the radiators to keep the pipes from freezing, though (he
would not perform his deep-breathing in the open window tonight at all)
he had yet to go to the bedroom and return first with his bathrobe on
and next with his overcoat on top of the bathrobe and Quentins overcoat
on his arm. He just said that he was now engaged to be married Quentin
said, and then he stopped telling it. He just stopped, Grandfather
said, flat and final like that, like that was all there was, all there
could be to it, all of it that made good listening from one man to
another over whiskey at night. Maybe it was. His (Quentins) face was
lowered. He spoke still in that curious, that almost sullen flat tone
which had caused Shreve to watch him from the beginning with intent
detached speculation and curiosity, to watch him still from behind his
(Shreves) expression of cherubic and erudite amazement which the
spectacles intensified or perhaps actually created. Sutpen just got up
and looked at the whiskey bottle and said, No more tonight. Well get
to sleep; we want to get an early start tomorrow. Maybe we can catch him
before he limbers up.

But they didnt. It was late afternoon before they caught himthe
architect I meanand then only because he had hurt his leg trying to
architect himself across the river. But he made a mistake in the
calculation this time so the dogs and the niggers bayed him and the
niggers making the racket now as they hauled him out. Grandfather said
how maybe the niggers believed that by fleeing the architect had
voluntarily surrendered his status as interdict meat, had voluntarily
offered the gambit by fleeing, which the niggers had accepted by chasing
him and won by catching him, and that now they would be allowed to cook
and eat him, both victors and vanquished accepting this in the same
spirit of sport and sportsmanship and no rancor or hard feelings on
either side. All the men who had started the race yesterday had come
back except three, and the ones that returned had brought others, so
there were more of them now than when the race started, Grandfather
said. So they hauled him out of his cave under the river bank: a little
man with one sleeve missing from his frock coat and his flowered vest
ruined by water and mud where he had fallen in the river and one pants
leg ripped down so they could see where he had tied up his leg with a
piece of his shirt tail and the rag bloody and the leg swollen, and his
hat was completely gone. They never did find it so Grandfather gave him
a new hat the day he left when the house was finished. It was in
Grandfathers office and Grandfather said the architect took the new hat
and looked at it and burst into tears.a little harried wild-faced man
with a two-days stubble of beard, who came out of the cave fighting
like a wildcat, hurt leg and all, with the dogs barking and the niggers
whooping and hollering with deadly and merry anticipation, like they
were under the impression that since the race had lasted more than
twenty-four hours the rules would be automatically abrogated and they
would not have to wait to cook him until Sutpen waded in with a short
stick and beat niggers and dogs all away, leaving the architect standing
there, not scared worth a damn either, just panting a little and
Grandfather said a little sick in the face where the niggers had
mishandled his leg in the heat of the capture, and making them a speech
in French, a long one and so fast that Grandfather said probably another
Frenchman could not have understood all of it. But it sounded fine;
Grandfather said even heall of themcould tell that the architect was
not apologizing; it was fine, Grandfather said, and he said how Sutpen
turned toward him but he (Grandfather) was already approaching the
architect, holding out the bottle of whiskey already uncorked. And
Grandfather saw the eyes in the gaunt face, the eyes desperate and
hopeless but indomitable too, invincible too, not beaten yet by a damn
sight Grandfather said, and all that fifty-odd hours of dark and swamp
and sleeplessness and fatigue and no grub and nowhere to go and no hope
of getting there: just a will to endure and a foreknowing of defeat but
not beat yet by a damn sight: and he took the bottle in one of his
little dirty coon-like hands and raised the other hand and even fumbled
about his head for a second before he remembered that the hat was gone,
then flung the hand up in a gesture that Grandfather said you simply
could not describe, that seemed to gather all misfortune and defeat that
the human race ever suffered into a little pinch in his fingers like
dust and fling it backward over his head, and raised the bottle and
bowed first to Grandfather then to all the other men sitting their
horses in a circle and looking at him, and then he took not only the
first drink of neat whiskey he ever took in his life but the drink of it
that he could no more have conceived himself taking than the Brahmin can
believe that that situation can conceivably arise in which he will eat
dog.

Quentin ceased. At once Shreve said, All right. Dont bother to say he
stopped talking now; just go on. But Quentin did not continue at
oncethe flat, curiously dead voice, the downcast face, the relaxed
body not stirring except to breathe; the two of them not moving except
to breathe, both young, both born within the same year: the one in
Alberta, the other in Mississippi; born half a continent apart yet
joined, connected after a fashion in a sort of geographical
transubstantiation by that Continental Trough, that River which runs not
only through the physical land of which it is the geologic umbilical,
not only runs through the spiritual lives of the beings within its
scope, but is very Environment itself which laughs at degrees of
latitude and temperature, though some of these beings, like Shreve, have
never seen itthe two of them who four months ago had never laid eyes
on one another yet who since had slept in the same room and eaten side
by side of the same food and used the same books from which to prepare
to recite in the same freshman courses, facing one another across the
lamplit table on which lay the fragile pandoras box of scrawled paper
which had filled with violent and unratiocinative djinns and demons this
snug monastic coign, this dreamy and heatless alcove of what we call the
best of thought. Just dont bother, Shreve said. Just get on with it.

That would take thirty years, Quentin said. It was thirty years
before Sutpen told Grandfather any more of it. Maybe he was too busy.
All his time for spare talking taken up with furthering that design
which he had in mind, and his only relaxation fighting his wild niggers
in the stable where the men could hitch their horses and come up from
the back and not be seen from the house because he was already married
now, his house finished and he already arrested for stealing it and
freed again so that was all settled, with a wife and two childrenno,
threein it and his land cleared and planted with the seed Grandfather
loaned him and him getting rich good and steady now

Yes, Shreve said; Mr Coldfield: what was that?

I dont know, Quentin said. Nobody ever did know for certain. It was
something about a bill of lading, some way he persuaded Mr Coldfield to
use his credit: one of those things that when they work you were smart
and when they dont you change your name and move to Texas: and, Father
said how Mr Coldfield must have sat back there in his little store and
watched his wagonload of stock double maybe every ten years or at least
not lose any ground and seen the chance to do that very same thing all
the time, only his conscience (not his courage: Father said he had
plenty of that) wouldnt let him. Then Sutpen came along and offered to
do it, he and Mr Coldfield to divide the loot if it worked, and he
(Sutpen) to take all the blame if it didnt. And Mr Coldfield let him.
Father said it was because Mr Coldfield did not believe it would work,
that they would get away with it, only he couldnt quit thinking about
it, and so when they tried it and it failed he (Mr Coldfield) would be
able to get it out of his mind then; and that when it did fail and they
were caught, Mr Coldfield would insist on taking his share of the blame
as penance and expiation for having sinned in his mind all those years.
Because Mr Coldfield never did believe it would work, so when he saw
that it was going to work, had worked, the least thing he could do was
to refuse to take his share of the profits; that when he saw that it had
worked it was his conscience he hated, not Sutpenhis conscience and
the land, the country which had created his conscience and then offered
the opportunity to have made all that money to the conscience which it
had created, which could do nothing but decline; hated that country so
much that he was even glad when he saw it drifting closer and closer to
a doomed and fatal war; that he would have joined the Yankee army,
Father said, only he was not a soldier and knew that he would either be
killed or die of hardship, and so he would not be present on that day
when the South would realize that it was now paying the price for having
erected its economic edifice not on the rock of stern morality but on
the shifting sands of opportunism and moral brigandage. So he chose the
only gesture he could think of to impress his disapproval on these who
should outlive the fighting and so participate in the remorse

Sure, Shreve said. Thats fine. But Sutpen. The design. Get on, now.

Yes, Quentin said. The design.Getting richer and richer. It must
have looked fine and clear ahead for him now: house finished, and even
bigger and whiter than the one he had gone to the door of that day and
the nigger came in his monkey clothes and told him to go to the back,
and he with his own brand of niggers even, which the man who lay in the
hammock with his shoes off didnt have, to cull one from and train him
to go to the door when his turn came for a little boy without any shoes
on and with his paps cut-down pants for clothes to come and knock on
it. Only Father said that that wasnt it now, that when he came to
Grandfathers office that day after the thirty years, and not trying to
excuse now anymore than he had tried in the bottom, that night when they
ran the architect, but just to explain now, trying hard to explain now
because now he was old and knew it, knew it was being old that he had to
talk against: time shortening ahead of him that could and would do
things to his chances and possibilities even if he had no more doubt of
his bones and flesh than he did of his will and courage, telling
Grandfather that the boy-symbol at the door wasnt it because the
boy-symbol was just the figment of the amazed and desperate child; that
now he would take that boy in where he would never again need to stand
on the outside of a white door and knock at it: and not at all for mere
shelter but so that that boy, that whatever nameless stranger, could
shut that door himself forever behind him on all that he had ever known,
and look ahead along the still undivulged light rays in which his
descendants who might not even ever hear his (the boys) name, waited to
be born without even having to know that they had once been riven
forever free from brutehood just as his own (Sutpens) children
were

Dont say its just me that sounds like your old man, Shreve said. But
go on. Sutpens children. Go on.

Yes, Quentin said. The two children thinking _Yes. Maybe we are both
Father. Maybe nothing ever happens once and is finished. Maybe happen is
never once but like ripples maybe on water after the pebble sinks, the
ripples moving on, spreading, the pool attached by a narrow umbilical
water-cord to the next pool which the first pool feeds, has fed, did
feed, let this second pool contain a different temperature of water, a
different molecularity of having seen, felt, remembered, reflect in a
different tone the infinite unchanging sky, it doesnt matter: that
pebbles watery echo whose fall it did not even see moves across its
surface too at the original ripple-space, to the old ineradicable rhythm
thinking Yes, we are both Father. Or maybe Father and I are both Shreve,
maybe it took Father and me both to make Shreve or Shreve and me both to
make Father or maybe Thomas Sutpen to make all of us._

Yes, the two children, the son and the daughter by sex and age so glib
to the design that he might have planned that too, by character mental
and physical so glib to it that he might have culled them out of the
celestial herd of seraphs and cherubim like he chose his twenty niggers
out of whatever swapping there must have been when he repudiated that
first wife and that child when he discovered that they would not be
adjunctive to the forwarding of the design. And Grandfather said there
was no conscience about that, that Sutpen sat in the office that
afternoon after thirty years and told him how his conscience had
bothered him somewhat at first but that he had argued calmly and
logically with his conscience until it was settled, just as he must have
argued with his conscience about his and Mr Coldfields bill of lading
(only probably not as long here, since time here would be pressing)
until that was settledhow he granted that by certain lights there was
injustice in what he did but that he had obviated that as much as lay in
his power by being aboveboard in the matter; that he could have simply
deserted her, could have taken his hat and walked out, but he did not:
and that he had what Grandfather would have to admit was a good and
valid claim, if not to the whole place which he alone had saved, as well
as the lives of all the white people on it, at least to that portion of
it which had been specifically described and deeded to him in the
marriage settlement which he had entered in good faith, with no
reservations as to his obscure origin and material equipment, while
there had been not only reservation but actual misrepresentation on
their part and misrepresentation of such a crass nature as to have not
only voided and frustrated without his knowing it the central motivation
of his entire design, but to have made an ironic delusion of all that he
had suffered and endured in the past and all that he could ever
accomplish in the future toward that designwhich claim he had
voluntarily relinquished, taking only the twenty niggers out of all he
might have claimed and which many another man in his place would have
insisted upon keeping and (in which contention) would have been
supported by both legal and moral sanction even if not the delicate one
of conscience: and Grandfather not saying Wait wait now because it was
that innocence again, that innocence which believed that the ingredients
of morality were like the ingredients of pie or cake and once you had
measured them and balanced them and mixed them and put them into the
oven it was all finished and nothing but pie or cake could come out.
Yes, sitting there in Grandfathers office trying to explain with that
patient amazed recapitulation, not to Grandfather and not to himself
because Grandfather said that his very calmness was indication that he
had long since given up any hope of ever understanding it, but trying to
explain to circumstance, to fate itself, the logical steps by which he
had arrived at a result absolutely and forever incredible, repeating the
clear and simple synopsis of his history (which he and Grandfather both
now knew) as if he were trying to explain it to an intractable and
unpredictable child:

You see, I had a design in my mind. Whether it was a good or a bad
design is beside the point; the question is, Where did I make the
mistake in it, what did I do or misdo in it, whom or what injure by it
to the extent which this would indicate. I had a design. To accomplish
it I should require money, a house, a plantation, slaves, a
familyincidentally of course, a wife. I set out to acquire these,
asking no favor of any man. I even risked my life at one time, as I told
you, though as I also told you I did not undertake this risk purely and
simply to gain a wife, though it did have that result. But that is
beside the point also: suffice that I had the wife, accepted her in good
faith, with no reservations about myself, and I expected as much from
them. I did not even demand, mind, as one of my obscure origin might
have been expected to do (or at least be condoned in the doing) out of
ignorance of gentility in dealing with gentleborn people. I did not
demand; I accepted them at their own valuation while insisting on my own
part upon explaining fully about myself and my progenitors: yet they
deliberately withheld from me the one fact which I have reason to know
they were aware would have caused me to decline the entire matter,
otherwise they would not have withheld it from mea fact which I did
not learn until after my son was born. And even then I did not act
hastily. I could have reminded them of these wasted years, these years
which would now leave me behind with my schedule not only the amount of
elapsed time which their number represented, but that compensatory
amount of time represented by their number which I should now have to
spend to advance myself once more to the point I had reached and lost.
But I did not. I merely explained how this new fact rendered it
impossible that this woman and child be incorporated in my design, and
following which, as I told you, I made no attempt to keep not only that
which I might consider myself to have earned at the risk of my life but
which had been given to me by signed testimonials, but on the contrary I
declined and resigned all right and claim to this in order that I might
repair whatever injustice I might be considered to have done by so
providing for the two persons whom I might be considered to have
deprived of anything I might later possess: and this was agreed to,
mind; agreed to between the two parties. And yet, and after more than
thirty years, more than thirty years after my conscience had finally
assured me that if I had done an injustice, I had done what I could to
rectify it and Grandfather not saying Wait now but saying,
hollering maybe even: Conscience? Conscience? Good God, man, what else
did you expect? Didnt the very affinity and instinct for misfortune of
a man who had spent that much time in a monastery even, let alone one
who had lived that many years as you lived them, tell you better than
that? didnt the dread and fear of females which you must have drawn in
with the primary mammalian milk teach you better? What kind of abysmal
and purblind innocence could that have been which someone told you to
call virginity? what conscience to trade with which would have warranted
you in the belief that you could have bought immunity from her for no
other coin but justice?

It was at this point that Shreve went to the bedroom and put on the
bathrobe. He did not say Wait, he just rose and left Quentin sitting
before the table, the open book and the letter, and went out and
returned in the robe and sat again and took up the cold pipe, though
without filling it anew or lighting it as it was. All right, he said.
So that Christmas Henry brought him home, into the house, and the demon
looked up and saw the face he believed he had paid off and discharged
twenty-eight years ago. Go on.

Yes, Quentin said. Father said he probably named him himself. Charles
Bon. Charles Good. He didnt tell Grandfather that he did, but
Grandfather believed he did, would have. That would have been a part of
the cleaning up, just as he would have done his share toward cleaning up
the exploded caps and musket cartridges after the siege if he hadnt
been sick (or maybe engaged); he would have insisted on it maybe, the
conscience again which could not allow her and the child any place in
the design even though he could have closed his eyes and, if not fooled
the rest of the world as they had fooled him, at least have frightened
any man out of speaking the secret aloudthe same conscience which
would not permit the child, since it was a boy, to bear either his name
or that of its maternal grandfather, yet which would also forbid him to
do the customary and provide a quick husband for the discarded woman and
so give his son an authentic name. He chose the name himself,
Grandfather believed, just as he named them allthe Charles Goods and
the Clytemnestras and Henry and Judith and all of themthat entire
fecundity of dragons teeth as father called it. And Father said

Your father, Shreve said. He seems to have got an awful lot of
delayed information awful quick, after having waited forty-five years.
If he knew all this, what was his reason for telling you that the
trouble between Henry and Bon was the octoroon woman?

He didnt know it then. Grandfather didnt tell him all of it either,
like Sutpen never told Grandfather quite all of it.

Then who did tell him?

I did. Quentin did not move, did not look up while Shreve watched him.
The day after weafter that night when we

Oh, Shreve said. After you and the old aunt. I see. Go on. And father
said

said how he must have stood there on the front gallery that
afternoon and waited for Henry and the friend Henry had been writing
home about all fall to come up the drive, and that maybe after Henry
wrote the name in the first letter Sutpen probably told himself it
couldnt be, that there was a limit even to irony beyond which it became
either just vicious but not fatal horseplay or harmless coincidence,
since Father said that even Sutpen probably knew that nobody yet ever
invented a name that somebody didnt own now or hadnt owned once: and
they rode up at last and Henry said, Father, this is Charles and
he (the demon, Shreve said) saw the face and knew that there
are situations where coincidence is no more than the little child that
rushes out onto a football field to take part in the game and the
players run over and around the unscathed head and go on and shock
together, and in the fury of the struggle for the facts called gain or
loss nobody even remembers the child nor saw who came and snatched it
back from dissolutionthat he stood there at his own door, just as he
had imagined, planned, designed, and sure enough and after fifty years
the forlorn nameless and homeless lost child came to knock at it and no
monkey-dressed nigger anywhere under the sun to come to the door and
order the child away; and Father said that even then, even though he
knew that Bon and Judith had never laid eyes on one another, he must
have felt and heard the designhouse, position, posterity and allcome
down like it had been built out of smoke, making no sound, creating no
rush of displaced air and not even leaving any debris. And he not
calling it retribution, no sins of the father come home to roost; not
even calling it bad luck, but just a mistake: that mistake which he
could not discover himself and which he came to Grandfather, not to
excuse but just to review the facts for an impartial (and Grandfather
said he believed, a legally trained) mind to examine and find and point
out to him. Not moral retribution you see: just an old mistake in fact
which a man of courage and shrewdness (the one of which he now knew he
possessed, the other of which he believed that he had now learned,
acquired) could still combat if he could only find out what the mistake
had been. Because he did not give up. He never did give up; Grandfather
said that his subsequent actions (the fact that for a time he did
nothing and so perhaps helped to bring about the very situation which he
dreaded) were not the result of any failing of courage or shrewdness or
ruthlessness, but were the result of his conviction that it had all come
from a mistake and until he discovered what that mistake had been he did
not intend to risk making another one.

So he invited Bon into the house, and for the two weeks of the vacation
(only it didnt take that long; Father said that probably Mrs Sutpen had
Judith and Bon already engaged from the moment she saw Bons name in
Henrys first letter) he watched Bon and Henry and Judith, or watched
Bon and Judith rather because he would have already known about Henry
and Bon from Henrys letters about him from the school; watched them for
two weeks, and did nothing. Then Henry and Bon went back to school and
now the nigger groom that fetched the mail back and forth each week
between Oxford and Sutpens Hundred brought letters to Judith now that
were not in Henrys hand (and that not necessary either, Father said,
because Mrs Sutpen was already covering the town and county both with
news of that engagement that Father said didnt exist yet) and still he
did nothing. He didnt do anything at all until spring was almost over
and Henry wrote that he was bringing Bon home with him to stay a day or
two before Bon went home. Then Sutpen went to New Orleans. Whether he
chose that time to go in order to get Bon and his mother together and
thrash the business out for good and all or not, nobody knows, just as
nobody knows whether he ever saw the mother or not while he was there,
if she received him or refused to receive him; or if she did and he
tried once more to come to terms with her, buy her off maybe with money
now, since Father said that a man who could believe that a scorned and
outraged and angry woman could be bought off with formal logic would
believe that she could be placated with money too, and it didnt work;
or if Bon was there and it was Bon himself who refused the offer, though
nobody ever did know if Bon ever knew Sutpen was his father or not,
whether he was trying to revenge his mother or not at first and only
later fell in love, only later succumbed to the current of retribution
and fatality which Miss Rosa said Sutpen had started and had doomed all
his blood to, black and white both. But it didnt work evidently, and
the next Christmas came and Henry and Bon came to Sutpens Hundred again
and now Sutpen saw that there was no help for it, that Judith was in
love with Bon and whether Bon wanted revenge or was just caught and sunk
and doomed too, it was all the same. So it seems that he sent for Henry
that Christmas eve just before supper time (Father said that maybe by
now, after his New Orleans trip, he had learned at last enough about
women to know it wouldnt do any good to go to Judith first) and told
Henry. And he knew what Henry would say and Henry said it and he took
the lie from his son and Henry knew by his father taking the lie that
what his father had told him was true; and Father said that he (Sutpen)
probably knew what Henry would do too and counted on Henry doing it
because he still believed that it had been only a minor tactical
mistake. So he was like a skirmisher who is outnumbered yet cannot
retreat who believes that if he is just patient enough and clever enough
and calm enough and alert enough he can get the enemy scattered and pick
them off one by one. And Henry did it. And he (Sutpen) probably knew
what Henry would do next too, that Henry too would go to New Orleans to
find out for himself. Then it was 61 and Sutpen knew what they would do
now, not only what Henry would do but what he would force Bon to do;
maybe (being a demonthough it would not require a demon to foresee war
now) he even foresaw that Henry and Bon would join that student company
at the University; he may have had some way of watching, knowing the day
their names appeared on the roster, some way of knowing where the
company was even before Grandfather became colonel of the regiment the
company was in until he got hurt at Pittsburgh Landing (where Bon was
wounded) and came home to get used to not having any right arm and
Sutpen came home in 64 with the two tombstones and talked to
Grandfather in the office that day before both of them went back to the
war. Maybe he knew all the time where Henry and Bon were, that they had
been all the time in Grandfathers regiment where Grandfather could look
after them in a fashion even if Grandfather didnt know that he was
doing iteven if they needed watching, because Sutpen must have known
about the probation too, what Henry was doing now: holding all three of
themhimself and Judith and Bonin that suspension while he wrestled
with his conscience to make it come to terms with what he wanted to do
just like his father had that time more than thirty years ago, maybe
even turned fatalist like Bon now and giving the war a chance to settle
the whole business by killing him or Bon or both of them (but with no
help, no fudging, on his part because it was him that carried Bon to the
rear after Pittsburgh Landing) or maybe he knew that the South would be
whipped and then there wouldnt be anything left that mattered that
much, worth getting that heated over, worth protesting against or
suffering for or dying for or even living for. That was the day he came
to the office, his (the demons, Shreve said) one day of
leave at home, came home with his tombstones. Judith was there and I
reckon he looked at her and she looked at him and he said, You know
where he is and Judith didnt lie to him, and (he knew Henry) he said,
But you have not heard from him yet and Judith didnt lie about that
either and she didnt cry either because both of them knew what would be
in the letter when it came so he didnt have to ask, When he writes you
that he is coming, you and Clytie will start making the wedding dress
even if Judith would have lied to him about that, which she would not
have: so he put one of the stones on Ellens grave and set the other one
up in the hall and came in to see Grandfather, trying to explain it,
seeing if Grandfather could discover that mistake which he believed was
the sole cause of his problem, sitting there in his worn and shabby
uniform, with his worn gauntlets and faded sash and (he would have had
the plume by all means. He might have had to discard his saber, but he
would have had the plume) the plume in his hat broken and frayed and
soiled, with his horse saddled and waiting in the street below and a
thousand miles to ride to find his regiment, yet he sitting there on the
one afternoon of his leave as though he had a thousand of them, as if
there were no haste nor urgency anywhere under the sun and that when he
departed he had no further to go than the twelve miles out to Sutpens
Hundred and a thousand days or maybe even years of monotony and rich
peace, and he, even after he would become dead, still there, still
watching the fine grandsons and great-grandsons springing as far as eye
could reach; he still, even though dead in the earth, that same fine
figure of a man that Wash Jones called him, but not now. Now fog-bound
by his own private embattlement of personal morality: that picayune
splitting of abstract hairs while (Grandfather said) Rome vanished and
Jericho crumbled, that _this would be right if_ or _that would be wrong
but_ of slowing blood and stiffening bones and arteries that Father says
men resort to in senility who while young and supple and strong reacted
to a single simple Yes and a single simple No as instantaneous and
complete and unthinking as the snapping on and off of electricity,
sitting there and talking and now Grandfather not knowing what he was
talking about because now Grandfather said he did not believe that
Sutpen himself knew because even yet Sutpen had not quite told him all
of it. And this that morality again, Grandfather said: that morality
which would not permit him to malign or traduce the memory of his first
wife, or at least the memory of the marriage even though he felt that he
had been tricked by it, not even to an acquaintance in whose confidence
and discretion he trusted enough to wish to justify himself, not even to
his son by another marriage in order to preserve the status of his
lifes attainment and desire, except as a last resort. Not that he would
hesitate then, Grandfather said: but not until then. He had been tricked
by it himself, but he had extricated himself without asking or receiving
help from any man; let anyone else who might be so imposed upon do the
same.Sitting there and moralizing on the fact that, no matter which
course he chose, the result would be that that design and plan to which
he had given fifty years of his life had just as well never have existed
at all by almost exactly fifty years, and Grandfather not knowing what
choice he was talking about even, what second choice he was faced with
until the very last word he spoke before he got up and put on his hat
and shook Grandfathers left hand and rode away; this second choice,
need to choose, as obscure to Grandfather as the reason for the first,
the repudiation, had been: so that Grandfather did not even say I dont
know which you should choose not because that was all he could have
said and so to say that would be less than no answer at all, but that
anything he might have said would have been less than no answer at all
since Sutpen was not listening, did not expect an answer, who had not
come for pity and there was no advice that he could have taken, and
justification he had already coerced from his conscience thirty years
ago. And he still knew that he had courage, and though he may have come
to doubt lately that he had acquired that shrewdness which at one time
he believed he had, he still believed that it existed somewhere in the
world to be learned and that if it could be learned he would yet learn
itand maybe even this, Grandfather said: if shrewdness could not
extricate him this second time as it had before, he could at least
depend on the courage to find him will and strength to make a third
start toward that design as it had found him to make the second
withwho came into the office not for pity and not for help because
Grandfather said he had never learned how to ask anybody for help or
anything else and so he would not have known what to do with the help if
Grandfather could have given it to him, but came just with that sober
and quiet bemusement, hoping maybe (if he hoped at all, if he were doing
anything but just thinking out loud at all) that the legal mind might
perceive and clarify that initial mistake which he still insisted on,
which he himself had not been able to find: I was faced with condoning
a fact which had been foisted upon me without my knowledge during the
process of building toward my design, which meant the absolute and
irrevocable negation of the design; or in holding to my original plan
for the design in pursuit of which I had incurred this negation. I
chose, and I made to the fullest what atonement lay in my power for
whatever injury I might have done in choosing, paying even more for the
privilege of choosing as I chose than I might have been expected to, or
even (by law) required. Yet I am now faced with a second necessity to
choose, the curious factor of which is not, as you pointed out and as
first appeared to me, that the necessity for a new choice should have
arisen, but that either choice which I might make, either course which I
might choose, leads to the same result: either I destroy my design with
my own hand, which will happen if I am forced to play my last trump
card, or do nothing, let matters take the course which I know they will
take and see my design complete itself quite normally and naturally and
successfully to the public eye, yet to my own in such fashion as to be a
mockery and a betrayal of that little boy who approached that door fifty
years ago and was turned away, for whose vindication the whole plan was
conceived and carried forward to the moment of this choice, this second
choice devolving out of that first one which in its turn was forced on
me as the result of an agreement, an arrangement which I had entered in
good faith, concealing nothing, while the other party or parties to it
concealed from me the one very factor which would destroy the entire
plan and design which I had been working toward, concealed it so well
that it was not until after the child was born that I discovered that
this factor existed

Your old man, Shreve said. When your grandfather was telling this to
him, he didnt know any more what your grandfather was talking about
than your grandfather knew what the demon was talking about when the
demon told it to him, did he? And when your old man told it to you, you
wouldnt have known what anybody was talking about if you hadnt been
out there and seen Clytie. Is that right?

Yes, Quentin said. Grandfather was the only friend he had.

The demon had? Quentin didnt answer, didnt move. It was cold in the
room now. The heat was almost gone out of the radiators: the cold iron
fluting stern signal and admonition for sleeping, the little death, the
renewal. It had been some time now since the chimes had rung eleven.
All right, Shreve said. He was hugging himself into the bathrobe now
as he had formerly hugged himself inside his pink naked almost hairless
skin. He chose. He chose lechery. So do I. But go on. His remark was
not intended for flippancy nor even derogation. It was born (if from any
source) of that incorrigible unsentimental sentimentality of the young
which takes the form of hard and often crass levityto which, by the
way, Quentin paid no attention whatever, resuming as if he had never
been interrupted, his face still lowered, still brooding apparently on
the open letter upon the open book between his hands.

He left for Virginia that night. Grandfather said how he went to the
window and watched him ride across the square on the gaunt black
stallion, erect in his faded gray, the hat with its broken plume cocked
a little yet not quite so much as the beaver of the old days, as if
(Grandfather said) even with his martial rank and prerogatives he did
not quite swagger like he used to do, not because he was chastened by
misfortune or spent or even war-wearied but as though even while riding
he was still bemused in that state in which he struggled to hold clear
and free above a maelstrom of unpredictable and unreasoning human
beings, not his head for breath and not so much his fifty years of
effort and striving to establish a posterity, but his code of logic and
morality, his formula and recipe of fact and deduction whose balanced
sum and product declined, refused to swim or even float. Grandfather saw
him approach the Holston House and saw old Mr McCaslin and two other old
men hobble out and stop him, he sitting the stallion and talking to them
and his voice not raised, Grandfather said, yet the very sober quality
of his gestures and the set of his shoulders forensic, oratorical. Then
he went on. He could still reach Sutpens Hundred before dark, so it was
probably after supper than he headed the stallion toward the Atlantic
Ocean, he and Judith facing one another again for maybe a full minute,
he not needing to say I will stop it if I can, she not needing to say
Stop it thenif you can but just goodbye, the kiss on the brow and no
tears; a word to Clytie and to Wash: master to slave, baron to retainer:
Well, Clytie, take care of Miss Judith.Wash, Ill send you a piece of
Abe Lincolns coat tail from Washington and I reckon Wash answering
like it used to be under the scuppernongs with the demijohn and the well
bucket: Sho, Kernel; kill ever one of the varmints! So he ate the
hoecake and drank the parched acorn coffee and rode away. Then it was
65 and the army (Grandfather had gone back to it too; he was a
brigadier now though I reckon this was for more reason than because he
just had one arm) had retreated across Georgia and into Carolina and
they all knew it wouldnt be very much longer now. Then one day Lee sent
Johnston some reinforcements from one of his corps and Grandfather found
out that the Twenty-third Mississippi was one of the regiments. And he
(Grandfather) didnt know what had happened: whether Sutpen had found
out in some way that Henry had at last coerced his conscience into
agreeing with him as his (Henrys) father had done thirty years ago,
whether Judith perhaps had written her father that she had heard from
Bon at last and what she and Bon intended to do, or if the four of them
had just reached as one person that point where something had to be
done, had to happen, he (Grandfather) didnt know. He just learned one
morning that Sutpen had ridden up to Grandfathers old regiments
headquarters and asked and received permission to speak to Henry and did
speak to him and then rode away again before midnight.

So he got his choice made, after all, Shreve said. He played that
trump after all. And so he came home and found

Wait, Quentin said.

what he must have wanted to find or anyway what he was going to
find

Wait, I tell you! Quentin said, though still he did not move nor even
raise his voicethat voice with its tense suffused restrained quality:
I am telling _Am I going to have to have to hear it all again_ he
thought _I am going to have to hear it all over again I am already
hearing it all over again I am listening to it all over again I shall
have to never listen to anything else but this again forever so
apparently not only a man never outlives his father but not even his
friends and acquaintances do_he came home and found that at least
regarding which he should have needed no word nor warning even if Judith
would have sent him one, sent him acknowledgment that she was beaten,
who according to Mr Compson would no more have sent him acknowledgment
that he had beat her than she waited (whom Miss Coldfield said was not
bereaved) and met him on his return, not with the fury and despair
perhaps which he might have expected even though knowing as little,
having learned as little, about women as Mr Compson said he had, yet
certainly with something other than the icy calm with which, according
to Miss Coldfield, she met himthe kiss again after almost two years,
on the brow; the voices, the speeches, quiet, contained, almost
impersonal: And? Yes. Henry killed him followed by the brief
tears which ceased on the instant when they began, as if the moisture
consisted of a single sheet or layer thin as a cigarette paper and in
the shape of a human face; the Ah, Clytie. Ah, Rosa.Well, Wash. I was
unable to penetrate far enough behind the Yankee lines to cut a piece
from that coat tail as I promised you; the (from Jones) guffaw, the
chortle, the old imbecile stability of the articulated mud which, Mr
Compson said, outlasts the victories and the defeats both: Well, Kernel
they kilt us but they aint whupped us yit, air they?: and that was all.
He had returned. He was home again where his problem now was haste,
passing time, the need to hurry. _He was not concerned_, Mr Compson
said, _about the courage and the will, nor even about the shrewdness
now. He was not for one moment concerned about his ability to start the
third time. All that he was concerned about was the possibility that he
might not have time sufficient to do it in, regain his lost ground in.
He did not waste any of what time he had either. The will and the
shrewdness too he did not waste, though he doubtless did not consider it
to have been either his will or his shrewdness which supplied waiting to
his hand the opportunity, and it was probably less of shrewdness and
more of courage than even will which got him engaged to Miss Rosa within
a period of three months and almost before she was aware of the
factMiss Rosa, the chief disciple and advocate of that cult of
demon-harrying of which he was the chief object (even though not
victim), engaged to him before she had got accustomed to having him in
the houseyes, more of courage than even will, yet something of
shrewdness too: the shrewdness acquired in excrutiating driblets through
the fifty years suddenly capitulant and retroactive or suddenly
sprouting and flowering like a seed lain fallow in a vacuum or in a
single iron clod. Because he seemed to perceive without stopping, in
that passage through the house which was an unbroken continuation of the
long journey from Virginia, the pause not to greet his family but merely
to pick up Jones and drag him on out to the brier-choked fields and
fallen fences and clap ax or mattock into his hands, the one weak spot,
the one spot vulnerable to assault in Miss Rosas embattled
spinsterhood, and to assault and carry this in one stride, with
something of the ruthless tactical skill of his old master (the
Twenty-third Mississippi was in Jacksons corps at one time). And then
the shrewdness failed him again. It broke down, it vanished into that
old impotent logic and morality which had betrayed him before: and what
day might it have been, what furrow might he have stopped dead in, one
foot advanced, the unsentient plow handles in his instantaneous
unsentient hands, what fence panel held in midair as though it had no
weight by muscles which could not feel it, when he realized that there
was more in his problem than just lack of time, that the problem
contained some super-distillation of this lack: that he was now past
sixty and that possibly he could get but one more son, had at best but
one more son in his loins, as the old cannon might know when it has just
one more shot in its corporeality. So he suggested what he suggested to
her, and she did what he should have known she would do and would have
known probably if he had not bogged himself again in his morality which
had all the parts but which refused to run, to move. Hence the proposal,
the outrage and unbelief; the tide, the blast of indignation and anger
upon which Miss Rosa vanished from Sutpens Hundred, her air-ballooned
skirts spread upon the flood, chip-light, her bonnet (possibly one of
Ellens which she had prowled out of the attic) clapped fast onto her
head rigid and precarious with rage. And he standing there with the
reins over his arm, with perhaps something like smiling inside his beard
and about the eyes which was not smiling but the crinkled concentration
of furious thinkingthe haste, the need for it; the urgency but not
fear, not concern: just the fact that he had missed that time, though
luckily it was just a spotting shot with a light charge, and the old
gun, the old barrel and carriage none the worse; only next time there
might not be enough powder for both a spotting shot and then a
full-sized loadthe fact that the thread of shrewdness and courage and
will ran onto the same spool which the thread of his remaining days ran
onto and that spool almost near enough for him to reach out his hand and
touch it. But this was no grave concern yet, since it (the old logic,
the old morality which had never yet failed to fail him) was already
falling into pattern, already showing him conclusively that he had been
right, just as he knew he had been, and therefore what had happened was
just a delusion and did not actually exist._

No, Shreve said; you wait. Let me play a while now. Now, Wash. Him
(the demon) standing there with the horse, the saddled charger, the
sheathed saber, the gray waiting to be laid peaceful away among the
moths and all lost save dishonor: then the voice of the faithful
grave-digger who opened the play and would close it, coming out of the
wings like Shakespeares very self: Well, Kernel, they mought have
whupped us but they aint kilt us yit, air they? This was not
flippancy either. It too was just that protective coloring of levity
behind which the youthful shame of being moved hid itself, out of which
Quentin also spoke, the reason for Quentins sullen bemusement, the (on
both their parts) flipness, the strained clowning: the two of them,
whether they knew it or not, in the cold room (it was quite cold now)
dedicated to that best of ratiocination which after all was a good deal
like Sutpens morality and Miss Coldfields demonizingthis room not
only dedicated to it but set aside for it and suitably so since it would
be here above any other place that it (the logic and the morality) could
do the least amount of harmthe two of them back to back as though at
the last ditch, saying No to Quentins Mississippi shade who in life had
acted and reacted to the minimum of logic and morality, who dying had
escaped it completely, who dead remained not only indifferent but
impervious to it, somehow a thousand times more potent and alive. There
was no harm intended by Shreve and no harm taken, since Quentin did not
even stop. He did not even falter, taking Shreve up in stride without
comma or colon or paragraph:

no reserve to risk a spotting shot with now so he started this one
like you start a rabbit out of a brier patch, with a little chunk of
dried mud thrown by hand. Maybe it was the first string of beads out of
his and Washs little store where he would get mad at his customers, the
niggers and the trash and the haggling, and turn them out and lock the
door and drink himself blind. And maybe Wash delivered the beads
himself, Father said, that was down at the gate when he rode back from
the war that day, that after he went away with the regiment would tell
folks that he (Wash) was looking after Kernels place and niggers until
after a while maybe he even believed it. Fathers mother said how when
the Sutpen niggers first heard about what he was saying, they would stop
him in the road that came up out of the bottom where the old fishing
camp was that Sutpen let him and the granddaughter (she was about eight
then) live in. There would be too many of them for him to whip them all,
to even try to, risk trying to: and they would ask him why he wasnt at
the war and he would say, Git outen my road, niggers! and then it
would be the outright laughing, asking one another (except it was not
one another but him): Who him, calling us niggers? and he would rush
at them with a stick and them avoiding him just enough, not mad at all,
just laughing. And he was still carrying fish and animals he killed (or
maybe stole) and vegetables up to the house when that was about all Mrs
Sutpen and Judith (and Clytie too) had to live on, and Clytie would not
let him come into the kitchen with the basket even, saying, Stop right
there, white man. Stop right where you is. You aint never crossed this
door while Colonel was here and you aint going to cross it now. Which
was true, only Father said there was a kind of pride in it: that he had
never tried to enter the house, even though he believed that if he had
tried, Sutpen would not have let them repulse him; like (Father said) he
might have said to himself _The reason I wont try it aint that I refuse
to give any black nigger the chance to tell me I cant but because I aint
going to force Mister Tom to have to cuss a nigger or take a cussing
from his wife on my account_. But they would drink together under the
scuppernong arbor on the Sunday afternoons, and on the week days he
would see Sutpen (the fine figure of the man as he called it) on the
black stallion, galloping about the plantation, and Father said how for
that moment Washs heart would be quiet and proud both and that maybe it
would seem to him that this world where niggers, that the Bible said had
been created and cursed by God to be brute and vassal to all men of
white skin, were better found and housed and even clothed than he and
his granddaughterthat this world where he walked always in mocking and
jeering echoes of nigger laughter, was just a dream and an illusion and
that the actual world was the one where his own lonely apotheosis
(Father said) galloped on the black thoroughbred, thinking maybe, Father
said, how the Book said that all men were created in the image of God
and so all men were the same in Gods eyes anyway, looked the same to
God at least, and so he would look at Sutpen and think _A fine proud
man. If God Himself was to come down and ride the natural earth, thats
what He would aim to look like._ Maybe he even delivered the first
string of beads himself, and Father said maybe each of the ribbons
afterward during the next three years while the girl matured fast like
girls of that kind do; or anyway he would know and recognize each and
every ribbon when he saw it on her even when she lied to him about where
and how she got it, which she probably did not, since she would be bound
to know that he had been seeing the ribbons in the showcase every day
for three years and would have known them as well as he knew his own
shoes. And not only he knew them, but all the other men, the customers
and the loungers, the white and the black that would be sitting and
squatting about the stores gallery to watch her pass, not quite defiant
and not quite cringing and not quite flaunting the ribbons and the
beads, but almost; not quite any of them but a little of all: bold,
sullen and fearful. But father said how Washs heart was probably still
quiet even after he saw the dress and spoke about it, probably only a
little grave now and watching her secret defiant frightened face while
she told him (before he had asked, maybe too insistent, too quick to
volunteer it) that Miss Judith had given it to her, helped her to make
it: and Father said maybe he realized all of a sudden and without
warning that when he passed the men on the gallery they would look after
him too and that they already knew that which he had just thought they
were probably thinking. But Father said his heart was still quiet, even
now, and that he answered, if he answered at all, stopped the
protestations and disclaimers at all: Sho, now. Ef Kernel and Miss
Judith wanted to give hit to you, I hope you minded to thank them.Not
alarmed, Father said: just thoughtful, just grave; and Father said how
that afternoon Grandfather rode out to see Sutpen about something and
there was nobody in the front of the store and he was about to go out
and go up to the house when he heard the voices from the back and he
walked on toward them and so he overheard them before he could begin to
not listen and before he could make them hear him calling Sutpens name.
Grandfather couldnt see them yet, he hadnt even got to where they
could hear him yet, but he said he knew exactly how they would be:
Sutpen having already told Wash to get the jug out and then Wash spoke
and Sutpen beginning to turn, realizing that Wash wasnt getting the jug
before he comprehended the import of what Wash was saying, then
comprehending that and still half turned and then all of a sudden kind
of reared back and flinging his head up, looking at Wash and Wash
standing there, not cringing either, in that attitude dogged and quiet
and not cringing, and Sutpen said, What about the dress? and
Grandfather said it was Sutpens voice that was short and sharp: not
Washs; that Washs voice was just flat and quiet, not abject: just
patient and slow: I have knowed you for going on twenty years now. I
aint never denied yit to do what you told me to do. And Im a man past
sixty. And she aint nothing but a fifteen-year-old gal. and Sutpen
said, Meaning that Id harm the girl? I, a man as old as you are? and
Wash: If you was arra other man, Id say you was as old as me. And old
or no old, I wouldnt let her keep that dress nor nothing else that come
from your hand. But you are different. and Sutpen: How different? and
Grandfather said how Wash did not answer and that he called again now
and neither of them heard him; and then Sutpen said: So thats why you
are afraid of me? and Wash said, I aint afraid. Because you are brave.
It aint that you were a brave man at one second or minute or hour of
your life and got a paper to show hit from General Lee. But you are
brave, the same as you are alive and breathing. Thats where its
different. Hit dont need no ticket from nobody to tell me that. And I
know that whatever your hands tech, whether hits a regiment of men or a
ignorant gal or just a hound dog, that you will make hit right. Then
Grandfather heard Sutpen move, sudden and sharp, and Grandfather said he
reckoned, thought just about what he imagined Wash was thinking. But all
Sutpen said was, Get the jug.Sho, Kernel, Wash said.

So that Sunday came, a year after that day and three years after he had
suggested to Miss Rosa that they try it first and if it was a boy and
lived, they would be married. It was before daylight and he was
expecting his mare to foal to the black stallion, so when he left the
house before day that morning Judith thought he was going to the stable.
What Judith knew and how much about her father and Washs granddaughter
nobody knew, how much she could not have helped but know from what
Clytie must have known (may have or may not have told her, whether or
no) since everybody else white or black in the neighborhood knew who had
ever seen the girl pass in the ribbons and beads which they all
recognized, how much she may have refused to discover during the fitting
and sewing of that dress (Father said Judith actually did this; this was
no lie that the girl told Wash: the two of them alone all day long for
about a week in the house: and what they must have talked about, what
Judith must have talked about while the girl stood around in what she
possessed to call underclothes, with her sullen defiant secret watchful
face, answering what, telling what that Judith may or may not have tried
to shut her eyes to, nobody knew). So it was not until he failed to
return at dinner time that she went or sent Clytie to the stable and
found that the mare had foaled in the night but that her father was not
there. And it was not until midafternoon that she found a half-grown boy
and paid him a nickel to go down to the old fish camp and ask Wash where
Sutpen was, and the boy walked whistling around the corner of the
rotting cabin and saw maybe the scythe first, maybe the body first lying
in the weeds which Wash had not yet cut, and as he screamed he looked up
and saw Wash in the window, watching him. Then about a week later they
caught the nigger, the midwife, and she told how she didnt know that
Wash was there at all that dawn when she heard the horse and then
Sutpens feet and he came in and stood over the pallet where the girl
and the baby were and said, Penelope (that was the mare)
foaled this morning. A damned fine colt. Going to be the spit and
image of his daddy when I rode him North in 61. Do you remember? and
the old nigger said she said, Yes, Marster and that he jerked the
riding whip toward the pallet and said, Well? Damn your black hide:
horse or mare? and that she told him and that he stood there for a
minute and he didnt move at all, with the riding whip against his leg
and the lattices of sunlight from the unchinked wall falling upon him,
across his white hair and his beard that hadnt turned at all yet, and
she said she saw his eyes and then his teeth inside his beard and that
she would have run then only she couldnt, couldnt seem to make her
legs bear to get up and run: and then he looked at the girl on the
pallet again and said, Well, Milly; too bad youre not a mare too. Then
I could give you a decent stall in the stable and turned and went out.
Only she could not move even yet, and she didnt even know that Wash was
outside there; she just heard Sutpen say, Stand back, Wash. Dont you
touch me, and then Wash, his voice soft and hardly loud enough to reach
her: Im going to tech you, Kernel: and Sutpen again: Stand back,
Wash! sharp now, and then she heard the whip on Washs face but she
didnt know if she heard the scythe or not because now she found out
that she could move, get up, run out of the cabin and into the weeds,
running

Wait, Shreve said; wait. You mean that he had got the son at last
that he wanted, yet still he

walked the three miles and back before midnight to fetch the old
nigger, then sat on the sagging gallery until daylight came and the
granddaughter stopped screaming inside the cabin and he even heard the
baby once, waiting for Sutpen. And Father said his heart was quiet then
too, even though he knew what they would be saying in every cabin about
the land by nightfall, just as he had known what they were saying during
the last four or five months while his granddaughters condition (which
he had never tried to conceal) could no longer be mistaken: _Wash Jones
has fixed old Sutpen at last. It taken him twenty years to do it, but he
has got a holt of old Sutpen at last where Sutpen will either have to
tear meat or squeal_ Thats what Father said he was thinking while he
waited outside on the gallery where the old nigger had sent him, ordered
him out, standing there maybe by the very post where the scythe had
leaned rusting for two years, while the granddaughters screams came
steady as a clock now but his own heart quiet, not at all concerned nor
alarmed; and Father said that maybe while he stood befogged in his
fumbling and groping (that morality of his that was a good deal like
Sutpens, that told him he was right in the face of all fact and usage
and everything else) which had always been somehow mixed up and involved
with galloping hoofs even during the old peace that nobody remembered,
and in which during the four years of the war which he had not attended
the galloping had been only the more gallant and proud and
thunderousFather said that maybe he got his answer; that maybe there
broke free and plain in midgallop against the yellow sky of dawn the
fine proud image of the man on the fine proud image of the stallion and
that the fumbling and the groping broke clear and free too, not in
justification or explanation or extenuation or excuse, Father said, but
as the apotheosis lonely, explicable, beyond all human fouling: _He is
bigger than all them Yankees that killed us and ourn, that killed his
wife and widowed his daughter and druv his son from home, that stole his
niggers and ruined his land; bigger than this whole county that he fit
for and in payment for which has brung him to keeping a little country
store for his bread and meat; bigger than the scorn and denial which hit
helt to his lips like the bitter cup in the Book. And how could I have
lived nigh to him for twenty years without being touched and changed by
him? Maybe I am not as big as he is and maybe I did not do any of the
galloping. But at least I was drug along where he went. And me and him
can still do hit and will ever so, if so be he will show me what he aims
for me to do_; and maybe still standing there and holding the stallions
reins after Sutpen had entered the cabin, still hearing the galloping,
watching the proud galloping image merge and pass, galloping through
avatars which marked the accumulation of years, time, to the fine climax
where it galloped without weariness or progress, forever and forever
immortal beneath the brandished saber and the shot-torn flags rushing
down a sky in color like thunder; stood there and heard Sutpen inside
the house speak his single sentence of salutation, inquiry and farewell
to the granddaughter, and Father said that for a second Wash must not
have felt the very earth under his feet while he watched Sutpen emerge
from the house, the riding whip in his hand, thinking quietly, like in a
dream: _I kaint have heard what I know I heard. I just know I kaint_
thinking _That was what got him up. It was that colt. It aint me or mine
either. It wasnt even his own that got him out of bed_ maybe feeling no
earth, no stability, even yet, maybe not even hearing his own voice when
Sutpen saw his face (the face of the man who in twenty years he had no
more known to make any move save at command than he had the stallion
which he rode) and stopped: You said if she was a mare you could give
her a decent stall in the stable, maybe not even hearing Sutpen when he
said, sudden and sharp: Stand back. Dont you touch me only he must
have heard that because he answered it: Im going to tech you, Kernel
and Sutpen said Stand back, Wash again before the old woman heard the
whip. Only there were two blows with the whip; they found the two welts
on Washs face that night. Maybe the two blows even knocked him down;
maybe it was while he was getting up that he put his hand on the
scythe

Wait, Shreve said; for Christs sake wait. You mean that he

sat there all that day in the little window where he could watch
the road; probably laid the scythe down and went straight into the house
where maybe the granddaughter on the pallet asked querulously what it
was and he answered, Whut? Whut racket, honey? and maybe he tried to
persuade her to eat toothe side meat he had probably brought home from
the store Saturday night or maybe the candy, trying to tempt her with it
maybethe nickels worth of stale jellified glue out of a striped sack,
and maybe ate and then sat at the window where he could look out above
the body and the scythe in the weeds below, and watch the road. Because
he was sitting there when the half-grown boy came around the corner of
the house whistling and saw him. And Father said he must have realized
then that it would not be much after dark when it would happen; that he
must have sat there and sensed, felt them gathering with the horses and
dogs and gunsthe curious and the vengefulmen of Sutpens own kind,
who used to eat at his table with him back when he (Wash) had yet to
approach nearer the house than the scuppernong arbormen who had led
the way, shown the other and lesser ones how to fight in battles, who
might also possess signed papers from the generals saying that they were
among the first and foremost of the bravewho had galloped also in the
old days arrogant and proud on the fine horses about the fine
plantationssymbol also of admiration and hope, instruments too of
despair and grief; these it was whom he was expected to run from and it
seeming to him probably that he had no less to run from than he had to
run to; that if he ran he would be fleeing merely one set of bragging
and evil shadows for another, since they (men) were all of a kind
throughout all of earth which he knew, and he old, too old to run far
even if he were to run who could never escape them, no matter how much
or how far he ran; a man past sixty could not expect to run that far,
far enough to escape beyond the boundaries of earth where such men
lived, set the order and the rule of living: and Father said that maybe
for the first time in his life he began to comprehend how it had been
possible for Yankees or any other army to have whipped themthe
gallant, the proud, the brave; the acknowledged and chosen best among
them all to bear the courage and honor and pride. It would probably be
about sunset now and probably he could feel them quite near now; Father
said it probably seemed to him that he could even hear them: all the
voices, the murmuring of tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow beyond the
immediate fury: _Old Wash Jones come a tumble at last. He thought he had
Sutpen, but Sutpen fooled him. He thought he had him, but old Wash Jones
got fooled_ and then maybe even saying it aloud, shouting it Father
said: But I never expected that, Kernel! You know I never! until maybe
the granddaughter stirred and spoke querulously again and he went and
quieted her and returned to talk to himself again but careful now, quiet
now since Sutpen was close enough to hear him easy, without shouting:
You know I never. You know I never expected or asked or wanted nothing
from arra living man but what I expected from you. And I never asked
that. I didnt think hit would need: I just said to myself _I dont need
to. What need has a fellow like Wash Jones to question or doubt the man
that General Lee himself said in a hand-wrote ticket that he was brave?_
Brave (and maybe it would be loud again, forgetting again) Brave!
Better if narra one of them had ever rid back in 65 thinking _Better
if his kind and mine too had never drawn the breath of life on this
earth. Better that all who remain of us be blasted from the face of it
than that another Wash Jones should see his whole life shredded from him
and shrivel away like a dried shuck thrown onto the fire_ Then they rode
up. He must have been listening to them as they came down the road, the
dogs and the horses, and seen the lanterns since it was dark now. And
Major de Spain who was sheriff then got down and saw the body, though he
said he did not see Wash nor know that he was there until Wash spoke his
name quietly from the window almost in his face: That you, Major? De
Spain told him to come on out and he said how Washs voice was quite
quiet when he said he would be out in just a minute; it was too quiet,
too calm; so much too quiet and calm that de Spain said he did not
realize for a moment that it was too calm and quiet: In just a minute.
Soon as I see about my granddaughter. Well see to her, de Spain
said. You come on out. Sho, Major, Wash said, In just a minute. So
they waited in front of the dark house, and the next day Father said
there were a hundred that remembered about the butcher knife that he
kept hidden and razor-sharpthe one thing in his sloven life that he
was ever known to take pride in or care ofonly by the time they
remembered all this it was too late. So they didnt know what he was
about. They just heard him moving inside the dark house, then they heard
the granddaughters voice, fretful and querulous: Who is it? Light the
lamp, Grandpaw then his voice: Hit wont need no light, honey. Hit wont
take but a minute then de Spain drew his pistol and said, You, Wash!
Come out of there! and still Wash didnt answer, murmuring still to the
granddaughter: Wher air you? and the fretful voice answering, Right
here. Where else would I be? What is then de Spain said, Jones!
and he was already fumbling at the broken steps when the granddaughter
screamed; and now all the men there claimed that they heard the knife on
both the neckbones, though de Spain didnt. He just said he knew that
Wash had come out onto the gallery and that he sprang back before he
found out that it was not toward him Wash was running but toward the end
of the gallery, where the body lay, but that he did not think about the
scythe: he just ran backward a few feet when he saw Wash stoop and rise
again and now Wash was running toward him. Only he was running toward
them all, de Spain said, running into the lanterns so that now they
could see the scythe raised above his head; they could see his face, his
eyes too, as he ran with the scythe above his head, straight into the
lanterns and the gun barrels, making no sound, no outcry while de Spain
ran backward before him, saying, Jones! Stop! Stop, or Ill kill you.
Jones! Jones! _Jones!_

Wait, Shreve said. You mean that he got the son he wanted, after all
that trouble, and then turned right around and

Yes. Sitting in Grandfathers office that afternoon, with his head kind
of flung back a little, explaining to Grandfather like he might have
been explaining arithmetic to Henry back in the fourth grade: You see,
all I wanted was just a son. Which seems to me, when I look about at my
contemporary scene, no exorbitant gift from nature or circumstance to
demand

_Will you wait?_ Shreve said. that with the son he went to all
that trouble to get lying right there behind him in the cabin, he would
have to taunt the grandfather into killing first him and then the child
too?

What? Quentin said. It wasnt a son. It was a girl.

Oh, Shreve said. Come on. Lets get out of this damn icebox and
go to bed.




                               *  VIII  *


          There would be no deep-breathing tonight. The window would
remain closed above the frozen and empty quad beyond which the windows
in the opposite wall were, with two or three exceptions, already dark;
soon the chimes would ring for midnight, the notes melodious and
tranquil, faint and clear as glass in the fierce (it had quit snowing)
still air. So the old man sent the nigger for Henry, Shreve said. And
Henry came in and the old man said They cannot marry because he is your
brother and Henry said You lie like that, that quick: no space, no
interval, no nothing between like when you press the button and get
light in the room. And the old man just sat there, didnt even move and
strike him and so Henry didnt say You lie again because he knew now
it was so; he just said Its not true, not I dont believe it but
Its not true because he could maybe see the old mans face again now
and demon or no it was a kind of grief and pity, not for himself but for
Henry, because Henry was just young while he (the old man) knew that he
still had the courage and even all the shrewdness too

Shreve stood beside the table, facing Quentin again though not seated
now. In the overcoat buttoned awry over the bathrobe he looked huge and
shapeless like a disheveled bear as he stared at Quentin (the
Southerner, whose blood ran quick to cool, more supple to compensate for
violent changes of temperature perhaps, perhaps merely nearer the
surface) who sat hunched in his chair, his hands thrust into his pockets
as if he were trying to hug himself warm between his arms, looking
somehow fragile and even wan in the lamplight, the rosy glow which now
had nothing of warmth, coziness, in it, while both their breathing
vaporized faintly in the cold room where there was now not two of them
but four, the two who breathed not individuals now yet something both
more and less than twins, the heart and blood of youth. Shreve was
nineteen, a few months younger than Quentin. He looked exactly nineteen;
he was one of those people whose correct age you never know because they
look exactly that and so you tell yourself that he or she cannot
possibly be that because he or she looks too exactly that not to take
advantage of the appearance: so you never believe implicitly that he or
she is either that age which they claim or that which in sheer
desperation they agree to or which someone else reports them to be,
strong enough and willing enough for two, for two thousand, for all. Not
two of then in a New England college sitting-room but one in a
Mississippi library sixty years ago, with holly and mistletoe in vases
on the mantel or thrust behind, crowning and garlanding with the season
and time the pictures on the walls, and a sprig or so decorating the
photograph, the groupmother and two childrenon the desk, behind
which the father sat when the son entered; and theyQuentin and
Shrevethinking how after the father spoke and before what he said
stopped being shock and began to make sense, Henry would recall later
how he had seen through the window beyond his fathers head the sister
and the lover in the garden, pacing slowly, the sisters head bent with
listening, the lovers head leaned above it while they paced slowly on
in that rhythm which not the eyes but the heart marks and calls the beat
and measure for, to disappear slowly beyond some bush or shrub starred
with white bloomjasmine, spiraea, honeysuckle, perhaps myriad
scentless unpickable Cherokee rosesnames, blooms which Shreve possibly
had never heard and never seen although the air had blown over him first
which became tempered to nourish them. It would not matter here in
Cambridge that the time had been winter in that garden too, and hence no
bloom nor leaf even if there had been someone to walk there and be seen
there since, judged by subsequent events, it had been night in the
garden also. But that did not matter because it had been so long ago. It
did not matter to them (Quentin and Shreve) anyway, who could without
moving, as free now of flesh as the father who decreed and forbade, the
son who denied and repudiated, the lover who acquiesced, the beloved who
was not bereaved, and with no tedious transition from hearth and garden
to saddle, who could be already clattering over the frozen ruts of that
December night and that Christmas dawn, that day of peace and cheer, of
holly and goodwill and logs on the hearth; not two of them there and
then either but four of them riding the two horses through the iron
darkness, and that not mattering either: what faces and what names they
called themselves and were called by so long as the blood coursedthe
blood, the immortal brief recent intransient blood which could hold
honor above slothy unregret and love above fat and easy shame.

And Bon didnt know it, Shreve said. The old man didnt move and this
time Henry didnt say You lie, he said Its not true and the old man
said, Ask him. Ask Charles then and then Henry knew that that was what
his father had meant all the time and that that was what he meant
himself when he told his father he lied, because what the old man said
wasnt just He is your brother but He has known all the time that he
is yours and your sisters brother. But Bon didnt know. Listen, dont
you remember how your father said it, that not one time did hethe old
guy, the demonever seem to wonder how the other wife managed to find
him, track him down, had never once seemed to wonder what she might have
been doing all that time, the thirty years since that day when he paid
his bill with her and got it receipted, so he thought, and saw with his
own eyes that it was (so he thought) destroyed, torn up and thrown to
the wind; never once wondered about this but only that she had done it,
could have and would have wanted to track him down? So it wasnt her
that told Bon. She wouldnt have wanted to, maybe for the reason that
she knew hethe demonwould believe she had. Or maybe she didnt get
around to telling him. Maybe she just never thought that there could be
anyone as close to her as a lone child out of her own body who would
have to be told how she had been scorned and suffered. Or maybe she was
already telling it before he was big enough to know words and so by the
time he was big enough to understand what was being told him she had
told it so much and so hard that the words didnt make sense to her
anymore either because they didnt have to make sense to her, and so she
had got to the point where when she thought she was saying it she was
quiet, and when she thought she was quiet it was just the hate and the
fury and the unsleeping and the unforgetting. Or maybe she didnt intend
for him to know it then. Maybe she was grooming him for that hour and
moment which she couldnt foresee but that she knew would arrive some
day because it would have to arrive or else she would have to do like
the Aunt Rosa and deny that she had ever breathedthe moment when he
(Bon) would stand side by side (not face to face) with his father where
fate or luck or justice or whatever she called it could do the rest (and
it did, better than she could have invented or hoped or even dreamed,
and your father said how being a woman she probably wasnt even
surprised)grooming him herself, bringing him on by hand herself,
washing and feeding and putting him to bed and giving him the candy and
the toys and the other childs fun and diversion and needs in measured
doses like medicine with her own hand: not because she had to, who could
have hired a dozen or bought a hundred to do it for her with the money,
the jack that he (the demon) had voluntarily surrendered, repudiated to
balance his moral ledger: but like the millionaire who could have a
hundred hostlers and handlers but who has just the one horse, the one
maiden, the one moment, the one matching of heart and muscle and will
with the one instant: and himself (the millionaire) patient in the
overalls and the sweat and the stable muck, and the mother bringing him
along to the moment when she would say He is your father. He cast you
and me aside and denied you his name. Now go and then sit down and let
God finish it: pistol or knife or rack; destruction or grief or anguish:
God to call the shot or turn the wheel. Jesus, you can almost see him: a
little boy already come to learn, to expect, before he could remember
having learned his own name or the name of the town where he lived or
how to say either of them, that every so often he would be snatched up
from playing and held, gripped between the two hands fierce with (what
passed at least with him for it) love, against the two fierce rigid
knees, the face that he remembered since before remembering began as
supervising all the animal joys of palate and stomach and entrails, of
warmth and pleasure and security, swooping down at him in a kind of
blazing immobility: he taking the interruption as a matter of course, as
just another natural phenomenon of existence; the face filled with
furious and almost unbearable unforgiving almost like fever (not
bitterness and despair: just implacable will for revenge) as just
another manifestation of mammalian loveand he not knowing what in hell
it was all about. He would be too young to curry any connected fact out
of the fury and hate and the tumbling speed; not comprehending or
caring: just curious, creating for himself (without help since who to
help him) his own notion of that Porto Rico or Haiti or wherever it was
he understood vaguely that he had come from, like orthodox children do
of Heaven or the cabbage patch or wherever it was that they came from,
except that his was different in that you were not supposed (your mother
didnt intend to, anyway) to ever go back there (and maybe when you got
as old as she was you would be horrified too, every time you found
hidden in your thoughts anything that just smelled or tasted like it
might be a wish to go back there). You were not supposed to know when
and why you left but only that you had escaped, that whatever power had
created the place for you to hate it had likewise got you away from the
place so you could hate it good and never forgive it in quiet and
monotony (though not exactly in what you would call peace); that you
were to thank God you didnt remember anything about it yet at the same
time you were not to, maybe dared not to, ever forget ithe not even
knowing maybe that he took it for granted that all kids didnt have
fathers too and that getting snatched every day or so from whatever
harmless pursuit in which you were not bothering anybody or even
thinking about them, by someone because that someone was bigger than
you, stronger than you, and being held for a minute or five minutes
under a kind of busted water pipe of incomprehensible fury and fierce
yearning and vindictiveness and jealous rage was part of childhood which
all mothers of children had received in turn from their mothers and from
their mothers in turn from that Porto Rico or Haiti or wherever it was
we all came from but none of us ever lived in. So that when he grew up
and had children he would have to pass it on too (and maybe deciding
then and there that it was too much trouble and bother and that he would
not have any children or at least hoped he would not) and hence no man
had a father, no one personal Porto Rico or Haiti, but all mother faces
which ever bred swooping down at those almost calculable moments out of
some obscure ancient general affronting and outraging which the actual
living articulate meat had not even suffered but merely inherited; all
boy flesh that walked and breathed stemming from that one ambiguous
eluded dark fatherhead and so brothered perennial and ubiquitous
everywhere under the sun

Quentin and Shreve stared at one anotherglared rathertheir quiet
regular breathing vaporizing faintly and steadily in the now tomblike
air. There was something curious in the way they looked at one another,
curious and quiet and profoundly intent, not at all as two young men
might look at each other but almost as a youth and a very young girl
might out of virginity itselfa sort of hushed and naked searching,
each look burdened with youths immemorial obsession not with times
dragging weight which the old live with but with its fluidity: the
bright heels of all the lost moments of fifteen and sixteen. Then he
got older and got out from under the apron despite her (despite him too
maybe; maybe the both of them) and he didnt even care. He found out
that she was up to something and he not only didnt care, he didnt even
care that he didnt know what it was; he got older and found out that
she had been shaping and tempering him to be the instrument for whatever
it was her hand was implacable for, maybe came to believe (or saw) that
she had tricked him into receiving that shape and temper, and didnt
care about that too because probably by that time he had learned that
there were three things and no more: breathing, pleasure, darkness; and
without money there could be no pleasure, and without pleasure it would
not even be breathing but mere protoplasmic inhale and collapse of blind
unorganism in a darkness where light never began. And he had the money
because he knew that she knew that the money was the only thing she
could coerce and smooth him into the barrier with when Derby Day came,
so she didnt dare pinch him there and she knew he knew it: so that
maybe he even blackmailed her, bought her off that way: You give me the
jack as I want it and I wont ask why or what for yet. Or maybe she was
so busy grooming him that she never thought of the money now, who
probably never had had much time to remember it or count it or wonder
how much there was in the intervals of the hating and the being mad, and
so all to check him up about the money would be the lawyer. He (Bon)
probably learned that the first thing: that he could go to his mother
and hold the lawyers feet to the fire anytime, like the millionaire
horse has only to come in one time with a little extra sweat on him, and
tomorrow he will have a new jock. Sure, thats who it would be: the
lawyer, that lawyer with his private mad female millionaire to farm, who
probably wasnt interested enough in the money to see whether the checks
had any other writing on them when she signed themthat lawyer who,
with Bons mother already plotting and planning him since before he
could remember for that day when he should be translated quick into so
much rich and rotting dirt, had already been plowing and planting and
harvesting him and the mother both as if he already wasthat lawyer who
maybe had the secret drawer in the secret safe and the secret paper in
it, maybe a chart with colored pins stuck into it like generals have in
campaigns, and all the notations in code: _Today Sutpen finished robbing
a drunken Indian of a hundred miles of virgin land, val. $25,000. At
2:31 today came up out of swamp with final plank for house, val. in
conj. with land 40,000. 7:52 p.m. today married. Bigamy threat val.
minus nil. unless quick buyer. Not probable. Doubtless conjoined with
wife same day. Say 1 year_ and then with maybe the date and the hour
too: _Son. Intrinsic val. possible though not probable forced sale of
house & land plus val. crop minus childs one quarter. Emotional val.
plus 100% times nil. plus val. crop. Say 10 years, one or more children.
Intrinsic val. forced sale house & improved land plus liquid assets
minus childrens share. Emotional val. 100% times increase yearly for
each child plus intrinsic val. plus liquid assets plus working acquired
credit_ and maybe here with the date too: _Daughter_ and you could maybe
even have seen the question mark after it and the other words even:
_daughter? daughter? daughter?_ trailing off not because thinking
trailed off, but on the contrary thinking stopping right still then,
backing up a little and spreading like when you lay a stick across a
trickle of water, spreading and rising slow all around him in whatever
place it was that he could lock the door to and sit quiet and subtract
the money that Bon was spending on his whores and his champagne from
what his mother had, and figure up how much would be left of it tomorrow
and next month and next year or until Sutpen would be good and
ripethinking about the good hard cash that Bon was throwing away on
his horses and clothes and the champagne and gambling and women (he
would have known about the octoroon and the left-handed marriage long
before the mother did even if it had been any secret; maybe he even had
a spy in the bedroom like he seems to have had in Sutpens; maybe he
even planted her, said to himself like you do about a dog: _He is
beginning to ramble. He needs a block. Not a tether: just a light block
of some sort, so he cant get inside of anything that might have a fence
around it_) and only him to try to check it, or as much as he dared, and
not getting far because he knew too that all Bon had to do was to go to
his mother and the race horse would have a gold eating trough if he
wanted it and, if the jock wasnt careful, a new jockey toocounting up
the money, figuring what he would net at this normal rate over the next
few years, and meanwhile crucified between his two problems: whether
maybe what he ought to do was to wash his hands of the Sutpen angle and
clean up what was left and light out for Texas. Except that whenever he
thought about doing that he would have to think about all the money that
Bon had already spent, and that if he had only gone to Texas ten years
ago or five years ago or even last year he would have made more: so that
maybe at night while he would be waiting for the window to begin to turn
gray he would be like what Aunt Rosa said she was and he would have to
deny that he breathed (or maybe wished he didnt) except for that two
hundred percent. times the intrinsic value every New Yearsthe water
backing up from the stick and rising and spreading about him steady and
quiet as light and him sitting there in the actual white glare of
clairvoyance (or second sight or faith in human misfortune and folly or
whatever you want to call it) that was showing him not only what might
happen but what was actually going to happen and him declining to
believe it was going to happen, not because it had come to him as a
vision, but because it would have to have love and honor and courage and
pride in it; and believing it might happen, not because it was logical
and possible, but because it would be the most unfortunate thing for all
concerned that could occur; and though you could no more have proved
vice or virtue or courage or cowardice to him without showing him the
moving people than you could have proved death to him without showing
him a corpse, he did believe in misfortune because of that rigorous and
arduous dusty eunuchs training which taught to leave mans good luck
and joys to God, who would in return surrender all his miseries and
follies and misfortunes to the lice and fleas of Coke and Littleton. And
the old Sabine

They staredglaredat one another. It was Shreve speaking, though save
for the slight difference which the intervening degrees of latitude had
inculcated in them (differences not in tone or pitch but of turns of
phrase and usage of words), it might have been either of them and was in
a sense both: both thinking as one, the voice which happened to be
speaking the thought only the thinking become audible, vocal; the two of
them creating between them, out of the rag-tag and bob-ends of old tales
and talking, people who perhaps had never existed at all anywhere, who,
shadows, were shadows not of flesh and blood which had lived and died
but shadows in turn of what were (to one of them at least, to Shreve)
shades too, quiet as the visible murmur of their vaporizing breath. The
chimes now began to ring for midnight, melodious, slow and faint beyond
the closed, the snow-sealed, window. the old Sabine, who couldnt
to save her life have told you or the lawyer or Bon or anybody else
probably what she wanted, expected, hoped for because she was a woman
and didnt need to want or hope or expect anything, but just to want and
expect and hope (and besides, your father said that when you have plenty
of good strong hating you dont need hope because the hating will be
enough to nourish you)the old Sabine (not so old yet, but she would
have just let herself go in the sense that you keep the engines clean
and oiled and the best of coal in the bunkers but you dont bother to
shine the brightwork or holystone the decks anymore; just let herself go
on the outside. Not fat; she would burn it up too fast for that, shrivel
it away in the gullet between swallowing and stomach; no pleasure in the
chewing; having to chew just another nuisance like no pleasure in the
clothing; having the old wear out and having to choose the new just
another nuisance: and no pleasure in the fine figure he neither of
them said Bon cut in the fine pants that fit his leg and the fine
coats that fit his shoulders nor in the fact that he had more watches
and cuff buttons and finer linen and horses and yellow-wheeled buggies
(not to mention the gals) than most others did, but all that too just an
unavoidable nuisance that he would have to get shut of before he could
do her any good just like he had to get shut of the teething and the
chicken pox and the light boys bones in order to be able to do her any
good)the old Sabine getting the faked reports from the lawyer like
reports sent back to headquarters from a battle front, with maybe a
special nigger in the lawyers anteroom to do nothing else but carry
them and that maybe once in two years or five times in two days,
depending on when she would begin to itch for news and began to worry
himthe report, the communique about how we are not far behind him
(Sutpen) in Texas or Missouri or maybe California (California would be
fine, that far away; convenient, proof inherent in the sheer distance,
the necessity to accept and believe) and we are going to catch up with
him any day now and so do not worry. So she wouldnt, she wouldnt worry
at all: she would just have out the carriage and go to the lawyer,
busting in in the black dress that looked like a section of limp stove
pipe and maybe not even a hat but just a shawl over her head, so that
the only things missing would be the mop and the pailbusting in and
saying Hes dead. I know he is dead and how can he, how can he be, not
meaning what the Aunt Rosa meant: _where did they find or invent a
bullet that could kill him_ but _How can he be allowed to die without
having to admit that he was wrong and suffer and regret it_. And so in
the next two seconds they would almost catch him (hethe lawyerwould
show her the actual letter, the writing in the English she couldnt
read, that had just come in, that he had just sent for the nigger to
carry to her when she came in, and the lawyer done practiced putting the
necessary date on the letter until he could do it now while his back
would be toward her, in the two seconds it would take him to get the
letter out of the file)catch him, get so close to him as to have ample
satisfaction that he was alive; so close indeed that he would be able to
get her out of the office before she had sat down and into the carriage
again and on the way home again where, among the Florentine mirrors and
Paris drapes and tufted camisoles, she would still look like the one
that had come in to scrub the floors, in the black dress that the cook
wouldnt have looked at even when it was new five or six years ago,
holding, clutching the letter she couldnt read (maybe the only word in
it she could even recognize would be the word Sutpen) in one hand and
brushing back a rope of lank iron-colored hair with the other and not
looking at the letter like she was reading it even if she could have,
but swooping at it, blazing down at it as if she knew she would have
only a second to read it in, only a second for it to remain intact in
after her eyes would touch it, before it took fire and so would not be
perused but consumed, leaving her sitting there with a black crumbling
blank carbon ash in her hand.

And him (Neither of them said Bon) there watching her, who
had got old enough to have learned that what he thought was childhood
wasnt childhood, that other children had been made by fathers and
mothers where he had been created new when he began to remember, new
again when he came to the point where his carcass quit being a baby and
became a boy, new again when he quit being a boy and became a man;
created between a lawyer and a woman whom he had thought was feeding and
washing and putting him to bed and finding him in the extra ticklings
for his palate and his pleasure because he was himself, until he got big
enough to find out that it wasnt him at all she was washing and feeding
the candy and the fun to but it was a man that hadnt even arrived yet,
whom even she had never seen yet, who would be something else beside
that boy when he did arrive like the dynamite which destroys the house
and the family and maybe even the whole community aint the old peaceful
paper that maybe would rather be blowing aimless and light along the
wind or the old merry sawdust or the old quiet chemicals that had rather
be still and dark in the quiet earth like they had been before the
meddling guy with ten-power spectacles came and dug them up and
strained, warped and kneaded themcreated between this woman and a
hired lawyer (the woman who since before he could remember he now
realized had been planning and grooming him for some moment that would
come and pass and following which he saw that to her he would be little
more than so much rich rotting dirt; the lawyer who since before he
could remember he now realized had been plowing and planting and
watering and manuring and harvesting him as if he already was) and Bon
watching her, lounging there against the mantel maybe in the fine
clothes, in the harem incense odor of what you might call easy sanctity,
watching her looking at the letter, not even thinking _I am looking upon
my mother naked_ since if the hating was nakedness, she had worn it long
enough now for it to do the office of clothing like they say that
modesty can do, does

So he went away. He went away to school at the age of twenty-eight. And
he wouldnt know nor care about that either: which of themmother or
lawyerit was who decided he should go to school nor why, because he
had known all the time that his mother was up to something and that the
lawyer was up to something, and he didnt care enough about what either
of them was to try to find out, who knew that the lawyer knew that his
mother was up to something but that his mother didnt know that the
lawyer was up to something, and that it would be all right with the
lawyer if his mother got whatever it was she wanted, provided he (the
lawyer) got what he wanted one second before or at least at the same
time. He went away to school; he said All right and told the octoroon
goodbye and went to school, who not in all the twenty-eight years had
ever been told by anyone, Do as these others do; have this task done at
nine a.m. tomorrow or Friday or Monday; maybe it was even the octoroon
whom they (or the lawyer) usedthe light block (not tether) which the
lawyer had put on him to keep him from getting inside of something which
might be found to have a fence around it later. Maybe the mother found
out about the octoroon and the child and the ceremony and discovered
more than the lawyer had (or would believe, who considered Bon only
dull, not a fool) and sent for him and he came and lounged against the
mantel again and maybe knowing what was up, what had happened before she
told him, lounging there with an expression on his face you might call
smiling except it was not that but just something you couldnt see
through or past, and she watching him with maybe the lank iron-colored
strand of hair down again and not even bothering to brush it back now
because she was not looking at any letter now but her eyes blazing at
him, her voice trying to blaze at him out of the urgency of alarm and
fear, but she managing to keep it down since she could not talk about
betrayal because she had not told him yet, and now, at this moment, she
would not dare risk ithe looking at her from behind the smiling that
wasnt smiling but was just something you were not supposed to see
beyond, saying, admitting it: Why not? All young men do it. The
ceremony too. I didnt set out to get the child, but now that I
have. . . . Its not a bad child, either and she watching him, glaring
at him and not being able to say what she would because she had put off
too long now saying what she could: But you. This is different and he
(she would not need to say it. He would know because he already knew why
she had sent for him, even if he did not know and did not care what she
had been up to since before he could remember, since before he could
take a woman whether in love or not): Why not? Men seem to have to
marry some day, sooner or later. And this is one whom I know, who makes
me no trouble. And with the ceremony, that bother, already done. And as
for a little matter like a spot of negro blood not needing to talk
much, say much either, not needing to say _I seem to have been born into
this world with so few fathers that I have too many brothers to outrage
and shame while alive and hence too many descendants to bequeath my
little portion of hurt and harm to, dead_; not that, just a little spot
of negro blood and then to watch the face, the desperate urgency
and fear, then to depart, kissing her maybe, her hand maybe which would
lie in his and even touch his lips like a dead hand because of the
desperate casting for this straw or that; maybe as he went out he said
_she will go to him_ (the lawyer); _if I were to wait five minutes I
could see her in the shawl. So probably by tonight I will be able to
knowif I cared to know._ Maybe by night he did, maybe before that if
they managed to find him, get word to him, because she went to the
lawyer. And it was right in the lawyers alley. Maybe before she even
got started telling it good that gentle white glow began like when you
turn up a wick; maybe he could even almost see his hand writing on into
the space where the _daughter? daughter? daughter?_ never had quite
showed. Because maybe that had been the lawyers trouble and worry and
concern all the time; that ever since she had made him promise he would
never tell Bon who his father was, he had been waiting and wondering how
to do it, since maybe he knew that if he were to tell Bon, Bon might
believe it or he might not, but certainly he would go and tell his
mother that the lawyer had told him and then he (the lawyer) would be
sunk, not for any harm done because there would be no harm, since this
could not alter the situation, but for having crossed his paranoiac
client. Maybe while he would sit in his office adding and subtracting
the money and adding what they would get out of Sutpen (he was never
worried about what Bon would do when he found out; he had probably a
long time ago paid Bon that compliment of thinking that even if he was
too dull or too indolent to suspect or find out about his father
himself, he wasnt fool enough not to be able to take advantage of it
once somebody showed him the proper move; maybe if the thought had ever
occurred to him that because of love or honor or anything else under
Heaven or jurisprudence either, Bon would not, would refuse to, he (the
lawyer) would even have furnished proof that he no longer
breathed)maybe all the time it was this that racked him: how to get
Bon where he would either have to find it out himself, or where
somebodythe father or the motherwould have to tell him. So maybe she
wasnt out of the office goodor at least as soon as he had had time to
open the safe and look in the secret drawer and make sure that it was
the University of Mississippi that Henry attendedbefore his hand was
writing steady and even into the space where the _daughter? daughter?
daughter?_ never had showedand with the date here too: _1859. Two
children. Say 1860, 20 years. Increase 200% times intrinsic val. yearly
plus liquid assets plus credit earned. Approxte val. 1860, 100,000.
Query: bigamy threat, Yes or No. Possible No. Incest threat: Credible
Yes_ and the hand going back before it put down the period, lining out
the _Credible_, writing in _Certain_, underlining it.

And he didnt care about that too; he just said, All right. Because
maybe he knew now that his mother didnt know and never would know what
she wanted, and so he couldnt beat her (maybe he had learned from the
octoroon that you cant beat women anyhow and that if you are wise or
dislike trouble and uproar you dont even try to), and he knew that all
the lawyer wanted was just the money; and so if he just didnt make the
mistake of believing that he could beat all of it, if he just remembered
to be quiet and be alert he could beat some of it.So he said, All
right and let his mother pack the fine clothes and the fine linen into
the bags and trunks, and maybe he lounged into the lawyers office and
watched from behind that something which could have been called smiling
while the lawyer made the elbow motion about getting his horses onto the
steamboat and maybe buying him an extra special body servant and
arranging about the money and all; watching from behind the smiling
while the lawyer did the heavy father even, talking about the
scholarship, the culture, the Latin and the Greek that would equip and
polish him for the position which he would hold in life and how a man to
be sure could get that anywhere, in his own library even, who had the
will; but how there was something, some quality to culture which only
the monastic, the cloistral monotony of asay obscure and small (though
high class, high class) collegeand he (neither of them said
Bon. Never at any time did there seem to be any confusion between them
as to whom Shreve meant by he) listening courteous and quiet
behind that expression which you were not supposed to see past, asking
at last, interrupting maybe, courteous and affablenothing of irony,
nothing of sarcasmWhat did you say this college was?: and now a good
deal of elbow motion here while the lawyer would shuffle through the
papers to find the one from which he could read that name which he had
been memorizing ever since he first talked to the mother: The
University of Mississippi, atWhere did you say?

Oxford, Quentin said. Its about forty miles from

Oxford. And then the papers could be still again because he would
be talking: about a small college only ten years old, about how there
wouldnt be anything to distract him from his studies there (where, in a
sense, wisdom herself would be a virgin or at least not very second
hand) and how he would have a chance to observe another and a provincial
section of the country in which his high destiny was rooted; (granted
the outcome of this war which was without doubt imminent, the successful
conclusion of which we all hoped for, had no doubt of) as the man he
would be and the economic power he would represent when his mother
passed on, and he listening behind that expression, saying, Then you
dont recommend the law as a vocation? and now for just a moment the
lawyer would stop, but not long; maybe not long enough or perceptible
enough for you to call it pause: and he would be looking at Bon too: It
hadnt occurred to me that the law might appeal to you and Bon:
Neither did practising with a rapier appeal to me while I was doing it.
But I can recall at least one occasion in my life when I was glad I had
and then the lawyer, smooth and easy: Then by all means let it be the
law. Your mother will agbe pleased. All right, he said, not
goodbye; he didnt care. Maybe he didnt even say goodbye to the
octoroon, to those tears and lamentations and maybe even the clinging,
the soft despairing magnolia-colored arms about his knees, and (say)
three and a half feet above those boneless steel gyves that expression
of his which was not smiling but just something not to be seen through.
Because you cant beat them: you just flee (and thank God you can flee,
can escape from that massy five-foot-thick maggot-cheesy solidarity
which overlays the earth, in which men and women in couples are ranked
and racked like ninepins; thanks to whatever Gods for that masculine
hipless tapering peg which fits light and glib to move where the
cartridge-chambered hips of women hold them fast)not goodbye: all
right: and one night he walked up the gangplank between the torches and
probably only the lawyer there to see him off and this not for godspeed
but to make sure that he actually took the boat. And the new extra
nigger opening the bags in the stateroom, spreading the fine clothes,
and the ladies already gathered in the saloon for supper and the men in
the bar, preparing for it, but not he; he alone, at the rail, with a
cigar maybe, watching the city drift and wink and glitter and sink away
and then all motion cease, the boat suspended immobile and without
progress from the stars themselves by the two ropes of spark-filled
smoke streaming upward from the stacks. And who knows what thinking,
what sober weighing and discarding, who had known for years that his
mother was up to something; that the lawyer was up to something and
though he knew that was just money, yet he knew that within his (the
lawyers) known masculine limitations he (the lawyer) could be almost as
dangerous as the unknown quantity which was his mother; and now
thisschool, collegeand he twenty-eight years old. And not only that,
but this particular college, which he had never heard of, which ten
years ago did not even exist; and knowing too that it was the lawyer who
had chosen it for himwhat sober, what intent, what almost frowning
_Why? Why? Why this college, this particular one above all
others?_maybe leaning there in that solitude between panting smoke and
engines and almost touching the answer, aware of the jigsaw puzzle
picture integers of it waiting, almost lurking, just beyond his reach,
inextricable, jumbled, and unrecognizable yet on the point of falling
into pattern which would reveal to him at once, like a flash of light,
the meaning of his whole life, pastthe Haiti, the childhood, the
lawyer, the woman who was his mother. And maybe the letter itself right
there under his feet, somewhere in the darkness beneath the deck on
which he stoodthe letter addressed not to Thomas Sutpen at Sutpens
Hundred but to Henry Sutpen, Esquire, in Residence at the University of
Mississippi, near Oxford, Mississippi. One day Henry showed it to him
and there was no gentle spreading glow but a flash, a glare (showed it
to him who not only had no visible father but had found himself to be,
even in infancy, enclosed by an unsleeping cabal bent apparently on
teaching him that he had never had a father, that his mother had emerged
from a sojourn in limbo, from that state of blessed amnesia in which the
weak senses can take refuge from the godless dark forces and powers
which weak human flesh cannot stand, to wake pregnant, shrieking and
screaming and thrashing, not against the ruthless agony of labor but in
protest against the outrage of her swelling loins; that he had been
fathered on her not through that natural process but had been blotted
onto and out of her body by the old infernal immortal male principle of
all unbridled terror and darkness) a glare in which he stood looking at
the innocent face of the youth almost ten years his junior, while one
part of him said _He has my brow my skull my jaw my hands_ and the other
said _Wait. Wait. You cant know yet. You cannot know yet whether what
you see is what you are looking at or what you are believing. Wait.
Wait._

The letter which he it was not Bon Shreve meant now, yet again
Quentin seemed to comprehend without difficulty or effort whom he meant
wrote maybe as soon as he finished that last entry in the record,
into the _daughter? daughter? daughter?_ while he thought _By all means
he must not know now, must not be told before he can get there and he
and the daughter_not remembering anything about young love from his
own youth and would not have believed it if he had, yet willing to use
that too as he would have used courage and pride, thinking not of any
hushed wild importunate blood and light hands hungry for touching, but
of the fact that this Oxford and this Sutpens Hundred were only a days
ride apart and Henry already established in the University and so maybe
for once in his life the lawyer even believed in God: _My Dear Mr
Sutpen: The undersigned name will not be known to you, nor are the
writers position and circumstances, for all their reflected worth and
(I hope) value, so unobscure as to warrant the hope that he will ever
see you in person or you heworth reflected from and value rendered to
two persons of birth and position, one of whom, a lady and widowed
mother, resides in that seclusion befitting her condition in the city
from which this letter is inscribed, the other of whom, a young
gentleman her son, will either be as you read this, or will shortly
thereafter be a petitioner before the same Bar of knowledge and wisdom
as yourself. It is in his behalf that I write. No: I will not say
behalf; certainly I shall not let his lady mother nor the young
gentleman himself suspect that I used that term, even to one, Sir, scion
of the principal family of that county as it is your fortunate lot to
be. Indeed, it were better for me if I had not written at all. But I do;
I have; it is irrevocable now; if you discern aught in this letter which
smacks of humility, take it as coming not from the mother and certainly
not from the son, but from the pen of one whose humble position as legal
adviser and man of business to the above described lady and young
gentleman, whose loyalty and gratitude toward one whose generosity has
found him (I do not confess this; I proclaim it) in bread and meat and
fire and shelter over a period long enough to have taught him gratitude
and loyalty even if he had not known them, has led him into an action
whose means fall behind its intention for the reason that he is only
what he is and professes himself to be, not what he would. So take this,
Sir, neither as the unwarranted insolence which an unsolicited
communication from myself to you would be, not as a plea for sufferance
on behalf of an unknown, but as an introduction (clumsy though it be) to
one young gentleman whose position needs neither detailing nor
recapitulation in the place where this letter is read, of another young
gentleman whose position requires neither detailing nor recapitulation
in the place where it was written._Not goodbye; all right; who had had
so many fathers as to have neither love nor pride to receive or inflict,
neither honor nor shame to share or bequeath; to whom one place was the
same as another, like to a catcosmopolitan New Orleans or bucolic
Mississippi: his own inherited and heritable Florentine lamps and gilded
toilet seats and tufted mirrors, or a little jerkwater college not ten
years old; champagne in the octoroons boudoir or whiskey on a harsh new
table in a monks cell and a country youth, a bucolic heir apparent who
had probably never spent a dozen nights outside of his paternal house
(unless perhaps to lie fully dressed beside a fire in the woods
listening to dogs running) until he came to school, whom he watched
aping his clothing carriage speech and all and (the youth) completely
unaware that he was doing it, who (the youth) over the bottle one night
said, blurtedno, not blurted: it would be fumbling, groping: and he
(the cosmopolite ten years the youths senior almost, lounging in one of
the silk robes the like of which the youth had never seen before and
believed that only women wore) watching the youth blush fiery red yet
still face him, still look him straight in the eye while he fumbled,
groped, blurted with abrupt complete irrelevance: If I had a brother, I
wouldnt want him to be a younger brother and he: Ah? and the youth:
No. I would want him to be older than me and he: No son of a landed
father wants an older brother and the youth: Yes. I do, looking
straight at the other, the esoteric, the sybarite, standing (the youth)
now, erect, thin (because he was young), his face scarlet but his head
high and his eyes steady: Yes. And I would want him to be just like
you and he: Is that so? The whiskeys your side. Drink or pass.

And now, Shreve said, were going to talk about love. But he didnt
need to say that either, any more than he had needed to specify which he
meant by he, since neither of them had been thinking about anything
else; all that had gone before just so much that had to be overpassed
and none else present to overpass it but them, as someone always has to
rake the leaves up before you can have the bonfire. That was why it did
not matter to either of them which one did the talking, since it was not
the talking alone which did it, performed and accomplished the
overpassing, but some happy marriage of speaking and hearing wherein
each before the demand, the requirement, forgave condoned and forgot the
faulting of the otherfaultings both in the creating of this shade whom
they discussed (rather, existed in) and in the hearing and sifting and
discarding the false and conserving what seemed true, or fit the
preconceivedin order to overpass to love, where there might be paradox
and inconsistency but nothing fault nor false. And now, love. He must
have known all about her before he ever saw herwhat she looked like,
her private hours in that provincial womens world that even men of the
family were not supposed to know a great deal about; he must have
learned it without even having to ask a single question. Jesus, it must
have kind of boiled out all over him. There must have been nights and
nights while Henry was learning from him how to lounge about a bedroom
in a gown and slippers such as women wore, in a faint though
unmistakable effluvium of scent such as women used, smoking a cigar
almost as a woman might smoke it, yet withal such an air of indolent and
lethal assurance that only the most reckless man would have gratuitously
drawn the comparison (and with no attempt to teach, train, play the
mentor on his partand then maybe yes; maybe who could know what times
he looked at Henrys face and thought, not _there but for the
intervening leaven of that blood which we do not have in common is my
skull, my brow, sockets, shape and angle of jaw and chin and some of my
thinking behind it, and which he could see in my face in his turn if he
but knew to look as I know but there, just behind a little, obscured a
little by that alien blood whose admixing was necessary in order that he
exist is the face of the man who shaped us both out of that blind chancy
darkness which we call the future; therethereat any moment, second,
I shall penetrate by something of will and intensity and dreadful need,
and strip that alien leavening from it and look not on my brothers face
whom I did not know I possessed and hence never missed, but my fathers,
out of the shadow of whose absence my spirits posthumeity has never
escaped_at what moment thinking, watching the eagerness which was
without abjectness, the humility which surrendered no pridethe entire
proffering of the spirit of which the unconscious aping of clothes and
speech and mannerisms was but the shellthinking _what cannot I do with
this willing flesh and bone if I wish; this flesh and bone and spirit
which stemmed from the same source that mine did, but which sprang in
quiet peace and contentment and ran in steady even though monotonous
sunlight, where that which he bequeathed me sprang in hatred and outrage
and unforgiving and ran in shadowwhat could I not mold of this
malleable and eager clay which that father himself could notto what
shape of what good there might, must, be in that blood and none handy to
take and mold that portion of it in me until too late:_ or what moments
when he might have told himself that it was nonsense, it could not be
true; that such coincidences only happened in books, thinkingthe
weariness, the fatalism, the incorrigible cat for solitude_That young
clodhopper bastard. How shall I get rid of him:_ and then the voice, the
other voice: _You dont mean that:_ and he: _No. But I do mean the
clodhopper bastard_) and the days, the afternoons, while they rode
together (and Henry aping him here too, who was the better horseman, who
maybe had nothing of what Bon would have called style but who had done
more of it, to whom a horse was as natural as walking, who would ride
anything anywhere and at anything) while he must have watched himself
being swamped and submerged in the bright unreal flood of Henrys
speech, translated (the three of them: himself and Henry and the sister
whom he had never seen and perhaps did not even have any curiosity to
see) into a world like a fairy tale in which nothing else save them
existed, riding beside Henry, listening, needing to ask no questions, to
prompt to further speech in any manner that youth who did not even
suspect that he and the man beside him might be brothers, who each time
his breath crossed his vocal chords was saying _From now on mine and my
sisters house will be your house and mine and my sisters lives your
life_, wondering (Bon)or maybe not wondering at allhow if conditions
were reversed and Henry was the stranger and he (Bon) the scion and
still knew what he suspected, if he would say the same; then (Bon)
agreeing at last, saying at last, All right. Ill come home with you
for Christmas, not to see the third inhabitant of Henrys fairy tale,
not to see the sister because he had not once thought of her: he had
merely listened about her: but thinking _So at last I shall see him,
whom it seems I was bred up never to expect to see, whom I had even
learned to live without_, thinking maybe how he would walk into the
house and see the man who made him and then he would know; there would
be that flash, that instant of indisputable recognition between them and
he would know for sure and foreverthinking maybe _Thats all I want.
He need not even acknowledge me; I will let him understand just as
quickly that he need not do that, that I do not expect that, will not be
hurt by that, just as he will let me know that quickly that I am his
son_, thinking maybe, maybe again with that expression you might call
smiling but which was not, which was just something that even just a
clodhopper bastard was not intended to see beyond: _I am my mothers
son, at least: I do not seem to know what I want either_. Because he
knew exactly what he wanted; it was just the saying of itthe physical
touch even though in secret, hiddenthe living touch of that flesh
warmed before he was born by the same blood which it had bequeathed him
to warm his own flesh with, to be bequeathed by him in turn to run hot
and loud in veins and limbs after that first flesh and then his own were
dead. So the Christmas came and he and Henry rode the forty miles to
Sutpens Hundred, with Henry still talking, still keeping distended and
light and iridescent with steady breathing that fairy balloon-vacuum in
which the three of them existed, lived, moved even maybe, in attitudes
without fleshhimself and the friend and the sister whom the friend had
never seen and (though Henry did not know it) had not even thought about
yet but only listened about from behind the more urgent thinking, and
Henry probably not even noticing that the nearer they came to home the
less Bon talked, had to say on any subject, and maybe even (and
certainly Henry would not know this) listening less. And so he went into
the house: and maybe somebody looking at him would have seen on his face
an expression a good deal like the onethat proffering with humility
yet with pride too, of complete surrenderwhich he had used to see on
Henrys face, and maybe he telling himself _I not only dont know what it
is I want but apparently I am a good deal younger than I thought also_:
and saw face to face the man who might be his father, and nothing
happenedno shock, no hot communicated flesh that speech would have
been too slow even to impedenothing. And he spent ten days there, not
only the esoteric, the sybarite, the steel blade in the silken
tessellated sheath which Henry had begun to ape at the University, but
the object of art, the mold and mirror of form and fashion which Mrs
Sutpen (so your father said) accepted him as and insisted (didnt your
father say?) that he be (and would have purchased him as and paid for
him with Judith even, if there had been no other bidder among the four
of themor didnt your father say?) and which he did remain to her
until he disappeared, taking Henry with him, and she never saw him again
and war and trouble and grief and bad food filled her days until maybe
she didnt even remember after a while that she had ever forgot him.
(And the girl, the sister, the virginJesus, who to know what she saw
that afternoon when they rode up the drive, what prayer, what maiden
meditative dream ridden up out of whatever fabulous land, not in harsh
stove iron but the silken and tragic Lancelot nearing thirty, ten years
older than she was and wearied, sated with what experiences and
pleasures, which Henrys letters must have created for her.) And the day
came to depart and no sign yet; he and Henry rode away and still no
sign, no more sign at parting than when he had seen it first, in that
face where he might (he would believe) have seen for himself the truth
and so would have needed no sign, if it hadnt been for the beard; no
sign in the eyes which could see his face because there was no beard to
hide it, could have seen the truth if it were there: yet no flicker in
them: and so he knew it was in his face because he knew that the other
had seen it there just exactly as Henry was to know the next Christmas
eve in the library that his father was not lying by the fact that the
father said nothing, did nothing. Maybe he even thought, wondered if
perhaps that was not why the beard, if maybe the other had not hidden
behind that beard against this very day, and if so, why? why? thinking
_But why? Why?_ since he wanted so little, could have understood if the
other had wanted the signal to be in secret, would have been quick and
glad to let it be in secret even if he could not have understood why,
thinking in the middle of this _My God, I am young, young, and I didnt
even know it; they didnt even tell me, that I was young_, feeling that
same despair and shame like when you have to watch your father fail in
physical courage, thinking, _It should have been me that failed; me, I,
not he who stemmed from that blood which we both bear before it could
have become corrupt and tainted by whatever it was in mothers that he
could not brook_.Wait, Shreve cried, though Quentin had not spoken:
it had been merely some quality, some gathering of Quentins still laxed
and hunched figure which presaged speech, because Shreve said Wait.
Wait, before Quentin could have begun to speak. Because he hadnt even
looked at her. Oh, he had seen her all right, he had had plenty of
opportunity for that; he could not have helped but that because Mrs
Sutpen would have seen to itten days of that kind of planned and
arranged and executed privacies like the campaigns of dead generals in
the textbooks, in libraries and parlors and drives in the buggy in the
afternoonsall planned three months ago when Mrs Sutpen read Henrys
first letter with Bons name in it, until maybe even Judith too began to
feel like the other one to a pair of goldfish: and him even talking to
her too, or what talking he could have found to do to a country girl who
probably never saw a man young or old before who sooner or later didnt
smell like manure; talking to her about like he would talk to the old
dame on the gold chairs in the parlor, except that in the one case he
would have to make all the conversation and in the other he would not
even be able to make his own escape but would have to wait for Henry to
come and get him. And maybe he had even thought about her by that time;
maybe at the times when he would be telling himself _it cant be so; he
could not look at me like this every day and make no sign if it were so_
he would even tell himself _She would be easy_ like when you have left
the champagne on the supper table and are walking toward the whiskey on
the sideboard and you happen to pass a cup of lemon sherbet on a tray
and you look at the sherbet and tell yourself, That would be easy too
only who wants it.Does that suit you?

But its not love, Quentin said.

Because why not? Because listen. What was it the old dame, the Aunt
Rosa, told you about how there are some things that just have to be
whether they are or not, have to be a damn sight more than some other
things that maybe are and it dont matter a damn whether they are or not?
That was it. He just didnt have time yet. Jesus, he must have known it
would be. Like that lawyer thought, he wasnt a fool; the trouble was,
he wasnt the kind of not-fool the lawyer thought he would be. He must
have known it was going to happen. It would be like you passed that
sherbet and maybe you knew you would even reach the sideboard and the
whiskey, yet you knew that tomorrow morning you would want that sherbet,
then you reached the whiskey and you knew you wanted that sherbet now;
maybe you didnt even go to the sideboard, maybe you even looked back at
that champagne on the supper table among the dirty haviland and the
crumpled damask, and all of a sudden you knew you didnt want to go back
there even. It would be no question of choosing, having to choose
between the champagne or whiskey and the sherbet, but all of a sudden
(it would be spring then, in that country where he had never spent a
spring before and you said North Mississippi is a little harder country
than Louisiana, with dogwood and violets and the early scentless flowers
but the earth and the nights still a little cold and the hard tight
sticky buds like young girls nipples on alder and Judas trees and beech
and maple and even something young in the cedars like he never saw
before) you find that you dont want anything but that sherbet and that
you havent been wanting anything else but that and you have been
wanting that pretty hard for some timebesides knowing that that
sherbet is there for you to take. Not just for anybody to take but for
you to take, knowing just from looking at that cup that it would be like
a flower that, if any other hand reached for it, it would have thorns on
it but not for your hand; and him not used to that since all the other
cups that had been willing and easy for him to take up hadnt contained
sherbet but champagne or at least kitchen wine. And more than that.
There was the knowing what he suspected might be so, or not knowing if
it was so or not. And who to say if it wasnt maybe the possibility of
incest, because who (without a sister: I dont know about the others) has
been in love and not discovered the vain evanescence of the fleshly
encounter; who has not had to realize that when the brief all is done
you must retreat from both love and pleasure, gather up your own rubbish
and refusethe hats and pants and shoes which you drag through the
worldand retreat since the gods condone and practice these and the
dreamy immeasurable coupling which floats oblivious above the trampling
and harried instant, the: _was-not: is: was:_ is a perquisite only of
balloony and weightless elephants and whales: but maybe if there were
sin too maybe you would not be permitted to escape, uncouple,
return.Aint that right? He ceased, he could have been interrupted
easily now. Quentin could have spoke now, but Quentin did not. He just
sat as before, his hands in his trousers pockets, his shoulders hugged
inward and hunched, his face lowered and he looking somehow curiously
smaller than he actually was because of his actual height and
sparenessthat quality of delicacy about the bones, articulation, which
even at twenty still had something about it, some last echo about it, of
adolescencethat is, as compared with the cherubic burliness of the
other who faced him, who looked younger, whose very superiority in bulk
and displacement made him look even younger, as a plump boy of twelve
who outweighs the other by twenty or thirty pounds still looks younger
than the boy of fourteen who had that plumpness once and lost it, sold
it (whether with his consent or not) for that state of virginity which
is neither boys nor girls.

I dont know, Quentin said.

All right, Shreve said. Maybe I dont either. Only, Jesus, some day
you are bound to fall in love. They just wouldnt beat you that way. It
would be like if God had got Jesus born and saw that he had the
carpenter tools and then never gave him anything to build with them.
Dont you believe that?

I dont know, Quentin said. He did not move. Shreve looked at him. Even
while they were not talking their breaths in the tomblike air vaporized
gently and quietly. The chimes for midnight would have rung some time
ago now.

You mean, it dont matter to you? Quentin did not answer. Thats
right. Dont say it. Because I would know you are lying.All right then.
Listen. Because he never had to worry about the love because that would
take care of itself. Maybe he knew there was a fate, a doom on him, like
what the old Aunt Rosa told you about some things that just have to be
whether they are or not, just to balance the books, write _Paid_ on the
old sheet so that whoever keeps them can take it out of the ledger and
burn it, get rid of it. Maybe he knew then that whatever the old man had
done, whether he meant well or ill by it, it wasnt going to be the old
man who would have to pay the check; and now that the old man was
bankrupt with the incompetence of age, who should do the paying if not
his sons, his get, because wasnt it done that way in the old days? the
old Abraham full of years and weak and incapable now of further harm,
caught at last and the captains and the collectors saying, Old man, we
dont want you and Abraham would say, Praise the Lord, I have raised
about me sons to bear the burden of mine iniquities and persecutions;
yea, perhaps even to restore my flocks and herds from the hand of the
ravisher: that I might rest mine eyes upon my goods and chattels, upon
the generations of them and of my descendants increased an hundred fold
as my soul goeth out from me. He knew all the time that the love would
take care of itself. Maybe that was why he didnt have to think about
her during those three months between that September and that Christmas
while Henry talked about her to him, saying every time he breathed:
_Hers and my lives are to exist within and upon yours;_ did not need to
waste any time over the love after it happened, backfired on him, why he
never bothered to write her any letters (except that last one) which she
would want to save, why he never actually proposed to her and gave her a
ring for Mrs Sutpen to show around. Because the fate was on her too: the
same old Abraham who was so old and weak now nobody would want him in
the flesh on any debt; maybe he didnt even have to wait for that
Christmas to see her to know this; maybe thats what it was that came
out of the three months of Henrys talking that he heard without
listening to: _I am not hearing about a young girl, a virgin; I am
hearing about a narrow delicate fenced virgin field already furrowed and
bedded so that all I shall need to do is drop the seeds in, caress it
smooth again_, saw her that Christmas and knew it for certain and then
forgot it, went back to school and did not even remember that he had
forgotten it, because he did not have time then; maybe it was just one
day in that spring you told about when he stopped and said, right quiet:
_All right. I want to go to bed with who might be my sister. All right_
and then forgot that too. Because he didnt have time. That is, he
didnt have anything else but time, because he had to wait. But not for
her. That was all fixed. It was the other. Maybe he thought it would be
in the mail bag each time the nigger rode over from Sutpens Hundred,
and Henry believing it was the letter from her that he was waiting for,
when what he was thinking was _Maybe he will write it then. He would
just have to write I am your father. Burn this and I would do it. Or
if not that, a sheet, a scrap of paper with the one word Charles in
his hand, and I would know what he meant and he would not even have to
ask me to burn it. Or a lock of his hair or a paring from his finger
nail and I would know them because I believe now that I have known what
his hair and his finger nails would look like all my life, could choose
that lock and that paring out of a thousand._ And it did not come, and
his letter went to her every two weeks and hers came back to him, and
maybe he thought _If one of mine to her should come back to me unopened
then. That would be a sign._ And that didnt happen: and then Henry
began to talk about his stopping at Sutpens Hundred for a day or so on
his way home and he said all right to it, said _It will be Henry who
will get the letter, the letter saying it is inconvenient for me to come
at that time; so apparently he does not intend to acknowledge me as his
son, but at least I shall have forced him to admit that I am_. And that
one did not come either and the date was set and the family at Sutpens
Hundred notified of it and that letter did not come either and he
thought _It will be then; I wronged him; maybe this is what he has been
waiting for_ and maybe his heart sprang then, maybe he said _Yes. Yes. I
will renounce her; I will renounce love and all; that will be cheap,
cheap, even though he say to me never look upon my face again; take my
love and my acknowledgment in secret, and go I will do that; I will not
even demand to know of him what it was my mother did that justified his
action toward her and me._ So the day came and he and Henry rode the
forty miles again, into the gates and up the drive to the house. He knew
what would be therethe woman whom he had seen once and seen through,
the girl whom he had seen through without even having to see once, the
man whom he had seen daily, watched out of his fearful intensity of need
and had never penetratedthe mother who had taken Henry aside before
they had been six hours in the house on that Christmas visit and
informed him of the engagement almost before the fiance had had time to
associate the daughters name with the daughters face: so that probably
before they even reached school again, and without his being aware that
he had done so, Henry had already told Bon what was in his mothers
mind, (who had already told Bon what was in his); so that maybe before
they even started on Bons second visit(It would be June now and what
would it be in North Mississippi? what was it you said; the magnolias in
bloom and the mockingbirds, and in fifty years more, after they had gone
and fought it and lost it and come back home, the Decoration Day and the
veterans in the neat brushed hand-ironed gray and the spurious bronze
medals that never meant anything to begin with, and the chosen young
girls in white dresses bound at the waist with crimson sashes and the
band would play Dixie and all the old doddering men would yell that you
would not have thought would have had wind enough to get there, walk
down town to sit on the rostrum even)it would be June now, with the
magnolias and mockingbirds in the moonlight and the curtains blowing in
the June air of Commencement, and the music, fiddles and triangles,
inside among the swirling and dipping hoops: and Henry would be a little
tight, that should have been saying I demand to know your intentions
toward my sister but wasnt saying it, instead maybe blushing again
even in the moonlight, but standing straight and blushing because when
you are proud enough to be humble you dont have to cringe (who every
time he breathed over his vocal chords he was saying _We belong to you;
do as you will with us_), saying I used to think that I would hate the
man that I would have to look at every day and whose every move and
action and speech would say to me, I have seen and touched parts of your
sisters body that you will never see and touch: and now I know that I
shall hate him and thats why I want that man to be you, knowing that
Bon would know what he meant, was trying to say, tell him, thinking,
telling himself (Henry): _Not just because he is older than I am and has
known more than I shall ever know and has remembered more of it; but
because of my own free will, and whether I knew it at the time or not
does not matter, I gave my life and Judiths both to him_

Thats still not love, Quentin said.

All right, Shreve said. Just listen.They rode the forty miles and
into the gates and up to the house. And this time Sutpen wasnt even
there. And Ellen didnt even know where he had gone, believing blandly
and volubly that he had gone to Memphis or maybe even to Saint Louis on
business, and Henry and Judith not even caring that much, and only he,
Bon, to know where Sutpen had gone, saying to himself _Of course; he
wasnt sure; he had to go there to make sure_, telling himself that loud
now, loud and fast too so he would not, could not, hear the thinking,
the _But if he suspected, why not have told me? I would have done that,
gone to him first, who have the blood after it was tainted and corrupt
by whatever it was in mother_; loud and fast now, telling himself
_Thats what it is; maybe he has gone on ahead to wait for me; he left
no message for me here because the others are not to suspect yet and he
knows that I will know at once where he is when I find him gone_,
thinking of the two of them, the somber vengeful woman who was his
mother and the grim rocklike man who had looked at him every day for ten
days with absolutely no alteration of expression at all, facing one
another in grim armistice after almost thirty years in that rich baroque
drawing room in that house which he called home since apparently
everybody seemed to have to have a home, the man whom he was now sure
was his father not humble now either (and he, Bon, proud of that), not
saying even now _I was wrong_ but _I admit that it is so_Jesus, think
of his heart then, during those two days, with the old gal throwing
Judith at him every minute now because she had been spreading the news
of the engagement confidentially through the county ever since
Christmasdidnt your father say how she had even taken Judith to
Memphis in the spring to buy the trousseau?and Judith neither having
to accede to the throwing nor to resist it but just being, just existing
and breathing like Henry did who maybe one morning during that spring
waked up and lay right still in the bed and took stock, added the
figures and drew the balance and told himself, _All right. I am trying
to make myself into what I think he wants me to be; he can do anything
he wants to with me; he has only to tell me what to do and I will do it;
even though what he asked me to do looked to me like dishonor, I would
still do it_, only Judith, being a female and so wiser than that, would
not even consider dishonor: she would just say, _All right. I will do
anything he might ask me to do and that is why he will never ask me to
do anything that I consider dishonorable_: so that (maybe he even kissed
her that time, the first time she had ever been kissed maybe and she too
innocent to be coy or modest or even to know that she had been
temporized with, maybe afterward just looking at him with a kind of
peaceful and blank surprise at the fact that your sweetheart apparently
kissed you the first time like your brother wouldprovided of course
that your brother ever thought of, could be brought to, kissing you on
the mouth)so that when the two days were up and he was gone again and
Ellen shrieking at her, What? No engagement, no troth, no ring? she
would be too astonished even to lie about it because that would be the
first time it would have occurred to her that there had been no
proposal.Think of his heart then, while he rode to the River, and then
on the steamboat itself where he walked up and down the deck, feeling
through the deck the engines driving him nearer and nearer day and night
to the moment which he must have realized now he had been waiting
forever since he had got big enough to comprehend. Of course every now
and then he would have to say it pretty fast and loud, _Thats all it
is. He just wants to make sure first_ to drown out the old _But why do
it this way? Why not back there? He knows that I shall never make any
claim upon any part of what he now possesses, gained at the price of
what sacrifice and endurance and scorn (so they told me; not he: they)
only he knows; knows that so well that it would never have occurred to
him just as he knows it would never occur to me that this might be his
reason, who is not only generous but ruthless, who must have surrendered
everything he and mother owned to her and to me as the price of
repudiating her_, not because the doing it this way hurt him, flouted
him and kept him in suspense that much unnecessary longer, because he
didnt matter; whether he was irked or even crucified didnt matter: it
was the fact that he had to be kept constantly reminded that he would
not have done it this way himself, yet he had stemmed from the blood
after whatever it was his mother had been or done had tainted and
corrupted it.Nearer and nearer, until suspense and puzzlement and
haste and all seemed blended into one sublimation of passive surrender
in which he thought only _All right. All right. Even this way. Even if
he wants to do it this way. I will promise never to see her again. Never
to see him again._ Then he reached home. And he never learned if Sutpen
had been there or not. He never knew. He believed it, but he never
knewhis mother the same somber unchanged fierce paranoiac whom he had
left in September, from whom he could learn nothing by indirection and
whom he dared not ask outrightthe very fact that he saw through the
skillful questions of the lawyer (as to how he had liked the school and
the people of that country and how perhapsor had he not perhaps?he
had made friends up there among the country families) only that much
more proof to him at that time that Sutpen had not been there, or at
least the lawyer was not aware that he had, since now that he believed
he had fathomed the lawyers design in sending him to that particular
school to begin with, he saw nothing in the questions to indicate that
the lawyer had learned anything new since. (Or what he could have
learned in that interview with the lawyer, because it would be a short
one; it would be next to the shortest one ever to transpire between
them, the shortest one of all next to the last one of course, the one
which would occur in the next summer, when Henry would be with him.)
Because the lawyer would not dare risk asking him outright, just as he
(Bon) did not dare to ask his mother outright. Because, though the
lawyer believed him to be rather a fool than dull or dense, yet even he
(the lawyer) never for one moment believed that even Bon was going to be
the kind of a fool he was going to be. So he told the lawyer nothing and
the lawyer told him nothing, and the summer passed and September came
and still the lawyer (his mother too) had not once asked him if he
wanted to return to the school. So that at last he had to say it
himself, that he intended to return; and maybe he knew that he had lost
that move since there was nothing whatever in the lawyers face save an
agents acquiescence. So he returned to school, where Henry was waiting
(oh yes; waiting) for him, who did not even say You didnt answer my
letters. You didnt even write to Judith who had already said _What my
sister and I have and are belongs to you_ but maybe he did write to
Judith now, by the first nigger post which rode to Sutpens Hundred,
about how it had been an uneventful summer and hence nothing to write
about, with maybe _Charles Bon_ plain and inelidable on the outside of
the envelope and he thinking _He will have to see that. Maybe he will
send it back_ thinking _Maybe if it comes back nothing will stop me then
and so maybe at last I will know what I am going to do_. But it didnt
come back. And the others didnt come back. And the fall passed and
Christmas came and they rode again to Sutpens Hundred and this time
Sutpen was not there again, he was in the field, he had gone to town, he
was huntingsomething; Sutpen not there when they rode up and Bon knew
he had not expected him to be there, saying _Now. Now. Now. It will come
now. It will come this time, and I am young, young, because I still dont
know what I am going to do._ So maybe what he was doing that twilight
(because he knew that Sutpen had returned, was now in the house; it
would be like a wind, something, dark and chill, breathing upon him and
he stopping, grave, quiet, alert, thinking _What? What is it?_ Then he
would know; he could feel the other entering the house, and he would let
his held breath go quiet and easy, a profound exhalation, his heart
quiet too) in the garden while he walked with Judith and talked to her,
gallant and elegant and automatic (and Judith thinking about that like
she thought about that first kiss back in the summer: _So thats it.
Thats what love is_, bludgeoned once more by disappointment but still
unbowed)maybe what he was doing there now was waiting, telling himself
_Maybe even yet he will send for me. At least say it to me_ even though
he knew better: _He is in the library now, he has sent the nigger for
Henry, now Henry is entering the room_: so that maybe he stopped and
faced her, with something in his face that was smiling now, and took her
by the elbows and turned her, easy and gentle, until she faced the
house, and said Go. I wish to be alone to think about love and she
went just as she took the kiss that day, with maybe the feel of the flat
of his hand light and momentary upon her behind. And he stood there
facing the house until Henry came out, and they looked at one another
for a while with no word said and then turned and walked together
through the garden, across the lot and into the stable, where maybe
there was a nigger there and maybe they saddled the two horses
themselves and waited until the house nigger came with the two repacked
saddlebags. And maybe he didnt even say then, But he sent no word to
me?

Shreve ceased. That is, for all the two of them, Shreve and Quentin,
knew he had stopped, since for all the two of them knew he had never
begun, since it did not matter (and possibly neither of them conscious
of the distinction) which one had been doing the talking. So that now it
was not two but four of them riding the two horses through the dark over
the frozen December ruts of that Christmas Eve: four of them and then
just twoCharles-Shreve and Quentin-Henry, the two of them both
believing that Henry was thinking _He_ (meaning his father) _has
destroyed us all_, not for one moment thinking _He_ (meaning Bon) _must
have known or at least suspected this all the time; thats why he has
acted as he has, why he did not answer my letters last summer nor write
to Judith, why he has never asked her to marry him_; believing that that
must have occurred to Henry, certainly during that moment after Henry
emerged from the house and he and Bon looked at one another for a while
without a word then walked down to the stable and saddled the horses,
but that Henry had just taken that in stride because he did not yet
believe it even though he knew that it was true, because he must have
now understood with complete despair the secret of his whole attitude
toward Bon from that first instinctive moment when he had seen him a
year and a quarter ago; he knew, yet he did not, had to refuse to,
believe. So it was four of them who rode the two horses through that
night and then across the bright frosty North Mississippi Christmas day,
in something very like pariah-hood passing the plantation houses with
sprigs of holly thrust beneath the knockers on the doors and mistletoe
hanging from the chandeliers and bowls of eggnog and toddy on tables in
the halls and the blue unwinded wood smoke standing above the plastered
chimneys of the slave quarters, to the River and the steamboat. There
would be Christmas on the boat too: the same holly and mistletoe, the
same eggnog and toddy; perhaps, doubtless, a Christmas supper and a
ball, but not for them: the two of them in the dark and the cold
standing at the guard rail above the dark water and still not talking
since there was nothing to say, the two of them (the four of them) held
in that probation, that suspension, by Henry who knew but still did not
believe, who was going deliberately to look upon and prove to himself
that which, so Shreve and Quentin believed, would be like death for him
to learn. So it was four of them still who got off the boat in New
Orleans, which Henry had never seen before (whose entire cosmopolitan
experience, apart from his sojourn at the school, consisted probably of
one or two trips to Memphis with his father to buy live stock or slaves)
and had no time to look at nowHenry who knew yet did not believe, and
Bon whom Mr Compson had called a fatalist but who, according to Shreve
and Quentin, did not resist Henrys dictum and design for the reason
that he neither knew nor cared what Henry intended to do because he had
long since realized that he did not know yet what he himself was going
to dofour of them who sat in that drawing room of baroque and fusty
magnificence which Shreve had invented and which was probably true
enough, while the Haiti-born daughter of the French sugar planter and
the woman whom Sutpens first father-in-law had told him was a Spaniard
(the slight dowdy woman with untidy gray-streaked raven hair coarse as a
horses tail, with parchment-colored skin and implacable pouched black
eyes which alone showed no age because they showed no forgetting, whom
Shreve and Quentin had likewise invented and which was likewise probably
true enough) told them nothing because she did not need to because she
had already told it, who did not say, My son is in love with your
sister? but So she has fallen in love with him and then sat laughing
harshly and steadily at Henry who could not have lied to her even if he
would have, who did not even have to answer at all either Yes or
No.Four of them there, in that room in New Orleans in 1860, just as in
a sense there were four of them here in this tomblike room in
Massachusetts in 1910. And Bon may have, probably did, take Henry to
call on the octoroon mistress and the child, as Mr Compson said, though
neither Shreve nor Quentin believed that the visit affected Henry as Mr
Compson seemed to think. In fact, Quentin did not even tell Shreve what
his father had said about the visit. Perhaps Quentin himself had not
been listening when Mr Compson related it that evening at home; perhaps
at that moment on the gallery in the hot September twilight Quentin took
that in stride without even hearing it just as Shreve would have, since
both he and Shreve believedand were probably right in this toothat
the octoroon and the child would have been to Henry only something else
about Bon to be, not envied but aped if that had been possible, if there
had been time and peace to ape it inpeace not between men of the same
race and nation but peace between two young embattled spirits and the
incontrovertible fact which embattled them, since neither Henry and Bon,
anymore than Quentin and Shreve, were the first young men to believe (or
at least apparently act on the assumption) that wars were sometimes
created for the sole aim of settling youths private difficulties and
discontents.

So the old dame asked Henry that one question and then sat there
laughing at him, so he knew then, they both knew then. And so now it
would be short, this time with the lawyer, the shortest one of all.
Because the lawyer would have been watching him; maybe there had even
been a letter during that second fall while the lawyer was waiting and
still nothing seemed to be happening up there (and maybe the lawyer was
the reason why Bon never answered Henrys and Judiths letters during
that summer: because he never got them)a letter, two or maybe three
pages of your humble and obedient e and t and c that boiled down to
eighteen words _I know you are a fool, but just what kind of a fool are
you going to be?_ and Bon was at least enough of a not-fool to do the
boiling down.Yes, watching him, not concerned yet, just considerably
annoyed, giving Bon plenty of time to come to him, giving him all of a
week maybe (after hethe lawyerwould have contrived to get hold of
Henry and find out a good deal of what Henry was thinking without Henry
ever knowing it) before he would contrive Bon too, and maybe so good at
the contriving that even Bon would not know at once what was coming. It
would be a short one. It would be no secret between them now; it would
just be unsaid: the lawyer behind the desk (and maybe in the secret
drawer the ledger where he had just finished adding in the last past
years interest compounded between the intrinsic and the love and pride
at two hundred percent.)the lawyer fretted, annoyed, but not at all
concerned since he not only knew he had the screws, but he still did not
really believe that Bon was that kind of a fool, though he was about to
alter his opinion somewhat about the dullness, or at least the
backwardnessthe lawyer watching him and saying, smooth and oily, since
it would be no secret now, who would know now that Bon knew all he would
ever know or would need to know to make the coup: Do you know that you
are a very fortunate young man? With most of us, even when we are lucky
enough to get our revenge, we must pay for it, sometimes in actual
dollars. While you are not only in a position to get your revenge, clear
your mothers name, but the balm with which you will assuage her injury
will have a collateral value which can be translated into the things
which a young man needs, which are his due and which, whether we like it
or not, may be had only in exchange for hard dollars and Bon not
saying _What do you mean?_ and not moving yet; that is, the lawyer would
not be aware that he was beginning to move, continuing (the lawyer)
smooth and easy: And more than this, than the revenge, as lagniappe to
the revenge as it were, this nosegay of an afternoon, this scentless
prairie flower which will not be missed and which might as well bloom in
your lapel as in anothers; thisHow do you young men put it?a nice
little piece and then he would see Bon, maybe the eyes, maybe he
would just hear the feet moving. And then, pistol (derringer, horse
pistol, revolver, whatever it was) and all, he would be crouched back
against the wall behind the overturned chair, snarling, Stand back!
Stop! then screaming Help! Help! He! then just screaming, because
he would hear and feel his own wrenching bones before he could free his
fingers of the pistol, and his neck bone too as Bon would strike him
with the palm on one cheek and then with the back of the hand on the
other; maybe he could even hear Bon too saying, Stop it. Hush. Im not
going to hurt you or maybe it was the lawyer in him that said the Hush
which he obeyed, who got him back into the righted chair again, half
lying upon the desk; the lawyer in him that warned him not to say _You
will pay for this_ but instead to half lie there, nursing his wrenched
hand in his handkerchief while Bon stood looking down at him, holding
the pistol by the barrel against his leg, saying, If you feel that you
require satisfaction, of course you know and the lawyer, sitting back
now, dabbing the handkerchief at his cheek now: I was wrong. I
misunderstood your feeling about the matter. I ask your pardon and Bon:
Granted. As you wish. I will accept either an apology or a bullet, as
you prefer and the lawyer (there would be a faint fading red in his
cheek, but that would be all: nothing in the voice or in the eyes): I
see you are going to collect full measure for my unfortunate
misconceptioneven ridicule. Even if I felt that right was on my side
(which I do not) I would still have to decline your offer. I would not
be your equal with pistols and Bon: Nor with knives or rapiers too?
and the lawyer, smooth and easy: Nor knives or rapiers too. So that
now the lawyer wouldnt even need to say _You will pay for this_ because
Bon would be saying that for him, who would stand there with the lax
pistol, thinking _But only with knives or pistols or rapiers. So I cant
beat him. I could shoot him. I would shoot him with no more compunction
than I would a snake or a man who cuckolded me. But he would still beat
me._ Thinking _Yes. He did beat me_ while hehe(Listen, Shreve said,
cried. It would be while he would be lying in a bedroom of that private
house in Corinth after Pittsburgh Landing while his shoulder got well
two years later and the letter from the octoroon (maybe even the one
that contained the photograph of her and the child) finally overtaking
him, wailing for money and telling him that the lawyer had departed for
Texas or Mexico or somewhere at last and that she (the octoroon) could
not find his mother either and so without doubt the lawyer had murdered
her before he stole the money, since it would be just like both of them
to flee or get themselves killed without providing for her at
all.)Yes, they knew now. And Jesus, think of him, Bon, who had wanted
to know, who had had the most reason to want to know, who as far as he
knew had never had any father but had been created somehow between that
woman who wouldnt let him play with other children, and that lawyer who
even told the woman whether or not each time she bought a piece of meat
or a loaf of breadtwo people neither of whom had taken pleasure or
found passion in getting him or suffered pain and travail in borning
himwho perhaps if one of the two had only told him the truth, none of
what happened would ever have come to pass; while there was Henry who
had father and security and contentment and all, yet was told the truth
by both of them while he (Bon) was told by neither. And think of Henry,
who had said at first it was a lie and then when he knew it was not a
lie had still said I dont believe it, who had found even in that I
dont believe it enough of strength to repudiate home and blood in order
to champion his defiance, and in which championing he proved his
contention to be the false one and was more than ever interdict against
returning home; Jesus, think of the load he had to carry, born of two
Methodists (or of one long invincible line of Methodists) and raised in
provincial North Mississippi, faced with incest, incest of all things
that might have been reserved for him, that all his heredity and
training had to rebel against on principle, and in a situation where he
knew that neither incest nor training was going to help him solve it. So
that maybe when they left and walked the streets that night and at last
Bon said, Well? Now what? Henry said, Wait. Wait. Let me get used to
it. And maybe it was two days or three days, and Henry said, You shall
not. Shall not and then it was Bon that said, Wait. I am your older
brother: do you say _shall not_ to me? And maybe it was a week, maybe
Bon took Henry to see the octoroon and Henry looked at her and said,
Aint that enough for you? and Bon said, Do you want it to be enough?
and Henry said, Wait. Wait. I must have time to get used to it. You
will have to give me time. Jesus, think how Henry must have talked
during that winter and then that spring with Lincoln elected and the
Alabama convention and the South began to draw out of the Union, and
then there were two presidents in the United States and the telegraph
brought the news about Charleston and Lincoln called out his army and it
was done, irrevocable now, and Henry and Bon already decided to go
without having to consult one another, who would have gone anyway even
if they had never seen one another but certainly now, because after all
you dont waste a warthink how they must have talked, how Henry would
say, But must you marry her? Do you have to do it? and Bon would say,
He should have told me. He should have told me, myself, himself. I was
fair and honorable with him. I waited. You know now why I waited. I gave
him every chance to tell me himself. But he didnt do it. If he had, I
would have agreed and promised never to see her or you or him again. But
he didnt tell me. I thought at first it was because he didnt know.
Then I knew that he did know, and still I waited. But he didnt tell me.
He just told you, sent me a message like you send a command by a nigger
servant to a beggar or a tramp to clear out. Dont you see that? and
Henry would say, But Judith. Our sister. Think of her and Bon: All
right. Think of her. Then what? because they both knew what Judith
would do when she found it out because they both knew that women will
show pride and honor about almost anything except love, and Henry said,
Yes. I see. I understand. But you will have to give me time to get used
to it. You are my older brother; you can do that little for me. Think
of the two of them: Bon who didnt know what he was going to do and had
to say, pretend, he did; and Henry who knew what he was going to do and
had to say he didnt. Then it was Christmas again, then 1861, and they
hadnt heard from Judith because Judith didnt know for sure where they
were because Henry wouldnt let Bon write to her yet; then they heard
about the company, the University Greys, organizing up at Oxford and
maybe they had been waiting for that. So they took the steamboat North
again, and more gayety and excitement on the boat now than Christmas
even, like it always is when a war starts, before the scene gets
cluttered up with bad food and wounded soldiers and widows and orphans,
and them taking no part in it now either but standing at the rail again
above the churning water, and maybe it would be two or three days, then
Henry said suddenly, cried suddenly: But kings have done it! Even
dukes! There was that Lorraine duke named John something that married
his sister. The Pope excommunicated him but it didnt hurt! It didnt
hurt! They were still husband and wife. They were still alive. They
still loved! then again, loud, fast: But you will have to wait! You
will have to give me time! Maybe the war will settle it and we wont need
to! And maybe this was one place where your old man was right: and they
rode into Oxford without touching Sutpens Hundred and signed the
company roster and then hid somewhere to wait, and Henry let Bon write
Judith one letter; they would send it by hand, by a nigger that would
steal into the quarters by night and give it to Judiths maid, and
Judith sent the picture in the metal case and they rode on ahead to wait
until the company got through making flags and riding about the state
telling girls farewell and started for the front.

Jesus, think of them. Because Bon would know what Henry was doing, just
as he had always known what Henry was thinking since that first day when
they had looked at one another. Maybe he would know all the better what
Henry was doing because he did not know what he himself was going to do,
that he would not know until all of a sudden some day it would burst
clear and he would know then that he had known all the time what it
would be, so he didnt have to bother about himself and so all he had to
do was just to watch Henry trying to reconcile what he (Henry) knew he
was going to do with all the voices of his heredity and training which
said _No. No. You cannot. You must not. You shall not._ Maybe they would
even be under fire now, with the shells rushing and rumbling past
overhead and bursting and them lying there waiting to charge and Henry
would cry again, But that Lorraine duke did it! There must have been
lots in the world who have done it that people dont know about, that
maybe they suffered for it and died for it and are in hell now for it.
But they did it and it dont matter now; even the ones we do know about
are just names now and it dont matter now and Bon watching him and
listening to him and thinking _Its because I dont know myself what I am
going to do and so he is aware that I am undecided without knowing that
he is aware. Perhaps if I told him now that I am going to do it, he
would know his own mind and tell me, You shall not._ And maybe your old
man was right that time and they did think maybe the war would settle it
and they would not have to themselves, or at least maybe Henry hoped it
would because maybe your old man was right here too and Bon didnt care;
that since both of the two people who could have given him a father had
declined to do it, nothing mattered to him now, revenge or love or all,
since he knew now that revenge could not compensate him nor love
assuage. Maybe it wasnt even Henry who wouldnt let him write to Judith
but Bon himself who did not write her because he didnt care about
anything, not even that he didnt know yet what he was going to do. Then
it was the next year and Bon was an officer now and they were moving
toward Shiloh without knowing that either, talking again as they moved
along in column, the officer dropping back alongside the file in which
the private marched and Henry crying again, holding his desperate and
urgent voice down to undertone: Dont you know yet what you are going to
do? while Bon would look at him for a moment with that expression which
could have been smiling: Suppose I told you I did not intend to go back
to her? and Henry would walk there beside him, with his pack and his
eight feet of musket, and he would begin to pant, panting and panting
while Bon watched him: I am out in front of you a lot now; going into
battle, charging, I will be out in front of you and Henry panting,
Stop! Stop! and Bon watching him with that faint thin expression about
the mouth and eyes:and who would ever know? You would not even have
to know for certain yourself, because who could say but what a Yankee
ball might have struck me at the exact second you pulled your trigger,
or even before and Henry panting and looking, glaring at the sky,
with his teeth showing and the sweat on his face and the knuckles of the
hand on his musket butt white, saying, panting, Stop! Stop! Stop!
Stop! Then it was Shiloh, the second day and the lost battle and the
brigade falling back from Pittsburgh LandingAnd listen, Shreve cried;
wait, now; wait! (glaring at Quentin, panting himself, as if he had
had to supply his shade not only with a cue but with breath to obey it
in): Because your old man was wrong here, too! He said it was Bon who
was wounded, but it wasnt. Because who told him? Who told Sutpen, or
your grandfather either, which of them it was who was hit? Sutpen didnt
know because he wasnt there, and your grandfather wasnt there either
because that was where he was hit too, where he lost his arm. So who
told them? Not Henry, because his father never saw Henry but that one
time and maybe they never had time to talk about wounds and besides to
talk about wounds in the Confederate army in 1865 would be like coal
miners talking about soot; and not Bon, because Sutpen never saw him at
all because he was deadit was not Bon, it was Henry; Bon that found
Henry at last and stooped to pick him up and Henry fought back,
struggled, saying, Let be! Let me die! I wont have to know it then and
Bon said, So you do want me to go back to her and Henry lay there
struggling and panting, with the sweat on his face and his teeth bloody
inside his chewed lip, and Bon said, Say you do want me to go back to
her. Maybe then I wont do it. Say it and Henry lay there struggling,
with the fresh red staining through his shirt and his teeth showing and
the sweat on his face until Bon held his arms and lifted him onto his
back

First, two of them, then four; now two again. The room was indeed
tomblike: a quality stale and static and moribund beyond any mere vivid
and living cold. Yet they remained in it, though not thirty feet away
was bed and warmth. Quentin had not even put on his overcoat, which lay
on the floor where it had fallen from the arm of the chair where Shreve
had put it down. They did not retreat from the cold. They both bore it
as though in deliberate flagellant exaltation of physical misery
transmogrified into the spirits travail of the two young men during
that time fifty years ago, or forty-eight rather, then forty-seven and
then forty-six, since it was 64 and then 65 and the starved and ragged
remnant of an army having retreated across Alabama and Georgia and into
Carolina, swept onward not by a victorious army behind it but rather by
a mounting tide of the names of lost battles from either
sideChickamauga and Franklin, Vicksburg and Corinth and
Atlantabattles lost not alone because of superior numbers and failing
ammunition and stores, but because of generals who should not have been
generals, who were generals not through training in contemporary methods
or aptitude for learning them, but by the divine right to say Go there
conferred upon them by an absolute caste system; or because the generals
of it never lived long enough to learn how to fight massed cautious
accretionary battles, since they were already as obsolete as Richard or
Roland or du Gueselin, who wore plumes and cloaks lined with scarlet at
twenty-eight and thirty and thirty-two and captured warships with
cavalry charges but no grain nor meat nor bullets, who would whip three
separate armies in as many days and then tear down their own fences to
cook meat robbed from their own smokehouses, who on one night and with a
handful of men would gallantly set fire to and destroy a million dollar
garrison of enemy supplies and on the next night be discovered by a
neighbor in bed with his wife and be shot to deathtwo, four, now two
again, according to Quentin and Shreve, the two the four the two still
talkingthe one who did not yet know what he was going to do, the other
who knew what he would have to do yet could not reconcile himselfHenry
citing himself authority for incest, talking about his Duke John of
Lorraine as if he hoped possibly to evoke that condemned and
excommunicated shade to tell him in person that it was all right, as
people both before and since have tried to evoke God or devil to justify
them in what their glands insisted uponthe two the four the two facing
one another in the tomblike room: Shreve, the Canadian, the child of
blizzards and of cold in a bathrobe with an overcoat above it, the
collar turned up about his ears; Quentin, the Southerner, the morose and
delicate offspring of rain and steamy heat in the thin suitable clothing
which he had brought from Mississippi, his overcoat (as thin and vain
for what it was as the suit) lying on the floor where he had not even
bothered to raise it:

_(the winter of 64 now, the army retreated across Alabama, into
Georgia; now Carolina was just at their backs and Bon, the officer,
thinking We will either he caught and annihilated or Old Joe will
extricate us and we will make contact with Lee in front of Richmond and
then we will at least have the privilege of surrender: and then one day
all of a sudden he thought of it, remembered, how that Jefferson
regiment of which his father was now colonel was in Longstreets corps,
and maybe from that moment the whole purpose of the retreat seemed to
him to be that of bringing him within reach of his father, to give his
father one more chance. So that it must have seemed to him now that he
knew at last why he had not been able to decide what he wanted to do.
Maybe he thought for just a second, My God, I am still young; even
after these four years I am still young but just for a second, because
maybe in the same breath he said, All right. Then I am young. But I
still believe, even though what I believe probably is that war,
suffering, these four years of keeping his men alive and able in order
to swap them blood and flesh for the largest amount of ground at its
bargain price, will have changed him (which I know that it does not do)
to where he will say to me not: Forgive me: but: You are my oldest son.
Protect your sister; never see either of us again: Then it was 65 and
what was left of the army of the West with nothing remaining now but the
ability to walk backward slow and stubborn and to endure musketry and
shelling; maybe they didnt even miss the shoes and overcoats and food
any more now and that was why he could write about the captured stove
polish like he did in the letter to Judith when he finally knew what he
was going to do at last and told Henry and Henry said Thank God. Thank
God, not for the incest of course but because at last they were going
to do something, at last he could be something even though that
something was the irrevocable repudiation of the old heredity and
training and the acceptance of eternal damnation. Maybe he could even
quit talking about his Lorraine duke then, because he could say now, It
isnt yours nor his nor the Popes hell that we are all going to: its
my mothers and her mothers and fathers and their mothers and
fathers hell, and it isnt you who are going there, but we, the
threeno: four of us. And so at least we will all be together where we
belong, since even if only he went there we would still have to be there
too since the three of us are just illusions that he begot, and your
illusions are a part of you like your bones and flesh and memory. And we
will all be together in torment and so we will not need to remember love
and fornication, and maybe in torment you cannot even remember why you
are there. And if we cannot remember all this, it cant be much torment.
Then they were in Carolina, that January and February of 65 and what
was left of them had been walking backward for almost a year now and the
distance between them and Richmond was less far than the distance they
had come; the distance between them and the end a good deal less far.
But to Bon it was not the space between them and defeat but the space
between him and the other regiment, between him and the hour, the
moment: He will not even have to ask me; I will just touch flesh with
him and I will say it myself: You will not need to worry; she shall
never see me again. Then March in Carolina and still the walking
backward slow and stubborn and listening to the Northward now because
there was nothing to hear from any other direction because in all the
other directions it was finished now, and all they expected to hear from
the North was defeat. Then one day (he was an officer; he would have
known, heard, that Lee had detached some troops and sent them down to
reinforce them; perhaps he even knew the names and numbers of the
regiments before they arrived) he saw Sutpen. Maybe that first time
Sutpen actually did not see him, maybe that first time he could tell
himself, That was why; he didnt see me, so that he had to put himself
in Sutpens way, make his chance and situation. Then for the second time
he looked at the expressionless and rocklike face, at the pale boring
eyes in which there was no flicker, nothing, the face in which he saw
his own features, in which he saw recognition, and that was all. That
was all, there was nothing further now; perhaps he just breathed once
quietly, with on his own face that expression which might at a glance
have been called smiling while he thought, I could force him. I could
go to him and force him, knowing that he would not because it was all
finished now, that was all of it now and at last. And maybe it was that
same night or maybe a night a week later while they were stopped
(because even Sherman would have to stop sometimes at night) with the
fires burning for warmth at least because at least warmth is cheap and
doesnt remain consumed, that Bon said, Henry and said, It wont be
much longer now and then there wont be anything left: we wont even have
anything to do left, not even the privilege of walking backward slowly
for a reason, for the sake of honor and whats left of pride. Not God;
evidently we have done without Him for four years, only He just didnt
think to notify us; and not only not shoes and clothing but not even any
need for them, and not only no land nor any way to make food, but no
need for the food since we have learned to live without that too; and so
if you dont have God and you dont need food and clothes and shelter,
there isnt anything for honor and pride to climb on and hold to and
flourish. And if you havent got honor and pride, then nothing matters.
Only there is something in you that doesnt care about honor and pride
yet that lives, that even walks backward for a whole year just to live;
that probably even when this is over and there is not even defeat left,
will still decline to sit still in the sun and die, but will be out in
the woods, moving and seeking where just will and endurance could not
move it, grubbing for roots and suchthe old mindless sentient
undreaming meat that doesnt even know any difference between despair
and victory, Henry. And then Henry would begin to say Thank God. Thank
God panting and saying Thank God, saying, Dont try to explain it.
Just do it and Bon: You authorize me? As her brother you give me
permission? and Henry: Brother? Brother? You are the oldest: why do
you ask me? and Bon: No. He has never acknowledged me. He just warned
me. You are the brother and the son. Do I have your permission, Henry?
and Henry: Write. Write. Write. So Bon wrote the letter, after the
four years, and Henry read it and sent it off. But they didnt quit then
and follow the letter. They still walked backward, slow and stubborn,
listening toward the North for the end of it because it takes an awful
lot of character to quit anything when you are losing, and they had been
walking backward slow for a year now so all they had left was not the
will but just the ability, the grooved habit to endure. Then one night
they had stopped again since Sherman had stopped again, and an orderly
came along the bivouac line and found Henry at last and said, Sutpen,
the colonel wants you in his tent.)_

And so you and the old dame, the Aunt Rosa, went out there that night
and the old nigger Clytie tried to stop you, stop her; she held your arm
and said, Dont let her go up there, young marster but you couldnt
stop her either because she was strong with forty-five years of hate
like forty-five years of raw meat and all Clytie had was just forty-five
or fifty years of despair and waiting; and you, you didnt even want to
be there at all to begin with. And you couldnt stop her either and then
you saw that Clyties trouble wasnt anger nor even distrust; it was
terror, fear. And she didnt tell you in so many words because she was
still keeping that secret for the sake of the man who had been her
father too as well as for the sake of the family which no longer
existed, whose heretofore inviolate and rotten mausoleum she still
guardeddidnt tell you in so many words anymore than she told you in
so many words how she had been in the room that day when they brought
Bons body in and Judith took from his pocket the metal case she had
given him with her picture in it; she didnt tell you, it just came out
of the terror and the fear after she turned you loose and caught the
Aunt Rosas arm and the Aunt Rosa turned and struck her hand away and
went on to the stairs and Clytie ran at her again and this time the Aunt
Rosa stopped and turned on the second step and knocked Clytie down with
her fist like a man would and turned and went on up the stairs: and
Clytie lay there on the floor, more than eighty years old and not much
more than five feet tall and looking like a little bundle of clean rags
so that you went and took her arm and helped her up and her arm felt
like a stick, as light and dry and brittle as a stick: and she looked at
you and you saw it was not rage but terror, and not nigger terror
because it was not about herself but was about whatever it was that was
upstairs, that she had kept hidden up there for almost four years; and
she didnt tell you in the actual words because even in the terror she
kept the secret; nevertheless she told you, or at least all of a sudden
you knew

Shreve ceased again. It was just as well, since he had no listener.
Perhaps he was aware of it. Then suddenly he had no talker either,
though possibly he was not aware of this. Because now neither of them
were there. They were both in Carolina and the time was forty-six years
ago, and it was not even four now but compounded still further, since
now both of them were Henry Sutpen and both of them were Bon, compounded
each of both yet either neither, smelling the very smoke which had blown
and faded away forty-six years ago from the _bivouac fires burning in a
pine grove, the gaunt and ragged men sitting or lying about them,
talking not about the war yet all curiously enough (or perhaps not
curiously at all) facing the South where further on in the darkness the
pickets stoodthe pickets who, watching to the South, could see the
flicker and gleam of the Federal bivouac fires myriad and faint and
encircling half the horizon and counting ten fires for each Confederate
one, and between whom and which (Rebel picket and Yankee fire) the
Yankee outposts watched the darkness also, the two picket lines so close
that each could hear the challenge of the others officers passing from
post to post and dying away: and when gone, the voice, invisible,
cautious, not loud yet carrying:_

_Hey, Reb._

_Yah._

_Where you fellers going?_

_Richmond._

_So are we. Why not wait for us?_

_We air._

_The men about the fires would not hear this exchange, though they would
presently hear the orderly plainly enough as he passes from fire to
fire, asking for Sutpen and being directed on and so reaches the fire at
last, the smoldering log, with his monotonous speech: Sutpen? Im
looking for Sutpen until Henry sits up and says, Here. He is gaunt
and ragged and unshaven; because of the last four years and because he
had not quite got his height when the four years began, he is not as
tall by two inches as he gave promise of being, and not as heavy by
thirty pounds as he probably will be a few years after he has outlived
the four years, if he do outlive them._

_Here, he saysWhat is it?_

_The colonel wants you._

_The orderly does not return with him. Instead, he walks alone through
the darkness along a rutted road, a road rutted and cut and churned
where the guns have passed over it that afternoon, and reaches the tent
at last, one of the few tents, the canvas wall gleaming faintly from a
candle within, the silhouette of a sentry before it, who challenges
him._

_Sutpen, Henry saysThe colonel sent for me._

_The sentry gestures him into the tent. He stoops through the entrance,
the canvas falls behind him as someone, the only occupant of the tent,
rises from a camp chair behind the table on which the candle sits, his
shadow swooping high and huge up the canvas wall. He (Henry) comes to
salute facing a gray sleeve with colonels braid on it, one bearded
cheek, a jutting nose, a shaggy droop of iron-riddle haira face which
Henry does not recognize, not because he has not seen it in four years
and does not expect to see it here and now, but rather because he is not
looking at it. He just salutes the braided cuff and stands so until the
other says,_

_Henry._

_Even now Henry does not start. He just stands so, the two of them stand
so, looking at one another. It is the older man who moves first, though
they meet in the center of the tent, where they embrace and kiss before
Henry is aware that he has moved, was going to move, moved by what of
close blood which in the reflex instant abrogates and reconciles even
though it does not yet (perhaps never will) forgive, who stands now
while his father holds his face between both hands, looking at it._

_Henry, Sutpen saysMy son._

_Then they sit, one on either side of the table, in the chairs reserved
for officers, the table (an open map lies on it) and the candle between
them._

_You were hit at Shiloh, Colonel Willow tells me, Sutpen says._

_Yes, sir, Henry says._

_He is about to say Charles carried me back but he does not, because
already he knows what is coming. He does not even think Surely Judith
didnt write him about that letter or It was Clytie who sent him word
somehow that Charles has written her. He thinks neither of these. To him
it is logical and natural that their father should know of his and Bons
decision: that rapport of blood which should bring Bon to decide to
write, himself to agree to it and their father to know of it at the same
identical instant, after a period of four years, out of all time. Now it
does come, almost exactly as he had known that it will:_

_I have seen Charles Bon, Henry._

_Henry says nothing. It is coming now. He says nothing, he merely stares
at his fatherthe two of them in leaf-faded gray, a single candle, a
crude tent walling them away from a darkness where alert pickets face
one another and where weary men sleep without shelter, waiting for dawn
and the firing, the weary backward walking to commence again: yet in a
second tent candle gray and all are gone and it is the holly-decked
Christmas library at Sutpens Hundred four years ago and the table not a
camp table suitable for the spreading of maps but the heavy carved
rosewood one at home with the group photograph of his mother and sister
and himself sitting upon it, his father behind the table and behind his
father the window above the garden where Judith and Bon strolled in that
slow rhythm where the heart matches the footsteps and the eyes need only
look at one another._

_You are going to let him marry Judith, Henry._

_Still Henry does not answer. It has all been said before, and now he
has had four years of bitter struggle following which, whether it be
victory or defeat which he has gained, at least he has gained it and has
peace now, even if the peace be mostly despair._

_He cannot marry her, Henry._

_Now Henry speaks._

_You said that before. I told you then. And now, and now it wont be
much longer now and then we wont have anything left: honor nor pride nor
God since God quit us four years ago only He never thought it necessary
to tell us; no shoes nor clothes and no need for them; not only no land
to make food out of but no need for the food and when you dont have God
and honor and pride, nothing matters except that there is the old
mindless meat that dont even care if it was defeat or victory, that wont
even die, that will be out in the woods and fields, grubbing up roots
and weeds.Yes. I have decided, Brother or not, I have decided. I will.
I will._

_He must not marry her, Henry._

_Yes. I said Yes at first, but I was not decided then. I didnt let
him. But now I have had four years to decide in. I will. I am going to._

_He must not marry her, Henry. His mothers father told me that her
mother had been a Spanish woman. I believed him; it was not until after
he was born that I found out that his mother was part negro._

_Nor did Henry ever say that he did not remember leaving the tent. He
remembers all of it. He remembers stooping through the entrance again
and passing the sentry again; he remembers walking back down the cut and
rutted road, stumbling in the dark among the ruts on either side of
which the fires have now died to embers, so that he can barely
distinguish the men sleeping on the earth about them. It must be better
than eleven oclock, he thinks. And another eight miles tomorrow. If it
were only not for those damned guns. Why doesnt Old Joe give the guns
to Sherman. Then we could make twenty miles a day. We could join Lee
then. At least Lee stops and fights some of the time. He remembers it.
He remembers how he did not return to his fire but stopped presently in
a lonely place and leaned against a pine, leaning quietly and easily,
with his head back so he could look up at the shabby shaggy branches
like something in wrought iron spreading motionless against the chill
vivid stars of early spring, thinking I hope he remembers to thank
Colonel Willow for letting us use his tent, thinking not what he would
do but what he would have to do. Because he knew what he would do; it
now depended on what Bon would do, would force him to do, since he knew
that he would do it. So I must go to him, he thought, thinking, Now it
is better than two oclock and it will be dawn soon._

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Then it was dawn, or almost, and it was cold: a chill which struck
through the worn patched thin clothing, through the something of
weariness and undernourishment; the passive ability, not the volitional
will, to endure; there was light somewhere, enough of it for him to
distinguish Bons sleeping face from among the others where he lay
wrapped in his blankets, beneath his spread cloak; enough light for him
to wake Bon by and for Bon to distinguish his face (or perhaps something
communicated by Henrys hand) because Bon does not speak, demand to know
who it is: he merely rises and puts the cloak about his shoulders and
approaches the smoldering fire and is kicking it into a blaze when Henry
speaks:_

_Wait._

_Bon pauses and looks at Henry; now he can see Henrys face. He says,_

_You will be cold. You are cold now. You havent been asleep, have
you? Here._

_He swings the cloak from his shoulders and holds it out._

_No, Henry says._

_Yes. Take it. Ill get my blanket._

_Bon puts the cloak about Henry and goes and takes up his tumbled
blanket and swings it about his shoulders, and they move aside and sit
on a log. Now it is dawn. The east is gray; it will be primrose soon and
then red with firing and once more the weary backward marching will
begin, retreating from annihilation, falling back upon defeat, though
not quite yet. There will be a little time yet for them to sit side by
side upon the log in the making light of dawn, the one in the cloak, the
other in the blanket; their voices are not much louder than the silent
dawn itself:_

_So its the miscegenation, not the incest, which you cant bear._

_Henry doesnt answer._

_And he sent me no word? He did not ask you to send me to him? No word
to me, no word at all? That was all he had to do, now, today; four years
ago or at any time during the four years. That was all. He would not
have needed to ask it, require it, of me. I would have offered it. I
would have said, I will never see her again before he could have asked
it of me. He did not have to do this, Henry. He didnt need to tell you
I am a nigger to stop me. He could have stopped me without that, Henry._

_No! Henry cries.No! No! I willIll_

_He springs up; his face is working; Bon can see his teeth within the
soft beard which covers his sunken cheeks, and the whites of Henrys
eyes as though the eyeballs struggled in their sockets as the panting
breath struggled in his lungsthe panting which ceased, the breath
held, the eyes too looking down at him where he sat on the log, the
voice now not much louder than an expelled breath:_

_You said, could have stopped you. What do you mean by that?_

_Now it is Bon who does not answer, who sits on the log looking at the
face stooped above him. Henry says, still in that voice no louder than
breathing:_

_But now? You mean you_

_Yes. What else can I do now? I gave him the choice. I have been
giving him the choice for four years._

_Think of her. Not of me: of her._

_I have. For four years. Of you and her. Now I am thinking of myself._

_No, Henry says.No. No._

_I cannot?_

_You shall not._

_Who will stop me, Henry?_

_No, Henry says.No. No. No._

_Now it is Bon who watches Henry; he can see the whites of Henrys eyes
again as he sits looking at Henry with that expression which might be
called smiling. His hand vanishes beneath the blanket and reappears,
holding his pistol by the barrel, the butt extended toward Henry._

_Then do it now, he says._

_Henry looks at the pistol; now he is not only panting, he is trembling;
when he speaks now his voice is not even the exhalation, it is the
suffused and suffocating inbreath itself:_

_You are my brother._

_No Im not. Im the nigger thats going to sleep with your sister.
Unless you stop me, Henry._

_Suddenly Henry grasps the pistol, jerks it free of Bons hand stands
so, the pistol in his hand, panting and panting; again Bon can see the
whites of his inrolled eyes while he sits on the log and watches Henry
with that faint expression about the eyes and mouth which might he
smiling._

_Do it now, Henry, he says._

_Henry whirls; in the same motion he hurls the pistol from him and
stoops again, gripping Bon by both shoulders, panting._

_You shall not! he says.You shall not! Do you hear me?_

_Bon does not move beneath the gripping hands; he sits motionless, with
his faint fixed grimace; his voice is gentler than that first breath in
which the pine branches begin to move a little:_

_You will have to stop me, Henry._ And he never slipped away, Shreve
said. He could have, but he never even tried. Jesus, maybe he even went
to Henry and said, Im going, Henry and maybe they left together and
rode side by side dodging Yankee patrols all the way back to Mississippi
and right up to that gate; side by side and it only then that one of
them ever rode ahead or dropped behind and that only then Henry spurred
ahead and turned his horse to face Bon and took out the pistol; and
Judith and Clytie heard the shot, and maybe Wash Jones was hanging
around somewhere in the back yard and so he was there to help Clytie and
Judith carry him into the house and lay him on the bed, and Wash went to
town to tell the Aunt Rosa and the Aunt Rosa comes boiling out that
afternoon and finds Judith standing without a tear before the closed
door, holding the metal case she had given him with her picture in it
but that didnt have her picture in it now but that of the octoroon and
the kid. And your old man wouldnt know about that too: why the black
son a of bitch should have taken her picture out and put the octoroons
picture in, so he invented a reason for it. But I know. And you know
too. Dont you? Dont you, huh? He glared at Quentin, leaning forward
over the table now, looking huge and shapeless as a bear in his
swaddling of garments. Dont you know? It was because he said to
himself, If Henry dont mean what he said, it will be all right; I can
take it out and destroy it. But if he does mean what he said, it will be
the only way I will have to say to her, _I was no good; do not grieve
for me_. Aint that right? Aint it? By God, aint it?

Yes, Quentin said.

Come on, Shreve said. Lets get out of this refrigerator and go to
bed.




                               [*  IX  *]


          At first, in bed in the dark, it seemed colder than ever, as
if there had been some puny quality of faint heat in the single light
bulb before Shreve turned it off and that now the iron and impregnable
dark had become one with the iron and icelike bedclothing lying upon the
flesh slacked and thin-clad for sleeping. Then the darkness seemed to
breathe, to flow back; the window which Shreve had opened became visible
against the faintly unearthly glow of the outer snow as, forced by the
weight of the darkness, the blood surged and ran warmer, warmer.
University of Mississippi, Shreves voice said in the darkness to
Quentins right. Bayard attenuated forty miles (it was forty miles,
wasnt it?); out of the wilderness proud honor semesterial regurgitant.

Yes, Quentin said. They were in the tenth graduating class since it
was founded.

I didnt know there were ten in Mississippi that went to school at one
time, Shreve said. Quentin didnt answer. He lay watching the rectangle
of window, feeling the warming blood driving through his veins, his arms
and legs. And now, although he was warm and though while he had sat in
the cold room he merely shook faintly and steadily, now he began to jerk
all over, violently and uncontrollably until he could even hear the bed,
until even Shreve felt it and turned, raising himself (by the sound)
onto his elbow to look at Quentin, though Quentin himself felt perfectly
all right. He felt fine even, lying there and waiting in peaceful
curiosity for the next violent unharbingered jerk to come. Jesus, are
you that cold? Shreve said. Do you want me to spread the overcoats on
you?

No, Quentin said. Im not cold. Im all right. I feel fine.

Then what are you doing that for?

I dont know. I cant help it. I feel fine.

All right. But let me know if you want the coats. Jesus, if I was going
to have to spend nine months in this climate, I would sure hate to have
come from the South. Maybe I wouldnt come from the South anyway, even
if I could stay there. Wait. Listen. Im not trying to be funny, smart.
I just want to understand it if I can and I dont know how to say it
better. Because its something my people havent got. Or if we have got
it, it all happened long ago across the water and so now there aint
anything to look at every day to remind us of it. We dont live among
defeated grandfathers and freed slaves (or have I got it backward and
was it your folks that are free and the niggers that lost?) and bullets
in the dining room table and such, to be always reminding us to never
forget. What is it? something you live and breathe in like air? a kind
of vacuum filled with wraithlike and indomitable anger and pride and
glory at and in happenings that occurred and ceased fifty years ago? a
kind of entailed birthright father and son and father and son of never
forgiving General Sherman, so that forevermore as long as your
childrens children produce children you wont be anything but a
descendant of a long line of colonels killed in Picketts charge at
Manassas?

Gettysburg, Quentin said. You cant understand it. You would have to
be born there.

Would I then? Quentin did not answer. Do you understand it?

I dont know, Quentin said. Yes, of course I understand it. They
breathed in the darkness. After a moment Quentin said: I dont know.

Yes. You dont know. You dont even know about the old dame, the Aunt
Rosa.

Miss Rosa, Quentin said.

All right. You dont even know about her. Except that she refused at the
last to be a ghost. That after almost fifty years she couldnt reconcile
herself to letting him lie dead in peace. That even after fifty years
she not only could get up and go out there to finish up what she found
she hadnt quite completed, but she could find someone to go with her
and bust into that locked house because instinct or something told her
it was not finished yet. Do you?

No, Quentin said peacefully. He could taste the dust. Even now, with
the chill pure weight of the snow-breathed New England air on his face,
he could taste and feel the dust of that breathless (rather,
furnace-breathed) Mississippi September night. He could even smell the
old woman in the buggy beside him, smell the fusty camphor-reeking shawl
and even the airless black cotton umbrella in which (he would not
discover until they had reached the house) she had concealed a hatchet
and a flashlight. He could smell the horse; he could hear the dry plaint
of the light wheels in the weightless permeant dust and he seemed to
feel the dust itself move sluggish and dry across his sweating flesh
just as he seemed to hear the single profound suspiration of the parched
earths agony rising toward the imponderable and aloof stars. Now she
spoke, for the first time since they had left Jefferson, since she had
climbed into the buggy with a kind of clumsy and fumbling and trembling
eagerness (which he thought derived from terror, alarm, until he found
that he was quite wrong) before he could help her, to sit on the extreme
edge of the seat, small, in the fusty shawl and clutching the umbrella,
leaning forward as if by leaning forward she would arrive the sooner,
arrive immediately after the horse and before he, Quentin, would, before
the prescience of her desire and need could warn its consummation.
Now, she said. We are on the Domain. On his land, his and Ellens and
Ellens descendants. They have taken it away from them since, I
understand. But it still belongs to him, to Ellen and her descendants.
But Quentin was already aware of that. Before she spoke he had said to
himself, Now. Now and (as during the long hot afternoon in the dim hot
little house) it seemed to him that if he stopped the buggy and
listened, he might even hear the galloping hoofs; might even see at any
moment now the black stallion and the rider rush across the road before
them and gallop onthe rider who at one time owned, lock stock and
barrel, everything he could see from a given point, with every stick and
blade and hoof and heel on it to remind him (if he ever forgot it) that
he was the biggest thing in their sight and in his own too; who went to
war to protect it and lost the war and returned home to find that he had
lost more than the war even, though not absolutely all; who said _At
least I have life left_ but did not have life but only old age and
breathing and horror and scorn and fear and indignation: and all
remaining to look at him with unchanged regard was the girl who had been
a child when he saw her last, who doubtless used to watch him from
window or door as he passed unaware of her as she would have looked at
God probably, since everything else within her view belonged to him too.
Maybe he would even stop at the cabin and ask for water and she would
take the bucket and walk the mile and back to the spring to fetch it
fresh and cool for him, no more thinking of saying The bucket is empty
to him than she would have said it to Godthis the not-all, since at
least there was breathing left.

Now Quentin began to breathe hard again, who had been peaceful for a
time in the warm bed, breathing hard the heady pure snowborn darkness.
She (Miss Coldfield) did not let him enter the gate. She said Stop
suddenly; he felt her hand flutter on his arm and he thought, Why, she
is afraid. He could hear her panting now, her voice almost a wail of
diffident yet iron determination: I dont know what to do. I dont know
what to do. (I do, he thought. Go back to town and go to bed.) But
he did not say it. He looked at the two huge rotting gate posts in the
starlight, between which no gates swung now, wondering from what
direction Bon and Henry had ridden up that day, wondering what had cast
the shadow which Bon was not to pass alive; if some living tree which
still lived and bore leaves and shed or if some tree gone, vanished,
burned for warmth and food years ago now or perhaps just gone; or if it
had been one of the two posts themselves, thinking, wishing that Henry
were there now to stop Miss Coldfield and turn them back, telling
himself that if Henry were there now, there would be no shot to be heard
by anyone. Shes going to try to stop me, Miss Coldfield whimpered. I
know she is. Maybe this far from town, out here alone at midnight, she
will even let that negro man And you didnt even bring a pistol. Did
you?

Nome, Quentin said. What is it shes got hidden there? What could it
be? And what difference does it make? Lets go back to town, Miss Rosa.

She didnt answer this at all. She just said, Thats what I have got to
find out, sitting forward on the seat, trembling now and peering up the
tree-arched drive toward where the rotting shell of the house would be.
And now I will have to find it out, she whimpered, in a kind of amazed
selfpity. She moved suddenly. Come, she whispered, beginning to get
out of the buggy.

Wait, Quentin said. Lets drive up to the house. Its a half a mile.

No, no, she whispered, a tense fierce hissing of words filled with
that same curious terrified yet implacable determination, as though it
were not she who had to go and find out but she only the helpless agent
of someone or something else who must know. Hitch the horse here.
Hurry. She got out, scrambled awkwardly down, before he could help her,
clutching the umbrella. It seemed to him that he could still hear her
whimpering panting where she waited close beside one of the posts while
he led the mare from the road and tied one rein about a sapling in the
weed-choked ditch. He could not see her at all, so close she stood
against the post: she just stepped out and fell in beside him when he
passed and turned into the gate, still breathing in those whimpering
pants as they walked on up the rutted tree-arched drive. The darkness
was intense; she stumbled; he caught her. She took his arm, clutching it
in a dead rigid hard grip as if her fingers, her hand, were a small mass
of wire. I will have to take your arm, she whispered, whimpered. And
you havent even got a pistolWait, she said. She stopped. He turned;
he could not see her but he could hear her hurried breathing and then a
rustling of cloth. Then she was prodding something at him. Here, she
whispered. Take it. It was a hatchet; not sight but touch told hima
hatchet with a heavy worn handle and a heavy gapped rust-dulled blade.

What? he said.

Take it! she whispered, hissed. You didnt bring a pistol. Its
something.

Here, he said; wait.

Come, she whispered. You will have to let me take your arm, I am
trembling so bad. They went on again, she clinging to one of his arms,
the hatchet in his other hand. We will probably need it to get into the
house, anyway, she said, stumbling along beside him, almost dragging
him. I just know she is somewhere watching us, she whimpered. I can
feel her. But if we can just get to the house, get into the house
The drive seemed interminable. He knew the place. He had walked from the
gate to the house as a child, a boy, when distances seem really long (so
that to the man grown the long crowded mile of his boyhood becomes less
than the throw of a stone) yet now it seemed to him that the house would
never come in sight: so that presently he found himself repeating her
words: If we can just get to the house, get inside the house, telling
himself, recovering himself in that same breath: I am not afraid. I
just dont want to be here. I just dont want to know about whatever it is
she keeps hidden in it. But they reached it at last. It loomed, bulked,
square and enormous, with jagged half-toppled chimneys, its roofline
sagging a little; for an instant as they moved, hurried, toward it
Quentin saw completely through it a ragged segment of sky with three hot
stars in it as if the house were of one dimension, painted on a canvas
curtain in which there was a tear; now, almost beneath it, the dead
furnace-breath of air in which they moved seemed to reek in slow and
protracted violence with a smell of desolation and decay as if the wood
of which it was built were flesh. She was trotting beside him now, her
hand trembling on his arm yet gripping it still with that lifeless and
rigid strength; not talking, not saying words, yet producing a steady
whimpering, almost a moaning, sound. Apparently she could not see at all
now, so that he had to guide her toward where he knew the steps would be
and then restrain her, whispering, hissing, aping without knowing it her
own tense fainting haste: Wait. This way. Be careful, now. Theyre
rotten. He almost lifted, carried, her up the steps, supporting her
from behind by both elbows as you lift a child; he could feel something
fierce and implacable and dynamic driving down the thin rigid arms and
into his palms and up his own arms; lying in the Massachusetts bed he
remembered how he thought, knew, said suddenly to himself, Why, shes
not afraid at all. Its something. But shes not afraid, feeling her
flee out of his hands, hearing her feet cross the gallery, overtaking
her where she now stood beside the invisible front door, panting. Now
what? he whispered.

Break it, she whispered. It will be locked, nailed. You have the
hatchet. Break it.

But he began.

Break it! she hissed. It belonged to Ellen. I am her sister, her only
living heir. Break it. Hurry. He pushed against the door. It did not
move. She panted beside him. Hurry, she said. Break it.

Listen, Miss Rosa, he said. Listen.

Give me the hatchet.

Wait, he said. Do you really want to go inside?

Im going inside, she whimpered. Give me the hatchet.

Wait, he said. He moved along the gallery, guiding himself by the
wall, moving carefully since he did not know just where the floor planks
might be rotten or even missing, until he came to a window. The shutters
were closed and apparently locked, yet they gave almost at once to the
blade of the hatchet, making not very much sounda flimsy and sloven
barricading done either by an old feeble personwomanor by a
shiftless man; he had already inserted the hatchet blade beneath the
sash before he discovered that there was no glass in it, that all he had
to do now was to step through the vacant frame. Then he stood there for
a moment, telling himself to go on in, telling himself that he was not
afraid, he just didnt want to know what might be inside. Well? Miss
Coldfield whispered from the door. Have you opened it?

Yes, he said. He did not whisper, though he did not speak overloud;
the dark room which he faced repeated his voice with hollow profundity,
as an unfurnished room will. You wait there. Ill see if I can open the
door.So now I shall have to go in, he thought, climbing over the
sill. He knew that the room was empty; the echo of his voice had told
him that, yet he moved as slowly and carefully here as he had along the
gallery, feeling along the wall with his hand, following the wall when
it turned, and found the door and passed through it. He would be in the
hall now; he almost believed that he could hear Miss Coldfield breathing
just beyond the wall beside him. It was pitch dark; he could not see, he
knew that he could not see, yet he found that his eyelids and muscles
were aching with strain while merging and dissolving red spots wheeled
and vanished across the retinae. He went on; he felt the door under his
hand at last and now he could hear Miss Coldfields whimpering breathing
beyond it as he fumbled for the lock. Then behind him the sound of the
scraped match was like an explosion, a pistol; even before the puny
following light appeared all his organs lifted sickeningly; he could not
even move for a moment even though something of sanity roared silently
inside his skull: Its all right! If it were danger, he would not have
struck the match! Then he could move, and turned to see the tiny
gnomelike creature in headrag and voluminous skirts, the worn
coffee-colored face staring at him, the match held in one coffee-colored
and doll-like hand above her head. Then he was not watching her but
watching the match as it burned down toward her fingers; he watched
quietly as she moved at last and lit a second match from the first and
turned; he saw then the square-ended saw chunk beside the wall and the
lamp sitting upon it as she lifted the chimney and held the match to the
wick. He remembered it, lying here in the Massachusetts bed and
breathing fast now, now that peace and quiet had fled again. He
remembered how she did not say one word to him, not Who are you? or What
do you want here? but merely came with a bunch of enormous old-fashioned
iron keys, as if she had known all the time that this hour must come and
that it could not be resisted, and opened the door and stepped back a
little as Miss Coldfield entered. And how she (Clytie) and Miss
Coldfield said no word to one another, as if Clytie had looked once at
the other woman and knew that that would do no good; that it was to him,
Quentin, that she turned, putting her hand on his arm and saying, Dont
let her go up there, young marster. And how maybe she looked at him and
knew that would do no good either, because she turned and overtook Miss
Coldfield and caught her arm and said, Dont you go up there, Rosie and
Miss Coldfield struck the hand away and went on toward the stairs (and
now he saw that she had a flashlight; he remembered how he thought, It
must have been in the umbrella too along with the axe) and Clytie said,
Rosie and ran after the other again, whereupon Miss Coldfield turned
on the step and struck Clytie to the floor with a full-armed blow like a
man would have, and turned and went on up the stairs. She (Clytie) lay
on the bare floor of the scaling and empty hall like a small shapeless
bundle of quiet clean rags. When he reached her he saw that she was
quite conscious, her eyes wide open and calm; he stood above her,
thinking, Yes. She is the one who owns the terror. When he raised her
it was like picking up a handful of sticks concealed in a rag bundle, so
light she was. She could not stand; he had to hold her up, aware of some
feeble movement or intention in her limbs until he realized that she was
trying to sit on the bottom step. He lowered her to it. Who are you?
she said.

Im Quentin Compson, he answered.

Yes. I remember your grandpaw. You go up there and make her come down.
Make her go away from here. Whatever he done, me and Judith and him have
paid it out. You go and get her. Take her away from here. So he mounted
the stairs, the worn bare treads, the cracked and scaling wall on one
side, the balustrade with its intermittent missing spindles on the
other. He remembered how he looked back and she was still sitting as he
had left her, and that now (and he had not heard him enter) there stood
in the hall below a hulking young light-colored negro man in clean faded
overalls and shirt, his arms dangling, no surprise, no nothing in the
saddle-colored and slack-mouthed idiot face. He remembered how he
thought, The scion, the heir, the apparent (though not obvious) and
how he heard Mrs Coldfields feet and saw the light of the torch
approaching along the upper hall and how she came and passed him, how
she stumbled a little and caught herself and looked full at him as if
she had never seen him beforethe eyes wide and unseeing like a
sleepwalkers, the face which had always been tallow-hued now possessing
some still profounder, some almost unbearable, quality of
bloodlessnessand he thought, What? What is it now? Its not shock.
And it never has been fear. Can it be triumph? and how she passed him
and went on. He heard Clytie say to the man, Take her to the gate, the
buggy and he stood there thinking, I should go with her and then,
But I must see too now. I will have to. Maybe I shall be sorry
tomorrow, but I must see. So when he came back down the stairs (and he
remembered how he thought, Maybe my face looks like hers did, but its
not triumph) there was only Clytie in the hall, sitting still on the
bottom step, sitting still in the attitude in which he had left her. She
did not even look at him when he passed her. Nor did he overtake Miss
Coldfield and the negro. It was too dark to go fast, though he could
presently hear them ahead of him. She was not using the flashlight now;
he remembered how he thought, Surely she cant be afraid to show a light
now. But she was not using it and he wondered if she were holding to
the negros arm now; he wondered that until he heard the negros voice,
flat, without emphasis or interest: Wawkin better over here and no
answer from her, though he was close enough now to hear (or believe he
did) her whimpering panting breath. Then he heard the other sound and he
knew that she had stumbled and fallen; he could almost see the hulking
slack-faced negro stopped in his tracks, looking toward the sound of the
fall, waiting, without interest or curiosity, as he (Quentin) hurried
forward, hurried toward the voices:

You, nigger! Whats your name?

Calls me Jim Bond.

Help me up! You aint any Sutpen! You dont have to leave me lying in the
dirt!

When he stopped the buggy at her gate she did not offer to get out alone
this time. She sat there until he got down and came round to her side;
she still sat there, clutching the umbrella in one hand and the hatchet
in the other, until he spoke her name. Then she stirred; he helped,
lifted her down; she was almost as light as Clytie had been; when she
moved it was like a mechanical doll, so that he supported and led her
through the gate and up the short walk and into the doll-sized house and
turned on the light for her and looked at the fixed sleep-walking face,
the wide dark eyes as she stood there, still clutching the umbrella and
the hatchet, the shawl and the black dress both stained with dirt where
she had fallen, the black bonnet jerked forward and awry by the shock of
the fall. Are you all right now? he said.

Yes, she said. Yes. Im all right. Goodnight.Not thank you, he
thought: Just goodnight, outside the house now, breathing deep and
fast now as he returned to the buggy, finding that he was about to begin
to run, thinking quietly, Jesus. Jesus. Jesus, breathing fast and hard
of the dark dead furnace-breath of air, of night where the fierce aloof
stars hung. His own home was dark; he was still using the whip when he
turned into the lane and then into the stable lot. He sprang out and
took the mare from the buggy, stripping the harness from her and
tumbling it into the harness room without stopping to hang it up,
sweating, breathing fast and hard; when he turned at last toward the
house he did begin to run. He could not help it. He was twenty years
old; he was not afraid, because what he had seen out there could not
harm him, yet he ran; even inside the dark familiar house, his shoes in
his hand, he still ran, up the stairs and into his room and began to
undress, fast, sweating, breathing fast. I ought to bathe, he thought:
then he was lying on the bed, naked, swabbing his body steadily with the
discarded shirt, sweating still, panting: so that when, his eye-muscles
aching and straining into the darkness and the almost dried shirt still
clutched in his hand, he said I have been asleep it was all the same,
there was no difference: waking or sleeping he walked down that upper
hall between the scaling walls and beneath the cracked ceiling, toward
the faint light which fell outward from the last door and paused there,
saying No. No and then Only I must. I have to and went in, entered
the bare, stale room whose shutters were closed too, where a second lamp
burned dimly on a crude table; waking or sleeping it was the same: the
bed, the yellow sheets and pillow, the wasted yellow face with closed,
almost transparent eyelids on the pillow, the wasted hands crossed on
the breast as if he were already a corpse; waking or sleeping it was the
same and would be the same forever as long as he lived:

_And you are?_

_Henry Sutpen._

_And you have been here?_

_Four years._

_And you came home?_

_To die. Yes._

_To die?_

_Yes. To die._

_And you have been here?_

_Four years._

_And you are?_

_Henry Sutpen._

It was quite cold in the room now; the chimes would ring for one any
time now; the chill had a compounded, a gathered quality, as though
preparing for the dead moment before dawn. And she waited three months
before she went back to get him, Shreve said. Why did she do that?
Quentin didnt answer. He lay still and rigid on his back with the cold
New England night on his face and the blood running warm in his rigid
body and limbs, breathing hard but slow, his eyes wide open upon the
window, thinking Nevermore of peace. Nevermore of peace. Nevermore
Nevermore Nevermore. Do you suppose it was because she knew what was
going to happen when she told it, took any steps, that it would be over
then, finished, and that hating is like drink or drugs and she had used
it so long that she did not dare risk cutting off the supply, destroying
the source, the very poppys root and seed? Still Quentin didnt
answer. But at last she did reconcile herself to it, for his sake, to
save him, to bring him into town where the doctors could save him, and
so she told it then, got the ambulance and the men and went out there.
And old Clytie maybe watching for just that out of the upstairs window
for three months now: and maybe even your old man was right this time
and when she saw the ambulance turn into the gate she believed it was
that same black wagon for which she probably had had that nigger boy
watching for three months now, coming to carry Henry into town for the
white folks to hang him for shooting Charles Bon. And I guess it had
been him who had kept that closet under the stairs full of tinder and
trash all that time too, like she told him to, maybe he not getting it
then either but keeping it full just like she told him, the kerosene and
all, for three months now, until the hour when he could begin to
how Now the chimes began, ringing for one oclock. Shreve ceased, as
if he were waiting for them to cease or perhaps were even listening to
them. Quentin lay still too, as if he were listening too, though he was
not; he just heard them without listening as he heard Shreve without
listening or answering, until they ceased, died away into the icy air
delicate and faint and musical as struck glass. And he, Quentin, could
see that too, though he had not been therethe ambulance with Miss
Coldfield between the driver and the second man, perhaps a deputy
sheriff, in the shawl surely and perhaps even with the umbrella too,
though probably no hatchet nor flashlight in it now, entering the gate
and picking its way gingerly up the rutted and frozen (and now partially
thawed) drive; and it may have been the howling or it may have been the
deputy or the driver or it may have been she who cried first: Its on
fire! though she would not have cried that; she would have said,
Faster. Faster. leaning forward on this seat toothe small furious
grim implacable woman not much larger than a child. But the ambulance
could not go fast in that drive; doubtless Clytie knew, counted upon,
that; it would be a good three minutes before it could reach the house,
the monstrous tinder-dry rotten shell seeping smoke through the warped
cracks in the weather-boarding as if it were made of gauze wire and
filled with roaring and beyond which somewhere something lurked which
bellowed, something human since the bellowing was in human speech, even
though the reason for it would not have seemed to be. And the deputy and
the driver would spring out and Miss Coldfield would stumble out and
follow them, running too, onto the gallery too, where the creature which
bellowed followed them, wraithlike and insubstantial, looking at them
out of the smoke, whereupon the deputy even turned and ran at him,
whereupon he retreated, fled, though the howling did not diminish nor
even seem to get any further away. They ran onto the gallery too, into
the seeping smoke, Miss Coldfield screaming harshly, The window! The
window! to the second man at the door. But the door was not locked; it
swung inward; the blast of heat struck them. The entire staircase was on
fire. Yet they had to hold her; Quentin could see it: the light thin
furious creature making no sound at all now, struggling with silent and
bitter fury, clawing and scratching and biting at the two men who held
her, who dragged her back and down the steps as the draft created by the
open door seemed to explode like powder among the flames as the whole
lower hall vanished. He, Quentin, could see it, could see the deputy
holding her while the driver backed the ambulance to safety and
returned, the three faces all a little wild now since they must have
believed herthe three of them staring, glaring at the doomed house:
and men for a moment maybe Clytie appeared in that window from which she
must have been watching the gates constantly day and night for three
monthsthe tragic gnomes face beneath the clean headrag, against a red
background of fire, seen for a moment between two swirls of smoke,
looking down at them, perhaps not even now with triumph and no more of
despair than it had ever worn, possibly even serene above the melting
clapboards before the smoke swirled across it againand he, Jim Bond,
the scion, the last of his race, seeing it too now and howling with
human reason now since now even he could have known what he was howling
about. But they couldnt catch him. They could hear him; he didnt seem
to ever get any further away but they couldnt get any nearer and maybe
in time they could not even locate the direction any more of the
howling. Theythe driver and the deputyheld Miss Coldfield as she
struggled: he (Quentin) could see her, them; he had not been there but
he could see her, struggling and fighting like a doll in a nightmare,
making no sound, foaming a little at the mouth, her face even in the
sunlight lit by one last wild crimson reflection as the house collapsed
and roared away, and there was only the sound of the idiot negro left.

And so it was the Aunt Rosa that came back to town inside the
ambulance, Shreve said. Quentin did not answer; he did not even say,
_Miss Rosa_. He just lay there staring at the window without even
blinking, breathing the chill heady pure snow-gleamed darkness. And she
went to bed because it was all finished now, there was nothing left now,
nothing out there now but that idiot boy to lurk around those ashes and
those four gutted chimneys and howl until someone came and drove him
away. They couldnt catch him and nobody ever seemed to make him go very
far away, he just stopped howling for a little while. Then after awhile
they would begin to hear him again. And so she died. Quentin did not
answer, staring at the window; then he could not tell if it was the
actual window or the windows pale rectangle upon his eyelids, though
after a moment it began to emerge. It began to take shape in its same
curious, light, gravity-defying attitudethe once-folded sheet out of
the wistaria Mississippi summer, the cigar-smell, the random blowing of
the fireflies. The South, Shreve said. The South. Jesus. No wonder
you folks all outlive yourselves by years and years and years. It was
becoming quite distinct; he would be able to decipher the words soon, in
a moment; even almost now, now, now.

I am older at twenty than a lot of people who have died, Quentin said.

And more people have died than have been twenty-one, Shreve said. Now
he (Quentin) could read it, could finish itthe sloped whimsical ironic
hand out of Mississippi attenuated, into the iron snow:

_or perhaps there is. Surely it can harm no one to believe that
perhaps she has escaped not at all the privilege of being outraged and
amazed and of not forgiving but on the contrary has herself gained that
place or borne where the objects of the outrage and of the commiseration
also are no longer ghosts but are actual people to be actual recipients
of the hatred and the pity. It will do no harm to hopeYou see I have
written hope, not think. So let it be hope.that the one cannot escape
the censure which no doubt he deserves, that the other no longer lack
the commiseration which let us hope (while we are hoping) that they have
longed for, if only for the reason that they are about to receive it
whether they will or no. The weather was beautiful though cold and they
had to use picks to break the earth for the grave yet in one of the
deeper clods I saw a redworm doubtless alive when the clod was thrown up
though by afternoon it was frozen again._

So it took Charles Bon and his mother to get rid of old Tom, and
Charles Bon and the octoroon to get rid of Judith, and Charles Bon and
Clytie to get rid of Henry; and Charles Bons mother and Charles Bons
grandmother got rid of Charles Bon. So it takes two niggers to get rid
of one Sutpen, dont it? Quentin did not answer; evidently Shreve did
not want an answer now; he continued almost without a pause: Which is
all right, its fine; it clears the whole ledger, you can tear all the
pages out and burn them, except for one thing. And do you know what that
is? Perhaps he hoped for an answer this time, or perhaps he merely
paused for emphasis, since he got no answer. Youve got one nigger
left. One nigger Sutpen left. Of course you cant catch him and you
dont even always see him and you never will be able to use him. But
youve got him there still. You still hear him at night sometimes. Dont
you?

Yes, Quentin said.

And so do you know what I think? Now he did expect an answer, and now
he got one:

No, Quentin said.

Do you want to know what I think?

No, Quentin said.

Then Ill tell you. I think that in time the Jim Bonds are going to
conquer the western hemisphere. Of course it wont quite be in our time
and of course as they spread toward the poles they will bleach out again
like the rabbits and the birds do, so they wont show up so sharp
against the snow. But it will still be Jim Bond; and so in a few
thousand years, I who regard you will also have sprung from the loins of
African kings. Now I want you to tell me just one thing more. Why do you
hate the South?

I dont hate it, Quentin said, quickly, at once, immediately; I dont
hate it, he said. _I dont hate it_ he thought, panting in the cold air,
the iron New England dark; _I dont. I dont! I dont hate it! I dont hate
it!_

Darl 

Jewel and I come up from the field, following the path in single file. Although 

I am fifteen feet ahead of him, anyone watching us from the cottonhouse can see 

Jewel's frayed and broken straw hat a full head above my own. 

The path runs straight as a plumb-line, worn smooth by feet and baked 

brick-hard by July, between the green rows of laid-by cotton, to the cottonhouse 

in the center of the field, where it turns and circles the cottonhouse at four 

soft right angles and goes on across the field again, worn so by feet in fading 

precision. 

The cottonhouse is of rough logs, from between which the chinking has long 
fallen. Square, with a broken roof set at a single pitch, it leans in empty and 
shimmering dilapidation in the sunlight, a single broad window in two opposite 
walls giving onto the approaches of the path. When we reach it I turn and follow 
the path which circles the house. Jewel, fifteen feet behind me, looking 
straight ahead, steps in a single stride through the window. Still staring 
straight ahead, his pale eyes like wood set into his wooden face, he crosses the 
floor in four strides with the rigid gravity of a cigar store Indian dressed in 
patched overalls and endued with life from the hips down, and steps in a single 
stride through the opposite window and into the path again just as I come around 
the corner. In single file and five feet apart and Jewel now in front, we go on 
up the path toward the foot of the bluff. 

Tull's wagon stands beside the spring, hitched to the rail, the reins 

wrapped about the seat stanchion. In the wagon bed are two chairs. Jewel stops 

at the spring and takes the gourd from the willow branch and drinks. I pass him 

and mount the path, beginning to hear Cash's saw. 

When I reach the top he has quit sawing. Standing in a litter of chips, he 

is fitting two of the boards together. Between the shadow spaces they are yellow 

as gold, like soft gold, bearing on their flanks in smooth undulations the marks 

of the adze blade: a good carpenter, Cash is. He holds the two planks on the 

trestle, fitted along the edges in a quarter of the finished box. He kneels and 

squints along the edge of them, then he lowers them and takes up the adze. A 

good carpenter. Addie Bundren could not want a better one, better box to lie in. 

It will give her confidence and comfort. I go on to the house, followed by the 

Chuck. Chuck. Chuck. 

of the adze. 



Cora 

So I saved out the eggs and baked yesterday. The cakes turned out right well. We 
depend a lot on our chickens. They are good layers, what few we have left after 
the possums and such. Snakes too, in the summer. A snake will break up a henhouse 
quicker than anything. So after they were going to cost so much more than 
Mr Tull thought, and after I promised that the difference in the number of eggs 
would make it up, I had to be more careful than ever because it was on my final 



say-so we took them. We could have stocked cheaper chickens, but I gave my 

promise as Miss Lawington said when she advised me to get a good breed, because 

Mr Tull himself admits that a good breed of cows or hogs pays in the long run. 

So when we lost so many of them we couldn't afford to use the eggs ourselves, 

because I could not have had Mr Tull chide me when it was on my say-so we took 

them. So when Miss Lawington told me about the cakes I thought that I could bake 

them and earn enough, at one time to increase the net value of the flock the 

equivalent of two head. And that by saving the eggs out one at a time, even the 

eggs wouldn't be costing anything. And that week they laid so well that I not 

only saved out enough eggs above what we had engaged to sell, to bake the cakes 

with, I had saved enough so that the flour and the sugar and the stove wood 

would not be costing anything. So I baked yesterday, more careful than ever I 

baked in my life, and the cakes turned out right well. But when we got to town 

this morning Miss Lawington told me the lady had changed her mind and was not 

going to have the party after all. 

"She ought to taken those cakes anyway," Kate says. 

"Well," I say, "I reckon she never had no use for them now." 

"She ought to taken them," Kate says. "But those rich town ladies can 

change their minds. Poor folks cant." 

Riches is nothing in the face of the Lord, for He can see into the heart. 
"Maybe I can sell them at the bazaar Saturday," I say. They turned out real 
well. 

"You cant get two dollars a piece for them," Kate says. 
"Well, it isn't like they cost me anything," I say. I saved them out and 
swapped a dozen of them for the sugar and flour. It isn't like the cakes cost me 
anything, as Mr Tull himself realises that the eggs I saved were over and beyond 
what we had engaged to sell, so it was like we had found the eggs or they had 
been given to us. 

"She ought to taken those cakes when she same as gave you her word," Kate 
says. The Lord can see into the heart. If it is His will that some folks has 
different ideas of honesty from other folks, it is not my place to question His 
decree. 

"I reckon she never had any use for them," I say. They turned out real 
well, too. 

The quilt is drawn up to her chin, hot as it is, with only her two hands 
and her face outside. She is propped on the pillow, with her head raised so she 
can see out the window, and we can hear him every time he takes up the adze or 
the saw. If we were deaf we could almost watch her face and hear him, see him. 
Her face is wasted away so that the bones draw just under the skin in white 
lines. Her eyes are like two candles when you watch them gutter down into the 
sockets of iron candle-sticks. But the eternal and the everlasting salvation and 
grace is not upon her. 

"They turned out real nice," I say. "But not like the cakes Addie used to 
bake." You can see that girl's washing and ironing in the pillow-slip, if ironed 
it ever was. Maybe it will reveal her blindness to her, laying there at the 
mercy and the ministration of four men and a torn-boy girl. "There's not a woman 
in this section could ever bake with Addie Bundren," I say. "First thing we know 
she'll be up and baking again, and then we wont have any sale for ours at all." 
Under the quilt she makes no more of a hump than a rail would, and the only way 
you can tell she is breathing is by the sound of the mattress shucks. Even the 
hair, at her cheek does not move, even with that girl standing right over her, 
fanning her with the fan. While we watch she swaps the fan to the other hand 



without stopping it. 

"Is she sleeping?" Kate whispers. 

"She's just watching Cash yonder," the girl says. We can hear the saw in 
the board. It sounds like snoring. Eula turns on the trunk and looks out the 
window. Her necklace looks real nice with her red hat. You wouldn't think it 
only cost twenty-five cents. 
"She ought to taken those cakes," Kate says. 
I could have used the money real well. But it's not like they cost me 
anything except the baking. I can tell him that anybody is likely to make a 
miscue, but it's not all of them that can get out of it without loss, I can tell 
him. It's not everybody can eat their mistakes, I can tell him. 
Someone comes through the hall. It is Darl. He does not look in as he 
passes the door. Eula watches him as he goes on and passes from sight again 
toward the back. Her hand rises and touches her beads lightly, and then her 
hair. When she finds me watching her, her eyes go blank. 

Darl 

Pa and Vernon are sitting on the back porch. Pa is tilting snuff from the lid of 
his snuff-box into his lower lip, holding the lip outdrawn between thumb and 
finger. They look around as I cross the porch and dip the gourd into the water 
bucket and drink. 

"Where's Jewel?" pa says. When I was a boy I first learned how much better 
water tastes when it has set a while in a cedar bucket. Warmish-cool, with a 
faint taste like the hot July wind in cedar trees smells. It has to set at least 
six hours, and be drunk from a gourd. Water should never be drunk from metal. 
And at night it is better still. I used to lie on the pallet in the hall, 
waiting until I could hear them all asleep, so I could get up and go back to the 
bucket. It would be black, the shelf black, the still surface of the water a 
round orifice in nothingness, where before I stirred it awake with the dipper I 
could see maybe a star or two in the bucket, and maybe in the dipper a star or 
two before I drank. After that I was bigger, older. Then I would wait until they 
all went to sleep so I could lie with my shirt-tail up, hearing them asleep, 
feeling myself without touching myself, feeling the cool silence blowing upon my 
parts and wondering if Cash was yonder in the darkness doing it too, had been 
doing it perhaps for the last two years before I could have wanted to or could 
have. 

Pa's feet are badly splayed, his toes cramped and bent and warped, with no 
toenail at all on his little toes, from working so hard in the wet in homemade 
shoes when he was a boy. Beside his chair his brogans sit. They look as though 
they had been hacked with a blunt axe out of pig-iron. Vernon has been to town. 
I have never seen him go to town in overalls. His wife, they say. She taught 
school too, once. 

I fling the dipper dregs to the ground and wipe my mouth on my sleeve. It 
is going to rain before morning. Maybe before dark. "Down to the barn," I say. 
"Harnessing the team." 

Down there fooling with that horse. He will go on through the barn, into 
the pasture. The horse will not be in sight: he is up there among the pine 
seedlings, in the cool. Jewel whistles, once and shrill. The horse snorts, then 
Jewel sees him, glinting for a gaudy instant among the blue shadows. Jewel 
whistles again; the horse comes dropping down the slope, stiff-legged, his ears 
cocking and flicking, his mis-matched eyes rolling, and fetches up twenty feet 



away, broadside on, watching Jewel over his shoulder in an attitude kittenish 
and alert. 

"Come here, sir," Jewel says. He moves. Moving that quick his coat, 
bunching, tongues swirling like so many flames. With tossing mane and tail and 
rolling eye the horse makes another short curvetting rush and stops again, feet 
bunched, watching Jewel. Jewel walks steadily toward him, his hands at his 
sides. Save for Jewel's legs they are like two figures carved for a tableau 
savage in the sun. 

When Jewel can almost touch him, the horse stands on his hind legs and 

slashes down at Jewel. Then Jewel is enclosed by a glittering maze of hooves as 

by an illusion of wings; among them, beneath the up-reared chest, he moves with 

the flashing limberness of a snake. For an instant before the jerk comes onto 

his arms he sees his whole body earth-free, horizontal, whipping snake-umber, 

until he finds the horse's nostrils and touches earth again. Then they are 

rigid, motionless, terrific, the horse back-thrust on stiffened, quivering legs, 

with lowered head; Jewel with dug heels, shutting off the horse's wind with one 

hand, with the other patting the horse's neck in short strokes myriad and 

caressing, cursing the horse with obscene ferocity. 

They stand in rigid terrific hiatus, the horse trembling and groaning. 

Then Jewel is on the horse's back. He flows upward in a stooping swirl like the 

lash of a whip, his body in midair shaped to the horse. For another moment the 

horse stands spraddled, with lowered head, before it bursts into motion. They 

descend the hill in a series of spine-jolting jumps, Jewel high, leech-like on 

the withers, to the fence where the horse bunches to a scuttering halt again. 

"Well," Jewel says, "you can quit now, if you got a-plenty." 

Inside the barn Jewel slides running to the ground before the horse stops. 

The horse enters the stall, Jewel following. Without looking back the horse 

kicks at him, slamming a single hoof into the wall with a pistol-like report. 

Jewel kicks him in the stomach; the horse arches his neck back, crop-toothed; 

Jewel strikes him across the face with his fist and slides on to the trough and 

mounts upon it. Clinging to the hay-rack he lowers his head and peers out across 

the stall tops and through the doorway. The path is empty; from here he cannot 

even hear Cash sawing. He reaches up and drags down hay in hurried armsful and 

crams it into the rack. 

"Eat," he says. "Get the goddamn stuff out of sight while you got a 
chance, you pussel-gutted bastard. You sweet son of a bitch," he says. 

Jewel 

It's because he stays out there, right under the window, hammering and sawing on 
that goddamn box. Where she's got to see him. Where every breath she draws is 
full of his knocking and sawing where she can see him saying See. See what a 
good one I am making for you. I told him to go somewhere else. I said Good God 
do you want to see her in it. It's like when he was a little boy and she says if 
she had some fertilizer she would try to raise some flowers and he taken the 
bread pan and brought it back from the barn full of dung. 
And now them others sitting there, like buzzards. Waiting, fanning 
themselves. Because I said If you wouldn't keep on sawing and nailing at it 
until a man cant sleep even and her hands laying on the quilt like two of them 
roots dug up and tried to wash and you couldn't get them clean. I can see the 
fan and Dewey Dell's arm. I said if you'd just let her alone. Sawing and 
knocking, and keeping the air always moving so fast on her face that when you're 



tired you cant breathe it, and that goddamn adze going One lick less. One lick 
less. One lick less until everybody that passes in the road will have to stop 
and see it and say what a fine carpenter he is. If it had just been me when Cash 
fell off of that church and if it had just been me when pa laid sick with that 
load of wood fell on him, it would not be happening with every bastard in the 
county coming in to stare at her because if there is a God what the hell is He 
for. It would just be me and her on a high hill and me rolling the rocks down 
the hill faces and teeth and all by God until she was quiet and not that goddamn 
adze going One lick less. One lick less and we could be quiet. 

Darl 

We watch him come around the corner and mount the steps. He does not look at us. 
"You ready?" he says. 

"If you're hitched up," I say. I say "Wait." He stops, looking at pa. 

Vernon spits, without moving. He spits With decorous and deliberate precision 

into the pocked dust below the porch. Pa rubs his hands slowly on his knees. He 

is gazing out beyond the crest of the bluff, out across the land. Jewel watches 

him a moment, then he goes on to the pail and drinks again. 

"I mislike undecision as much as ere a man," Pa says. 

"It means three dollars," I say. The shirt across pa's hump is faded 

lighter than the rest of it. There is no sweat stain on his shirt. I have never 

seen a sweat stain on his shirt. He was sick once from working in the sun when 

he was twenty-two years old, and he tells people that if he ever sweats, he will 

die. I suppose he believes it. 

"But if she dont last until you get back," he says. "She will be 
disappointed." 

Vernon spits into the dust. But it will rain before morning. 

"She's counted on it," pa says. "She'll want to start right away. I know 

her. I promised her I'd keep the team here and ready, and she's counting on it." 

"We'll need that three dollars then, sure," I say. He gazes out over the 

land, rubbing his hands on his knees. Since he lost his teeth his mouth 

collapses in slow repetition when he dips. The stubble gives his lower face that 

appearance that old dogs have. "You'd better make up your mind soon, so we can 

get there and get a load on before dark," I say. 

"Ma aint that sick," Jewel says. "Shut up, Darl." 

"That's right," Vernon says. "She seems more like herself today than she 

has in a week. Time you and Jewel get back, she'll be setting up." 

"You ought to know," Jewel says. "You been here often enough looking at 

her. You or your folks." Vernon looks at him. Jewel's eyes look like pale wood 

in his high-blooded face. He is a head taller than any of the rest of us, always 

was. I told them that's why ma always whipped him and petted him more. Because 

he was peakling around the house more. That's why she named him Jewel I told 

them. 

"Shut up, Jewel," pa says, but as though he is not listening much. He 
gazes out across the land, rubbing his knees. 

"You could borrow the loan of Vernon's team and we could catch up with 

you," I say. "If she didn't wait for us." 

"Ah, shut your goddamn mouth," Jewel says. 

"She'll want to go in ourn," pa says. He rubs his knees. "Dont ere a man 
mislike it more." 

"It's laying there, watching Cash whittle on that damn . . ." Jewel says. 



He says it harshly, savagely, but he does not say the word. Like a little boy in 
the dark to flail his courage and suddenly aghast into silence by his own noise. 
"She wanted that like she wants to go in our own wagon," pa says. "She'll 
rest easier for knowing it's a good one, and private. She was ever a private 
woman. You know it well." 

"Then let it be private," Jewel says. "But how the hell can you expect it 

to be--" he looks at the back o pa's head, his eyes like pale wooden eyes. 

"Sho," Vernon says, "she'll hold on till it's finished. She'll hold on 

till everything's ready, till her own good time. And with the roads like they 

are now, it wont take you no time to get her to town." 

"It's fixing up to rain," pa says. "I am a luckless man. I have ever 

been." He rubs his hands on his knees. "It's that durn doctor, liable to come at 

any time. I couldn't get word to him till so late. If he was to come tomorrow 

and tell her the time was nigh, she wouldn't wait, I know her. Wagon or no 

wagon, she wouldn't wait. Then she'd be upset, and I wouldn't upset her for the 

living world. With that family burying-ground in Jefferson and them of her blood 

waiting for her there, she'll be impatient. I promised my word me and the boys 

would get her there quick as mules could walk it, so she could rest quiet." He 

rubs his hands on his knees. "No man ever misliked it more." 

"If everybody wasn't burning hell to get her there," Jewel says in that 

harsh, savage voice. "With Cash all day long right under the window, hammering 

and sawing at that--" 

"It was her wish," pa says. "You got no affection nor gentleness for her. 
You never had. We would be beholden to no man," he says, "me and her. We have 
never yet been, and she will rest quieter for knowing it and that it was her own 
blood sawed out the boards and drove the nails. She was ever one to clean up 
after herself." 

"It means three dollars," I say. "Do you want us to go, or not?" Pa rubs 
his knees. "We'll be back by tomorrow sundown." 
"Well ..." pa says. He looks out over the land, awry-haired, mouthing the 
snuff slowly against, his gums. 

"Come on," Jewel says. He goes down the steps. Vernon spits neatly into 
the dust. 

"By sundown, now," pa says. "I would not keep her waiting." 
Jewel glances back, then he goes on around the house. I enter the hall, 
hearing the voices before I reach the door. Tilting a little down the hill, as 
our house does, a breeze draws through the hall all the time, upslanting. A 
feather dropped near the front door will rise and brush along the ceiling, 
slanting backward, until it reaches the down-turning current at the back door: 
so with voices. As you enter the hall, they sound as though they were speaking 
out of the air about your head. 

Cora 

It was the sweetest thing I ever saw. It was like he knew he would never see her 
again, that Anse Bundren was driving him from his mother's death bed, never to 
see her in this world again. I always said Darl was different from those others. 
I always said he was the only one of them that had his mother's nature, had any 
natural affection. Not that Jewel, the one she labored so to bear and coddled 
and petted so and him flinging into tantrums or sulking spells, inventing 
devilment to devil her until I would have trailed him time and time. Not him to 
come and tell her goodbye. Not him to miss a chance to make that extra three 



dollars at the price of his mother's goodbye kiss. A Bundren through and 
through, loving nobody, caring for nothing except how to get something with the 
least amount of work. Mr Tull says Darl asked them to wait. He said Darl almost 
begged them on his knees not to force him to leave her in her condition. But 
nothing would do but Anse and Jewel must make that three dollars. Nobody that 
knows Anse could have expected different, but to think of that boy, that Jewel, 
selling all those years of self-denial and down-right partiality they couldn't 
fool me: Mr Tull says Mrs Bundren liked Jewel the least of all, but I knew 
better. I knew she was partial to him, to the same quality in him that let her 
put up with Anse Bundren when Mr Tull said she ought to poisoned him~for three 
dollars, denying his dying mother the goodbye kiss. 
Why, for the last three weeks I have been coming over every time I could, 
coming sometimes when I shouldn't have, neglecting my own family and duties so 
that somebody would be with her in her last moments and she would not have to 
face the Great Unknown without one familiar face to give her courage. Not that I 
deserve credit for it: I will expect the same for myself. But thank God it will 
be the faces of my loved kin, my blood and flesh, for in my husband and children 
I have been more blessed than most, trials though they have been at times. 
She lived, a lonely woman, lonely with her pride, trying to make folks 
believe different, hiding the fact that they just suffered her, because she was 
not cold in the coffin before they were carting her forty miles away to bury 
her, flouting the will of God to do it. Refusing to let her lie in the same 
earth with those Bundrens. 

"But she wanted to go," Mr Tull said. 'It was her own wish to lie among 
her own people." 

"Then why didn't she go alive?" I said. "Not one of them would have 
stopped her, with even that little one almost old enough now to be selfish and 
stone-hearted like the rest of them." 

"It was her own wish," Mr Tull said. "I heard Anse say it was." 

"And you would believe Anse, of course," I said. "A man like you would. 

Dont tell me." 

"I'd believe him about something he couldn't expect to make anything off 
of me by not telling," Mr Tull said. 

"Dont tell me," I said. "A woman's place is with her husband and children, 
alive or dead. Would you expect me to want to go back to Alabama and leave you 
and the girls when my time comes, that I left of my own will to cast my lot with 
yours for better and worse, until death and after?" 
"Well, folks are different," he said. 

I should hope so. I have tried to live right in the sight of God and man, 
for the honor and comfort of my Christian husband and the love and respect of my 
Christian children. So that when I lay me down in the consciousness of my duty 
and reward I will be surrounded by loving faces, carrying the farewell kiss of 
each of my loved ones into my reward. Not like Addie Bundren dying alone, hiding 
her pride and her broken heart. Glad to go. Lying there with her head propped up 
so she could watch Cash building the coffin, having to watch him so he would not 
skimp on it, like as not, with those men not worrying about anything except if 
there was time to earn another three dollars before the rain come and the river 
got too high to get across it. Like as not, if they hadn't decided to make that 
last load, they would have loaded her into the wagon on a quilt and crossed the 
river first and then stopped and give her time to die what Christian death they 
would let her. 

Except Darl. It was the sweetest thing I ever saw. Sometimes I lose faith 



in human nature for a time; I am assailed by doubt. But always the Lord restores 
my faith and reveals to me His bounteous love for His creatures. Not Jewel, the 
one she had always cherished, not him. He was after that three extra dollars. It 
was Darl, the one that folks say is queer, lazy, pottering about the place no 
better than Anse, with Cash a good carpenter and always more building than he 
can get around to, and Jewel always doing something that made him some money or 
got him talked about, and that near-naked girl always standing over Addie with a 
fan so that every time a body tried to talk to her and cheer her up, would 
answer for her right quick, like she was trying to keep anybody from coming near 
her at all. 

It was Darl. He come to the door and stood there, looking at his dying 
mother. He just looked at her, and I felt the bounteous love of the Lord again 
and His mercy. I saw that with Jewel she had just been pretending, but that it 
was between her and Darl that the understanding and the true love was. He just 
looked at her, not even coming in where she could see him and get upset, knowing 
that Anse was driving him away and he would never see her again. He said 
nothing, just looking at her. 

"What you want, Darl?" Dewey Dell said, not stopping the fan, speaking up 
quick, keeping even him from her. He didn't answer. He just stood and looked at 
his dying mother, his heart too full for words. 

Dewey Dell 

The first time me and Lafe picked on down the row. Pa dassent sweat because he 
will catch his death from the sickness so everybody that comes to help us. And 
Jewel dont care about anything he is not kin to us in caring, not care-kin. And 
Cash like sawing the long hot sad yellow days up into planks and nailing them to 
something. And pa thinks because neighbors will always treat one another that 
way because he has always been too busy letting neighbors do for him to find 
out. And I did not think that Darl would, that sits at the supper table with his 
eyes gone further than the food and the lamp, full of the land dug out of his 
skull and the holes filled with distance beyond the land. 
We picked on down the row, the woods getting closer and closer and the 
secret shade, picking on into the secret shade with my sack and Lafe's sack. 
Because I said will I or wont I when the sack was half full because I said if 
the sack is full when we get to the woods it wont be me. I said if it dont mean 
for me to do it the sack will not be full and I will turn up the next row but if 
the sack is full, I cannot help it. It will be that I had to do it all the time 
and I cannot help it. And we picked on toward the secret shade and our eyes 
would drown together touching on his hands and my hands and I didn't say 
anything. I said "What are you doing?" and he said "I am picking into your 
sack." And so it was full when we came to the end of the row and I could not 
help it. 

And so it was because I could not help it. It was then, and then I saw 
Darl and he knew. He said he knew without the words like he told me that ma is 
going to die without words, and I knew he knew because if he had said he knew 
with the words I would not have believed that he had been there and saw us. But 
he said he did know and I said "Are you going to tell pa are you going to kill 
him?" without the words I said it and he said "Why?" without the words. And 
that's why I can talk to him with knowing with hating because he knows. 
He stands in the door, looking at her. 
"What you want, Darl?" I say. 



"She is going to die," he says. And old turkey-buzzard Tull coming to 

watch her die but I can fool them. 

"When is she going to die?" I say. 

"Before we get back," he says. 

"Then why are you taking Jewel?" I say. 

"I want him to help me load," he says. 



Tull 

Anse keeps on rubbing his knees. His overalls are faded; on one knee a serge 
patch cut out of a pair of Sunday pants, wore iron-slick. "No man mislikes it 
more than me," he says. 

"A fellow's got to guess ahead now and then," I say. "But, come long and 
short, it wont be no harm done neither way." 
"She'll want to get started right off," he says. "It's far enough to 
Jefferson at best." 

"But the roads is good now," I say. It's fixing to rain tonight, too. His 
folks buries at New Hope, too, not three miles away. But it's just like him to 
marry a woman born a day's hard ride away and have her die on him. 
He looks out over the land, rubbing his knees. "No man so mislikes it," he 
says. 

"They'll get back in plenty of time," I say. "I wouldn't worry none." 
"It means three dollars," he says. 

"Might be it wont be no need for them to rush back, noways," I say. "I 
hope it." 

"She's a-going," he says. "Her mind is set on it." 

It's a hard life on women, for a fact. Some women. I mind my mammy lived 
to be seventy and more. Worked every day, rain or shine; never a sick day since 
her last chap was born until one day she kind of looked around her and then she 
went and taken that lace-trimmed night gown she had had forty-five years and 
never wore out of the chest and put it on and laid down on the bed and pulled 
the covers up and shut her eyes. "You all will have to look out for pa the best 
you can," she said. "I'm tired." 

Anse rubs his hands on his knees. "The Lord giveth," he says. We can hear 

Cash a-hammering and sawing beyond the corner. 

It's true. Never a truer breath was ever breathed. "The Lord giveth," I 

say. 

That boy comes up the hill. He is carrying a fish nigh long as he is. He 

slings it to the ground and grunts "Hah" and spits over his shoulder like a man. 

Durn nigh long as he is. 

"What's that?" I say. "A hog? Where'd you get it?" 

"Down to the bridge," he says. He turns it over, the under side caked over 

with dust where it is wet, the eye coated over, humped under the dirt. 

"Are you aiming to leave it laying there?" Anse says. 

"I aim to show it to ma," Vardaman says. He looks toward the door. We can 

hear the talking, coming out on the draft. Cash, too, knocking and hammering at 

the boards. "There's company in there," he says. 

"Just my folks," I say. "They'd enjoy to see it too." 

He says nothing, watching the door. Then he looks down at the fish laying 

in the dust. He turns it over with his foot and prods at the eye-bump with his 

toe, gouging at it. Anse is looking out over the land. Vardaman looks at Anse's 

face, then at the door. He turns, going toward the corner of the house, when 



Anse calls him without looking around. 

"You clean that fish," Anse says. Vardaman stops. "Why cant Dewey Dell 

clean it?" he says. 

"You clean that fish," Anse says. 

"Aw, pa," Vardaman says. 

"You clean it," Anse says. He dont look around. Vardaman comes back and 
picks up the fish. It slides out of his hands, smearing wet dirt onto him, and 
flops down, dirtying itself again, gapmouthed, goggle-eyed, hiding into the dust 
like it was ashamed of being dead, like it was in a hurry to get back hid 
again.' Vardaman cusses it. He cusses it like a grown man, standing a-straddle 
of it. Anse dont look around. Vardaman picks it up again. He goes on around the 
house, toting it in both arms like a armful of wood, it overlapping him on both 
ends, head and tail. Durn nigh big as he is. 

Anse's wrists dangle out of his sleeves: I never see him with a shirt on 
that looked like it was his in all my life. They all looked like Jewel might 
have give him his old ones. Not Jewel, though. He's long-armed, even if he is 
spindling. Except for the lack of sweat. You could tell they aint been nobody 
else's but Anse's that way without no mistake. His eyes look like pieces of 
burnt-out cinder fixed in his face, looking out over the land. 
When the shadow touches the steps he says "It's five oclock." 
Just as I get up Cora comes to the door and says it's time to get on. Anse 
reaches for his shoes. "Now, Mr Bundren," Cora says, "dont you get up now." He 
puts his shoes on, stomping into them, like he does everything, like he is 
hoping all the time he really cant do it and can quit trying to. When we go up 
the hall we can hear them clumping on the floor like they was iron shoes. He 
comes toward the door where she is, blinking his eyes, kind of looking ahead of 
hisself before he sees, like he is hoping to find her setting up, in a chair 
maybe or maybe sweeping, and looks into the door in that surprised way like he 
looks in and finds her still in bed every time and Dewey Dell still a-fanning 
her with the fan. He stands there, like he dont aim to move again nor nothing 
else. 

"Well, I reckon we better get on," Cora says. "I got to feed the 
chickens." It's fixing to rain, too. Clouds like that dont lie, and the cotton 
making every day the Lord sends. That'll be something else for him. Cash is 
still trimming at the boards. "If there's ere a thing we can do," Cora says. 
"Anse'll let us know," I say. 

Anse dont look at us. He looks around, blinking, in that surprised way, 

like he had wore hisself down being surprised and was even surprised at that. If 

Cash just works that careful on my barn. 

"I told Anse it likely wont be no need," I say. "I so hope it." 

"Her mind is set on it," he says. "I reckon she's bound to go." 

"It comes to all of us," Cora says. "Let the Lord comfort you." 

"About that corn," I say. I tell him again I will help him out if he gets 

into a tight, with her sick and all. Like most folks around here, I done holp 

him so much already I cant quit now. 

"I aimed to get to it today," he says. "Seems like I cant get my mind on 
nothing." 

"Maybe she'll hold out till you are laid-by," I say. 

"If God wills it," he says. 

"Let Him comfort you," Cora says. 

If Cash just works that careful on my barn. He looks up when we pass. 
"Dont reckon I'll get to you this week," he says. 



"Taint no rush," I say. "Whenever you get around to it." 

We get into the wagon. Cora sets the cake box on her lap. It's fixing to 

rain, sho. 

"I dont know what he'll do," Cora says. "I just dont know." 

"Poor Anse," I say. "She kept him at work for thirty-odd years. I reckon 

she is tired." 

"And I reckon she'll be behind him for thirty years more," Kate says. "Or 

if it aint her, he'll get another one before cotton-picking." 

"I reckon Cash and Darl can get married now," Eula says. 

"That poor boy," Cora says. "The poor little tyke." 

"What about Jewel?" Kate says. 

"He can, too," Eula says. 

"Hmph," Kate says. "I reckon he will. I reckon so. I reckon there's more 
gals than one around here that dont want to see Jewel tied down. Well, they 
needn't to worry." 

"Why, Kate!" Cora says. The wagon begins to rattle. "The poor little 
tyke," Cora says. 

It's fixing to rain this night. Yes, sir. A rattling wagon is mighty dry 

weather, for a Birdsell. But that'll be cured. It will for a fact. 

"She ought to taken them cakes after she said she would," Kate says. 



Anse 

Durn that road. And it fixing to rain, too. I can stand here and same as see it 
with second-sight, a-shutting down behind them like a wall, shutting down 
betwixt them and my given promise. I do the best I can, much as I can get my 
mind on anything, but durn them boys. 

A-laying there, right tip to my door, where every bad luck that comes and 
goes is bound to find it. I told Addie it want any luck living on a road when it 
come by here, and she said, for the world like a woman, "Get up and move, then." 
But I told her it want no luck in it, because the Lord put roads for travelling: 
why He laid them down flat on the earth. When He aims for something to be always 
a-moving, He makes it longways, like a road or a horse or a wagon, but when He 
aims for something to stay put, He makes it up-and-down ways, like a tree or a 
man. And so he never aimed for folks to live on a road, because which gets there 
first, I says, the road or the house? Did you ever know Him to set a road down 
by a house? I says. No you never, I says, because it's always men cant rest till 
they gets the house set where everybody that passes in a wagon can spit in the 
doorway, keeping the folks restless and wanting to get up and go somewheres else 
when He aimed for them to stay put like a tree or a stand of corn. Because if 
He'd a aimed for man to be always a-moving and going somewheres else, wouldn't 
He a put him longways on his belly, like a snake? It stands to reason He would. 
Putting it where every bad luck prowling can find it and come straight to 
my door, charging me taxes on top of it. Making me pay for Cash having to get 
them carpenter notions when if it hadn't been no road come there, he wouldn't a 
got them; falling off of churches and lifting no hand in six months and me and 
Addie slaving and a-slaving, when there's plenty of sawing; on this place he 
could do if he's got to saw. 

And Darl too. Talking me out of him, durn them. It aint that I am afraid 
of work; I always is fed me and mine and kept a roof above us: it's that they 
would short-hand me just because he tends to his own business, just because he's 
got his eyes full of the land all the time. I says to them, he was all right at 



first, with his eyes full of the land, because the land laid up-and-down ways 
then; it wasn't till that ere road come and switched the land around longways 
and his eyes still full of the land, that they begun to threaten me out of him, 
trying to short-hand me with the law. 

Making me pay for it. She was well and hale as ere a woman ever were, 
except for that road. Just laying down, resting herself in her own bed, asking 
naught of none. "Are you sick, Addie?" I said. 
"I am not sick," she said. 

"You lay you down and rest you," I said. "I knowed you are not sick. 

You're just tired. You lay you down and rest." 

"I am not sick," she said. "I will get up." 

"Lay still and rest," I said. 'You are just tired. You can get up 

tomorrow." And she was laying there, well and hale as ere a woman ever were, 

except for that road. 

"I never sent for you," I said. "I take you to witness I never sent for 
you." 

"I know you didn't," Peabody said. "I bound that. Where is she?" 

"She's a-laying down," I said. "She's just a little tired, but she'll--" 

"Get outen here, Anse," he said. "Go set on the porch a while." 

And now I got to pay for it, me without a tooth in my head, hoping to get 

ahead enough so I could get my mouth fixed where I could eat God's own victuals 

as a man should, and her hale and well as ere a woman in the land until that 

day. Got to pay for being put to the need of that three dollars. Got to pay for 

the way for them boys to have to go away to earn it. And now I can see same as 

second sight the rain shutting down betwixt us, a-coming up that road like a 

durn man, like it want ere a other house to rain on in all the living land. 

I have heard men cuss their luck, and right, for they were sinful men. But 

I do not say it's a curse on me, because I have done no wrong to be cussed by. I 

am not religious, I reckon. But peace is my heart: I know it is. I have done 

things but neither better nor worse than them that pretend otherlike, and I know 

that Old Marster will care for me as for ere a sparrow that falls. But it seems 

hard that a man in his need could be so flouted by a road. 

Vardaman comes around the house, bloody as a hog to his knees, and that 

ere fish chopped up with the axe like as not, or maybe throwed away for him to 

lie about the dogs et it. Well, I reckon I aint no call to expect no more of him 

than of his man-growed brothers. He comes along, watching the house, quiet, and 

sits on the steps. "Whew," he says, "I'm pure tired." 

"Go wash them hands," I say. But couldn't no woman strove harder than 

Addie to make them right, man and boy: I'll say that for her. 

"It was full of blood and guts as a hog," he says. But I just cant seem to 

get no heart into anything, with this here weather sapping me, too. "Pa," he 

says, "is ma sick some more?" 

"Go wash them hands," I say. But I just cant seem to get no heart into it. 
Darl 

He has been to town this week: the back of his neck is trimmed close, with a 
white line between hair and sunburn like a joint of white bone. He has not once 
looked back. 

"Jewel," I say. Back running, tunnelled between the two sets of bobbing 

mule ears, the road vanishes beneath the wagon as though it were a ribbon and 

the front axle were a spool. "Do you know she is going to die, Jewel?" 



It takes two people to make you, and one people to die. That's how the 
world is going to end. 

I said to Dewey Dell: "You want her to die so you can get to town: is that 
it?" She wouldn't say what we both knew. "The reason you will not say it is, 
when you say it, even to yourself, you will know it is true: is that it? But you 
know it is true now. I can almost tell you the day when you knew it is true. Why 
wont you say it, even to yourself?" She will not say it. She just keeps on 
saying Are you going to tell pa? Are you going to kill him? "You cannot believe 
it is true because you cannot believe that Dewey Dell, Dewey Dell Bundren, could 
have such bad luck: is that it?" 

The sun, an hour above the horizon, is poised like a bloody egg upon a 
crest of thunderheads; the light has turned copper: in the eye portentous, in 
the nose sulphurous, smelling of lightning. When Peabody comes, they will have 
to use the rope. He has pussel-gutted himself eating cold greens. With the rope 
they will haul him up the path, balloon-like up the sulphurous air. 
"Jewel," I say, "do you know that Addie Bundren is going to die? Addie 
Bundren is going to die?" 

Peabody 

When Anse finally sent for me of his own accord, I said "He has wore her out at 
last." And I said a damn good thing, and at first I would not go because there 
might be something I could do and I would have to haul her back, by God. I 
thought maybe they have the same sort of fool ethics in heaven they have in the 
Medical College and that it was maybe Vernon lull sending for me again, getting 
me there in the nick of time, as Vernom always does things, getting the most for 
Anse's money like he does for his own. But when it got far enough into the day 
for me to read weather sign I knew it couldn't have been anybody but Anse that 
sent. I knew that nobody but a luckless man could ever need a doctor in the face 
of a cyclone. And I knew that if it had finally occurred to Anse himself that he 
needed one, it was already too late. 

When I reach the spring and get down and hitch the team, the sun has gone 
down behind a bank of black cloud like a topheavy mountain range, like a load of 
cinders dumped over there, and there is no wind. I could hear Cash sawing for a 
mile before I got there. Anse is standing at the top of the bluff above the 
path. 

"Where's the horse?" I say. 

"Jewel's taken and gone," he says. "Cant nobody else ketch hit. You'll 
have to walk up, I reckon." 

"Me, walk up, weighing two hundred and twenty-five pounds?" I say. "Walk 
up that durn wall?" He stands there beside a tree. Too bad the Lord made the 
mistake of giving trees roots and giving the Anse Bundrens He makes feet and 
legs. If He'd just swapped them, there wouldn't ever be a worry about this 
country being deforested someday. Or any other country. "What do you aim for me 
to do?" I say. "Stay here and get blowed clean out .of the county when that 
cloud breaks?" Even with the horse it would take me fifteen minutes to ride up 
across the pasture to the top of the ridge and reach the house. The path looks 
like a crooked limb blown against the bluff. Anse has not been in town in twelve 
years. And how his mother ever got up there to bear him, he being his mother's 
son. 

"Vardaman's gittin the rope," he says. 

After a while Vardaman appears with the plowline. He gives the end of it 



to Anse and comes down the path, uncoiling it. 

"You hold it tight," I say. "I done already wrote this visit onto my 

books, so I'm going to charge you just the same, whether I get there or not." 

"I got hit," Anse says. "You kin come on up." 

I'll be damned if I can see why I dont quit. A man seventy years old, 

weighing two hundred and odd pounds, being hauled up and down a damn mountain on 

a rope. I reckon it's because I must reach the fifty thousand dollar mark of 

dead accounts on my books before I can quit. "What the hell does your wife 

mean," I say, "taking sick on top of a durn mountain?" 

"I'm right sorry," he says. He let the rope go, just dropped it, and he 

has turned toward the house. There is a little daylight up here still, of the 

color of sulphur matches. The boards look like strips of sulphur. Cash does not 

look back. Vernon Tull says he brings each , board up to the window for her to 

see it and say it is all right. The boy overtakes us. Anse looks back at him. 

"Where's the rope?" he says. 

"It's where you left it," I say. "But never you mind that rope. I got to 

get back down that bluff. I dont aim for that storm to catch me up here. I'd 

blow too durn far once I got started." 

The girl is standing by the bed, fanning her. When we enter she turns her 
head and looks at us. She has been dead these ten days. I suppose it's having 
been a part of Anse for so long that she cannot even make that change, if change 
it be. I can remember how when I was young I believed death to be a phenomenon 
of the body; now I know it to be merely a function of the mind and that of the 
minds of the ones who suffer the bereavement. The nihilists say it is the end; 
the fundamentalists, the beginning; when in reality it is no more than a single 
tenant or family moving out of a tenement or a town. 
She looks at us. Only her eyes seem to move. It's like they touch us, not 
with sight or sense, but like the stream from a hose touches you, the stream at 
the instant of impact as dissociated from the nozzle as though it had never been 
there. She does not look at Anse at all. She looks at me, then at the boy. 
Beneath the quilt she is no more than a bundle of rotten sticks. 
"Well, Miss Addie," I say. The girl does not stop the fan. "How are you, 
sister?" I say. Her head lies gaunt on the pillow, looking at the boy. "You 
picked out a fine time to get me out here and bring up a storm." Then I send 
Anse and the boy out. She watches the boy as he leaves the room. She has not 
moved save her eyes. 

He and Anse are on the porch when I come out, the boy sitting on the 
steps, Anse standing by a post, not even leaning against it, his arms dangling, 
the hair pushed and matted up on his head like a dipped rooster. He turns his 
head, blinking at me. 

"Why didn't you send for me sooner?" I say. 

"Hit was jest one thing and then another," he says. 'That ere corn me and the 
boys was aimin to git up with, and Dewey Dell a-takin good keer of her, and 
folks comin in, a-offerin to help and sich, till I jest thought . . ." 
"Damn the money," I say. "Did you ever hear of me worrying a fellow before 
he was ready to pay?" 

"Hit aint begrudgin the money," he says. "I jest kept a-thinkin . . . 
She's goin, is she?" The durn little tyke is sitting on the top step, looking 
smaller than ever in the sulphur-colored light. That's the one trouble with this 
country: everything, weather, all, hangs on too long. Like our rivers, our land: 
opaque, slow, violent; shaping and creating the Me of man in its implacable and 
brooding image. "I knowed hit," Anse says. "All the while I made sho. Her mind 



is sot on hit." 

"And a damn good thing, too," I say. "With a trifling--" He sits on the 

top step, small, motionless in faded overalls. When I came out he looked up at 

me, then at Anse. But now he has stopped looking at us. He just sits there. 

"Have you told her yit?" Anse says. 

"What for?" I say. "What the devil for?" 

"Shell know hit. I knowed that when she see you she would know hit, same 
as writing. You wouldn't need to tell her. Her mind--" 
Behind us the girl says, "Paw." I look at her, at her face. 
"You better go quick," I say. 

When we enter the room she is watching the door. She looks at me. Her eyes 
look like lamps blaring up just before the oil is gone. "She wants you to go 
out," the girl says. 

"Now, Addie," Anse says, "when he come all the way from Jefferson to git 
you well?" She watches me: I can feel her eyes. It's like she was shoving at me 
with them. I have seen it before in women. Seen them drive from the room them 
coming with sympathy and pity, with actual help, and clinging to some trifling 
animal to whom they never were more than pack-horses. That's what they mean by 
the love that passeth understanding: that pride, that furious desire to hide 
that abject nakedness which we bring here with us, carry with us into operating 
rooms, carry stubbornly and furiously with us into the earth again. I leave the 
room. Beyond the porch Cash's saw snores steadily into the board. A minute later 
she calls his name, her voice harsh and strong. 
"Cash," she says; "you, Cash!" 

Darl 

Pa stands beside the bed. From behind his leg Vardaman peers, with his round 
head and his eyes round and his mouth beginning to open. She looks at pa; all 
her failing life appears to drain into her eyes, urgent, irremediable. "It's 
Jewel she wants," Dewey Dell says. 

"Why, Addle," pa says, "him and Darl went to make one more load. They 
thought there was time. That you would wait for them, and that three dollars and 
all. . . ." He stoops laying his hand on hers. For a while yet she looks at him, 
without reproach, without anything at all, as if her eyes alone are listening to 
the irrevocable cessation of his voice. Then she raises herself, who has not 
moved in ten days. Dewey Dell leans down, trying to press her back. 
"Ma," she says; "ma." 

She is looking out the window, at Cash stooping steadily at the board in 
the failing light, laboring on toward darkness and into it as though the 
stroking of the saw illumined its own motion, board and saw engendered. 
"You, Cash," she shouts, her voice harsh, strong, and unimpaired. "You, 
Cash!" 

He looks up at the gaunt face framed by the window in the twilight. It is 
a composite picture of all time since he was a child. He drops the saw and lifts 
the board for her to see, watching the window in which the face has not moved. 
He drags a second plank into position and slants the two of them into their 
final juxtaposition, gesturing toward the ones yet on the ground, shaping with 
his empty hand in pantomime the finished box. For a while still she looks down 
at him from the composite picture, neither with censure nor approbation. Then 
the face disappears. 

She lies back and turns her head without so much as glancing at pa. She 



looks at Vardaman; her eyes, the life in them, rushing suddenly upon them; the 
two flames glare up for a steady instant. Then they go out as though someone had 
leaned down and blown upon them. 

"Ma," Dewey Dell says; "ma!" Leaning above the bed, her hands lifted a 
little, the fan still moving like it has for ten days, she begins to keen. Her 
voice is strong, young, tremulous and clear, rapt with its own timbre and 
volume, the fan still moving steadily up and down, whispering the useless air. 
Then she flings herself across Addle Bundren's knees, clutching her, shaking her 
with the furious strength of the young before sprawling suddenly across the 
handful of rotten bones that Addie Bundren left, jarring the whole bed into a 
chattering sibilance of mattress shucks, her arms outflung and the fan in one 
hand still beating with expiring breath into the quilt. 
From behind pa's leg Vardaman peers, his mouth full open and all color 
draining from his face into his mouth, as though he has by some means fleshed 
his own teeth in himself, sucking. He begins to move slowly backward from the 
bed, his eyes round, his pale face fading into the dusk like a piece of paper 
pasted on a failing wall, and so out of the door. 

Pa leans above the bed in the twilight, his humped silhouette partaking of 
that owl-like quality of awry-feathered, disgruntled outrage within which lurks 
a wisdom too profound or too inert for even thought. 
"Durn them boys," he says. 

Jewel, I say. Overhead the day drives level and gray, hiding the sun by a 
flight of gray spears. In the rain the mules smoke a little, splashed yellow 
with mud, the off one clinging in sliding lunges to the side of the road above 
the ditch. The tilted lumber gleams dull yellow, water-soaked and heavy as 
lead, tilted at a steep angle into the ditch above the broken wheel; about the 
shattered spokes and about Jewel's, ankles a runnel of yellow neither water nor 
earth swirls, curving with the yellow road neither of earth nor water, down the 
hill dissolving into a streaming mass of dark green neither of earth nor sky. 
Jewel, I say 

Cash comes to the door, carrying the saw. Pa stands beside the bed, 
humped, his arms dangling. He turns his head, his shabby profile, his chin 
collapsing slowly as he works the snuff against his gums. 
"She's gone," Cash says. 

"She taken and left us," pa says. Cash does not look at him. "How nigh are 
you done?" pa says. Cash does not answer. He enters, carrying the saw. "I reckon 
you better get at it," pa says. "You'll have to do the best you can, with them 
boys gone off that-a-way." Cash looks down at her face. He is not listening to 
pa at all. He does not approach the bed. He stops in the middle of the floor, 
the saw against his leg, his sweating arms powdered lightly with sawdust, his 
face composed. "If you get in a tight, maybe some of themll get here tomorrow 
and help you," pa says. "Vernon could." Cash is not listening. He is looking 
down at her peaceful, rigid face fading into the dusk as though darkness were a 
precursor of the ultimate earth, until at last the face seems to float detached 
upon it, lightly as the reflection of a dead leaf. "There is Christians enough 
to help you," pa says. Cash is not listening. After a while he turns without 
looking at pa and leaves the room. Then the saw begins to snore again. "They 
will help us in our sorrow," pa says. 

The sound of the saw is steady, competent, unhurried, stirring the dying 
light so that at each stroke her face seems to wake a little into an expression 
of listening and of waiting, as though she were counting the strokes. Pa looks 
down at the face, at the black sprawl of Dewey Dell's hair, the outflung arms, 



the clutched fan now motionless on the fading quilt. "I reckon you better get 
supper on," he says. 
Dewey Dell does not move. 

"Git up, now, and put supper on," pa says. "We got to keep our strength 

up. I reckon Doctor Pea-body's right hungry, coming all this way. And Cash'll 

need to eat quick and get back to work so he can finish it in time." 

Dewey Dell rises, heaving to her feet. She looks down at the face. It is 

like a casting of fading bronze upon the pillow, the hands alone still with any 

semblance of life: a curled, gnarled ineptness; a spent yet alert quality from 

which weariness, exhaustion, travail has not yet departed, as though they 

doubted even yet the actuality of rest, guarding with horned and penurious 

alertness the cessation which they know cannot last. 

Dewey Dell stoops and slides the quilt from beneath them and draws it up 

over them to the chin, smoothing it down, drawing it smooth. Then without 

looking at pa she goes around the bed and leaves the room. 

She will go out where Peabody is, where she can stand in the twilight and 

look at his back with such an expression that, feeling her eyes and turning, he 

will say: I would not let it grieve me, now. She was old, and sick too. 

Suffering more than we knew. She couldn't have got well. Vardaman's getting big 

now, and with you to take good care of them all. I would try not to let it 

grieve me. I expect you'd better go and get some supper ready. It dont have to 

be much. But they'll need to eat, and she looking at him, saying You could do 

so much for me if you just would. If you just knew. I am I and you are you and 

I know it and you dont know it and you could do so much for me if you just 

would and if you just would then I could tell you and then nobody would have to 

know it except you and me and Darl 

Pa stands over the bed, dangle-armed, humped, motionless. He raises his 
hand to his head, scouring his hair, listening to the saw. He comes nearer and 
rubs his hand, palm and back, on his thigh and lays it on her face and then on 
the hump of quilt where her hands are. He touches the quilt as he saw Dewey Dell 
do, trying to smoothe it up to the chin, but disarranging it instead. He tries 
to smoothe it again, clumsily, his hand awkward as a claw, smoothing at the 
wrinkles which he made and which continue to emerge beneath his hand with 
perverse ubiquity, so that at last he desists, his hand falling to his side and 
stroking itself again, palm and back, on his thigh. The sound of the saw snores 
steadily into the room. Pa breathes with a quiet, rasping sound, mouthing the 
snuff against his gums. "God's will be done," he says. "Now I can get them 
teeth." 

Jewel's hat droops limp about his neck, channelling water onto the soaked 
towsack tied about his shoulders as, ankle-deep in the running ditch, he pries 
with a slipping two-by-four, with a piece of rotting log for fulcrum, at the 
axle. Jewel, I say, she is dead, Jewel. Addie Bundren is dead 

Vardaman 

Then I begin to run. I run toward the back and come to the edge of the porch and 
stop. Then I begin to cry. I can feel where the fish was in the dust. It is cut 
up into pieces of not-fish now, not-blood on my hands and overalls. Then it 
wasn't so. It hadn't happened then. And now she is getting so far ahead I cannot 
catch her. 

The trees look like chickens when they ruffle out into the cool dust on 
the hot days. If I jump off the porch I will be where the fish was, and it all 



cut up into not-fish now. I can hear the bed and her face and them and I can 
feel the floor shake when he walks on it that came and did it. That came and did 
it when she was all right but he came and did it. 
"The fat son of a bitch." 

I jump from the porch, running. The top of the barn comes swooping up out 

of the twilight. If I jump I can go through it like the pink lady in the circus, 

into the warm smelling, without having to wait My hands grab at the bushes; 

beneath my feet the rocks and dirt go rubbling down. 

Then I can breathe again, in the warm smelling. I enter the stall, trying 

to touch him, and then I can cry then I vomit the crying. As soon as he gets 

through, kicking I can and then I can cry, the crying can. 

"He kilt her. He kilt her." 

The life in him runs under the skin, under my hand, running through the 
splotches, smelling up into my nose where the sickness is beginning to cry, 
vomiting the crying, and then I can breathe, vomiting it. It makes a lot of 
noise. I can smell the life running up from under my hands, up my arms, and then 
I cart leave the stall. 

I cannot find it. In the dark, along the dust, the walls I cannot find it. 
The crying makes a lot of noise. I wish it wouldn't make so much noise. Then I 
find it in the wagon shed, in the dust, and I run across the lot and into the 
road, the stick jouncing on my shoulder. 

They watch me as I run up, beginning to jerk back, their eyes rolling, 
snorting, jerking back on the hitch-rein. I strike. I can hear the stick 
striking; I can see it hitting their heads, the breast-yoke, missing altogether 
sometimes as they rear and plunge, but I am glad. 
"You kilt my maw!" 

The stick breaks, they rearing and snorting, their feet popping loud on 
the ground; loud because it is going to rain and the air is empty for the rain. 
But it is still long enough. I run this way and that as they rear and jerk at 
the hitch-rein, striking. 
"You kilt her!" 

I strike at them, striking, they wheeling in a long lunge, the buggy 
wheeling onto two wheels and motionless like it is nailed to the ground and the 
horses motionless like they are nailed by the hind feet to the center of a 
whirling plate. 

I run in the dust.. I cannot see, running in the sucking dust where the 
buggy vanishes tilted on two wheels. I strike, the stick hitting into the 
ground, bouncing, striking into the dust and then into the air again and the 
dust sucking on down the road faster than if a car was in it. And then I can 
cry, looking at the stick. It is broken down to my hand, not longer than stove 
wood that was a long stick. I throw it away and I can cry. It does not make so 
much noise now. 

The cow is standing in the barn door, chewing. When she sees me come into 

the lot she lows, her mouth full of flopping green, her tongue flopping. 

"I aint a-goin to milk you. I aint a-goin to do nothing for them." 

I hear her turn when I pass. When I turn she is just behind me with her 

sweet, hot, hard breath. 

"Didn't I tell you I wouldn't?" 

She nudges me, snuffing. She moans deep inside, her mouth closed. I jerk 
my hand, cursing her like Jewel does. 
"Git, now." 

I stoop my hand to the ground and run at her. She jumps back and whirls 



away and stops, watching me. She moans. She goes on. to the path and stands 
there, looking up the path. 

It is dark in the barn, warm, smelling, silent. I can cry quietly, 
watching the top of the hill. 

Cash comes to the hill, limping where he fell off of the church. He looks 

down at the spring, then up the road and back toward the barn. He comes down the 

path stiffly and looks at the broken hitch-rein and at the dust in the road and 

then up the road, where the dust is gone. 

"I hope they've got clean past Tull's by now. I so hope hit." 

Cash turns and limps up the path. 

"Durn him. I showed him. Durn him." 

I am not crying now. I am not anything. Dewey Dell comes to the hill and 
calls me. Vardaman. I am not anything. I am quiet. You, Vardaman. I can cry 
quiet now, feeling and hearing my tears. 

"Then hit want. Hit hadn't happened then. Hit was a-layin right there on 
the ground. And now she's git-tin ready to cook hit." 
It is dark. I can hear wood, silence: I know them. But not living sounds, 
not even him. It is as though the dark were resolving him out of his integrity, 
into an unrelated scattering of components-snuffings and stampings; smells of 
cooling flesh and ammoniac hair; an illusion of a co-ordinated whole of 
splotched hide and strong bones within which, detached and secret and familiar, 
an is different from my is. I see him dissolve-legs, a rolling eye, a gaudy 
splotching like cold flames and float upon the dark in fading solution; all one 
yet neither; all either yet none. I can see hearing coil toward him, caressing, 
shaping his hard shape-fetlock, hip, shoulder and head; smell and sound. I am 
not afraid. 

"Cooked and et. Cooked and et." 



Dewey Dell 

He could do so much for me if he just would. He could do everything for me. It's 

like everything in the world for me is inside a tub full of guts, so that you 

wonder how there can be any room in it for anything else very important. He is a 

big tub of guts and I am a little tub of guts and if there is not any room for , 

anything else important in a big tub of guts, how can it be room in a little tub 

of guts. But I know it is there because God gave women a sign when something has 

happened bad. 

It's because I am alone. If I could just feel it, it would be different, 
because I would not be alone. But if I were not alone, everybody would know it. 
And he could do so much for me, and then I would not be alone. Then I could be 
all right alone. 

I would let him come in between me and Lafe, like Darl came in between me 
and Lafe, and so Lafe is alone too. He is Lafe and I am Dewey Dell, and when 
mother died I had to go beyond and outside of me and Lafe and Darl to grieve 
because he could do so much for me and he dont know it. He dont even know it. 
From the back porch I cannot see the barn. Then the sound of Cash's sawing 
comes in from that way. It is like a dog outside the house, going back and forth 
around the house to whatever door you come to, waiting to come in. He said I 
worry more than you do and I said You dont know what worry is so I cant worry. I 
try to but I cant think long enough to worry. 

I light the kitchen lamp. The fish, cut into jagged pieces, bleeds quietly 
in the pan. I put it into the cupboard quick, listening into the hall, hearing. 



It took her ten days to die; maybe she dont know it is yet. Maybe she wont go 
until Cash. Or maybe until Jewel. I take the dish of greens from the cupboard 
and the bread pan from the cold stove, and I stop, watching the door. 
"Where's Vardaman?" Cash says. In the lamp his sawdusted arms look like 
sand. 

"I dont know. I aint seen him." 

"Peabody's team run away. See if you can find Vardaman. The horse will let 
him catch him." 

"Well. Tell them to come to supper." 

I cannot see the barn. I said, I dont know how to worry. I dont know how to cry. 
I tried, but I cant. After a while the sound of the saw comes around, coming 
dark along the ground in the dust-dark. Then I can see him, going up and down 
above the plank. 

"You come in to supper," I say. "Tell him." He could do everything for me. 
And he dont know it. He is his guts and I am my guts. And I am Lafe's guts. 
That's it. I dont see why he didn't stay in town. We are country people, not as 
good as town people. I dont see why he didn't. Then I can see the top of the 
barn. The cow stands at the foot of the path, lowing. When I turn back, Cash is 
gone. 

I carry the buttermilk in. Pa and Cash and he are at the table. 

"Where's that big fish Bud caught, sister?" he says. 

I set the milk on the table. "I never had no time to cook it." 

"Plain turnip greens is mighty spindling eating for a man my size," he 

says. Cash is eating. About his head the print of his hat is sweated into his 

hair. His shirt is blotched with sweat. He has not washed his hands and arms. 

"You ought to took time," pa says. "Where's Vardaman?" 

I go toward the door. "I cant find him." 

"Here, sister," he says; "never mind about the fish. It'll save, I reckon. 
Come on and sit down." 

"I aint minding it," I say. "I'm going to milk before it sets in to rain." 

Pa helps himself and pushes the dish on. But he does not begin to eat. His 

hands are halfclosed on either side of his plate, his head bowed a little, his 

awry hair standing into the lamplight. He looks like right after the maul hits 

the steer and it no longer alive and dont yet know that it is dead. 

But Cash is eating, and he is too. "You better eat something," he says. He 

is looking at pa. "Like Cash and me. You'll need it." 

"Ay," pa says. He rouses up, like a steer that's been kneeling in a pond 

and you run at it. "She would not begrudge me it." 

When I am out of sight of the house, I go fast. The cow lows at the foot 

of the bluff. She nuzzles at me, snuffing, blowing her breath in a sweet, hot 

blast, through my dress, against my hot nakedness, moaning. "You got to wait a 

little while. Then I'll tend to you." She follows me into the barn where I set 

the bucket down. She breathes into the bucket, moaning. "I told you. You just 

got to wait, now. I got more to do than I can tend to." The barn is dark. When I 

pass, he kicks the wall a single blow. I go on. The broken plank is like a pale 

plank standing on end. Then I can see the slope, feel the air moving on my face 

again, slow, pale with lesser dark and with empty seeing, the pine clumps 

blotched up the tilted slope, secret and waiting. 

The cow in silhouette against the door nuzzles at the silhouette of the 

bucket, moaning. 

Then I pass the stall. I have almost passed it, I listen to it saying for 

a long time before it can say the word and the listening part is afraid that 



there may not be time to say it I feel my body, my bones and flesh beginning to 
part and open upon the alone, and the process of coming unalone is terrible. 
Lafe. Lafe. "Lafe" Lafe. Lafe. I lean a little forward, one foot advanced with 
dead walking. I feel the darkness rushing past my breast, past the cow; I begin 
to rush upon the darkness but the cow stops me and the darkness rushes on upon 
the sweet blast of her moaning breath, filled with wood and with silence. 
"Vardaman. You, Vardaman." 

He comes out of the stall. "You durn little sneak! You durn little sneak!" 
He does not resist; the last of rushing darkness flees whistling away. 
"What? I aint done nothing." 

"You durn little sneak!" My hands shake him, hard. Maybe I couldn't stop 
them. I didn't know they could shake so hard. They shake both of us, shaking. 
"I never done it," he says. "I never touched them." 

My hands stop shaking him, but I still hold him. "What are you doing here? 
Why didn't you answer when I called you?" 
"I aint doing nothing." 

"You go on to the house and get your supper." 

He draws back. I hold him. "You quit now. You leave me be." 

"What were you doing down here? You didn't come down here to sneak after 

me?" 

"I never. I never. You quit, now. I didn't even know you was down here. 
You leave me be." 

I hold him, leaning down to see his face, feel it with my eyes. He is 
about to cry. "Go on, now. I done put supper on and I'll be there soon as I 
milk. You better go on before he eats everything up. I hope that team runs clean 
back to Jefferson." 

"He kilt her," he says. He begins to cry. 
"Hush." 

"She never hurt him and he come and kilt her." 
"Hush." He struggles. I hold him. "Hush." 

"He kilt her." The cow comes up behind us, moaning. I shake him again. 
"You stop it, now. Right this minute. You're fixing to make yourself sick 
and then you cant go to town. You go on to the house and eat your supper." 
"I dont want no supper. I dont want to go to town." 
"We'll leave you here, then. Lessen you behave, we will leave you. Go on, 
now, before that old green-eating tub of guts eats everything up from you." He 
goes on, disappearing slowly into the hill. The crest, the trees, the roof of 
the house stand against the sky. The cow nuzzles at me, moaning. "Youll just 
have to wait. What you got in you aint nothing to what I got in me, even if you 
are a woman too." She follows me, moaning. Then the dead, hot, pale air breathes 
on my face again. He could fix it all right, if he just would. And he dont even 
know it. He could do everything for me if he just knowed it. The cow breathes 
upon my hips and back, her breath warm, sweet, stertorous, moaning. The sky lies 
flat down the slope, upon the secret dumps. Beyond the hill sheet-lightning 
stains upward and fades. The dead air shapes the dead earth in the dead 
darkness, further away than seeing shapes the dead earth. It lies dead and warm 
upon me, touching me naked through my clothes. I said You dont know what worry 
is. I dont know what it is. I dont know whether I am worrying or not. Whether I 
can or not. I dont know whether I can cry or not. I dont know whether I have 
tried to or not. I feel like a wet seed wild in the hot blind earth. 



Vardaman 

When they get it finished they are going to put her in it and then for a long 
time I couldn't say it. I saw the dark stand up and go whirling away and I said 
"Are you going to nail her up in it, Cash? Cash? Cash?" I got shut up in the 
crib the new door it was too heavy for me it went shut I couldn't breathe 
because the rat was breathing up all the air. I said "Are you going to nail it 
shut, Cash? Nail it? Nail it?" 

Pa walks around. His shadow walks around, over Cash going up and down 
above the saw, at the bleeding plank. 

Dewey Dell said we will get some bananas. The train is behind the glass, 

red on the track. When it runs the track shines on and off. Pa said flour and 

sugar and coffee costs so much. Because I am a country boy because boys in town. 

Bicycles. Why do flour and sugar and coffee cost so much when he is a country 

boy. "Wouldn't you ruther have some bananas instead?" Bananas are gone, eaten. 

Gone. When it runs on the track shines again. "Why aint I a town boy, pa?" I 

said. God made me. I did not said to God to made me in the country. If He can 

make the train, why cant He make them all in the town because flour and sugar 

and coffee. "Wouldn't you ruther have bananas?" 

He walks around. His shadow walks around. 

It was not her. I was there, looking. I saw. I thought it was her, but it 

was not. It was not my mother. She went away when the other one laid down in her 

bed and drew the quilt up. She went away. "Did she go as far as town?" "She went 

further than town." "Did all those rabbits and possums go further than town?" 

God made the rabbits and possums. He made the train. Why must He make a 

different place for them to go if she is just like the rabbit. 

Pa walks around. His shadow does. The saw sounds like it is asleep. 

And so if Cash nails the box up, she is not a rabbit. And so if she is not 

a rabbit I couldn't breathe in the crib and Cash is going to nail it up. And so 

if she lets him it is not her. I know. I was there. I saw when it did not be 

her. I saw. They think it is and Cash is going to nail it up. 

It was not her because it was laying right yonder in the dirt. And now 

it's all chopped up. I chopped it up. It's laying in the kitchen in the bleeding 

pan, waiting to be cooked and et. Then it wasn't and she was, and now it is and 

she wasn't. And tomorrow it will be cooked and et and she will be him and pa and 

Cash and Dewey Dell and there wont be anything in the box and so she can 

breathe. It was laying right yonder on the ground. I can get Vernon. He was 

there and he seen it, and with both of us it will be and then it will not be. 



Tull 

It was nigh to midnight and it had set into rain when he woke us. It had been a 
misdoubtful night, with the storm making; a night when a fellow looks for most 
anything to happen before he can get the stock fed and himself to the house and 
supper et and in bed with the rain starting, and when Peabody's team come up, 
lathered, with the broke harness dragging and the neck-yoke betwixt the off 
critter's legs, Cora says "It's Addie Bundren. She's gone at last." 
"Peabody mought have been to ere a one of a dozen houses hereabouts," I 
says. "Besides, how do you know it's Peabody's team?" 
"Well, aint it?" she says. "You hitch up, now." 

"What for?" I says. "If she is gone, we cant do nothing till morning. And 
it fixing to storm, too." 

"It's my duty," she says. "You put the team in." 



But I wouldn't do it. "It stands to reason they'd send for us if they 

needed us. You dont even know she's gone yet." 

"Why, dont you know that's Peabody's team? Do you claim it aint? Well, 

then." But I wouldn't go. When folks wants a fellow, it's best to wait till they 

sends for him, I've found. "It's my Christian duty," Cora says. "Will you stand 

between me and my Christian duty?" 

"You can stay there all day tomorrow, if you want," I says. 

So when Cora waked me it had set in to rain. Even while I was going to the 

door with the lamp and it shining on the glass so he could see I am coming, it 

kept on knocking. Not loud, but steady, like he might have gone to sleep 

thumping, but I never noticed how low down on the door the knocking was till I 

opened it and never seen nothing. I held the lamp up, with the rain sparkling 

across it and Cora back in the hall saying "Who is it, Vernon?" but I couldn't 

see nobody a-tall at first until I looked down and around the door, lowering the 

lamp. 

He looked like a drownded puppy, in them overalls, without no hat, 

splashed up to his knees where he had walked them four miles in the mud. "Well, 

I'll be durned," I says. 

"Who is it, Vernon?" Cora says. 

He looked at me, his eyes round and black in the middle like when you 
throw a light in a owl's face. "You mind that ere fish," he says. 
"Come in the house," I says. "What is it? Is your maw--" 
"Vernon," Cora says. 

He stood kind of around behind the door, in the dark. The rain was blowing 
onto the lamp, hissing on it so I am scared every minute it'll break. "You was 
there," he says. "You seen it." 

Then Cora come to the door. "You come right in outen the rain," she says, 
pulling him in and him watching me. He looked just like a drownded puppy. "I 
told you," Cora says. "I told you it was a-happening. You go and hitch." 
"But he aint said--" I says. 

He looked at me, dripping onto the floor. "He's a-ruining the rug," Cora 

says. "You go get the team while I take him to the kitchen." 

But he hung back, dripping, watching me with them eyes. "You was there. 

You seen it laying there. Cash is fixing to nail her up; and it was a-laying 

right there on the ground. You seen it. You seen the mark in the dirt. The rain 

never come up till after I was a-coming here. So we can get back in time." 

I be durn if it didn't give me the creeps, even when I didn't know yet. 

But Cora did. "You get that team quick as you can," she says. "He's outen his 

head with grief and worry." 

I be durn if it didn't give me the creeps. Now and then a fellow gets to 

thinking. About all the sorrow and afflictions in this world; how it's liable to 

strike anywhere, like lightning. I reckon it does take a powerful trust in the 

Lord to guard a fellow, though sometimes I think that Cora's a mite overcautious, 

like she was trying to crowd the other folks away and get in closer 

than anybody else. But then, when something like this happens, I reckon she is 

right and you got to keep after it and I reckon I am blessed in having a wife 

that ever strives for sanctify and well-doing like she says I am. 

Now and then a fellow gets to thinking about it. Not often, though. Which 

is a good thing. For the Lord aimed for him to do and not to spend too much time 

thinking, because his brain it's like a piece of machinery: it wont stand a 

whole lot of racking. It's best when it all runs along the same, doing the day's 

work and not no one part used no more than needful. I have said and I say again, 



that's ever living thing the matter with Darl: he just thinks by himself too 
much. Cora's right when she says all he needs is a wife to straighten him out. 
And when I think about that, I think that if nothing but being married will help 
a man, he's durn nigh hopeless. But I reckon Cora's right when she says the 
reason the Lord had to create women is because man dont know his own good when 
he sees it. 

When I come back to the house with the team, they was in the kitchen. She 

was dressed on top of her nightgownd, with a shawl over her head and her 

umbrella and her bible wrapped up in the oilcloth, and him sitting on a upturned 

bucket on the stove-zinc where she had put him, dripping onto the floor. 

I cant get nothing outen him except about a fish," she says. It's a judgment on 

them. I see the hand of the Lord upon this boy for Anse Bundrens judgment and 

warning." 

"The rain never come up till after I left," he says. "I had done left. I 

was on the way. And so it was there in the dust. You seen it. Cash is fixing to 

nail her, but you seen it." 

When we got there it was raining hard, and him sitting on the seat between 

us, wrapped up in Cora's shawl. He hadn't said nothing else, just sitting there 

with Cora holding the umbrella over him. Now and then Cora would stop singing 

long enough to say "It's a judgment on Anse Bundren. May it show him the path of 

sin he is a-trodding." Then she would sing again, and him sitting there between 

us, leaning forward a little like the mules couldn't go fast enough to suit him. 

"It was laying right yonder," he says, "but the rain come up after I taken 

and left. So I can go and open the windows, because Cash aint nailed her yet." 

It was long a-past midnight when we drove the last nail, and almost dustdawn 

when I got back home and taken the team out and got back in bed, with 

Cora's nightcap laying on the other pillow. And be durned if even then it wasn't 

like I could still hear Cora singing and feel that boy leaning forward between 

us like he was ahead of the mules, and still see Cash going up and down with 

that saw, and Anse standing there like a scarecrow, like he was a steer standing 

knee-deep in a pond and somebody come by and set the pond up on edge and he aint 

missed it yet. 

It was nigh toward daybreak when we drove the last nail and toted it into 

the house, where she was laying on the bed with the window open and the rain 

blowing on her again. Twice he did it, and him so dead for sleep that Cora says 

his face looked like one of these here Christmas masts that had done been buried 

a while and then dug up, until at last they put her into it and nailed it down 

so he couldn't open the window on her no more. And the next morning they found 

him in his shirt tail, laying asleep on the floor like a felled steer, and the 

top of the box bored clean full of holes and Cash's new auger broke off in the 

last one. When they taken the lid off they found that two of them had bored on 

into her face. 

If it's a judgment, it aint right. Because the Lord's got more to do than 

that. He's bound to have. Because the only burden Anse Bundren's ever had is 

himself. And when folks talks him low, I think to myself he aint that less of a 

man or he couldn't a bore himself this long. 

It aint right. I be durn if it is. Because He said Suffer little children 

to come unto Me dont make it right, neither. Cora said, I have bore you what the 

Lord God sent me. I faced it without fear nor terror because my faith was strong 

in the Lord, a-bolstering and sustaining me. If you have no son, it's because 

the Lord has decreed otherwise in His wisdom. And my life is and has ever been a 

open book to ere a man or woman among His creatures because I trust in my God 



and my reward." 

I reckon she's right. I reckon if there's ere a man or woman anywhere that 

He could turn it all over to and go away with His mind at rest, it would be 

Cora. And I reckon she would make a few changes, no matter how He was running it 

And I reckon they would be for man's good. Leastways, we would have to like 

them. Leastways, we might as well go on and make like we did. 

Darl 

The lantern sits on a stump. Rusted, grease-fouled, its cracked chimney smeared 
on one side with a soaring smudge of soot, it sheds a feeble and sultry glare 
upon the trestles and the boards and the adjacent earth. Upon the dark ground 
the chips look like random smears of soft pale paint on a black canvas. The 
boards look like long smooth tatters torn from the flat darkness and turned 
backside out. 

Cash labors about the trestles, moving back and forth, lifting and placing 
the planks with long clattering reverberations in the dead air as though he were 
lifting and dropping them at the bottom of an invisible well, the sounds ceasing 
without departing, as if any movement might dislodge them from the immediate air 
in reverberant repetition. He saws again, his elbow flashing slowly, a thin 
thread of fire running along the edge of the saw, lost and recovered at the top 
and bottom of each stroke in unbroken elongation, so that the saw appears to be 
six feet long, into and out of pa's shabby and aimless silhouette. "Give me that 
plank," Cash says. "No; the other one." He puts the saw down and comes and picks 
up the plank he wants, sweeping pa away with the long swinging gleam of the 
balanced board. 

The air smells like sulphur. Upon the impalpable plane of it their shadows 
form as upon a wall, as though like sound they had not gone very far away in 
falling but had merely congealed for a moment, immediate and musing. Cash works 
on, half turned into the feeble light, one thigh and one pole-thin arm braced, 
his face sloped into the light with a rapt, dynamic immobility above his 
tireless elbow. Below the sky sheet-lightning slumbers lightly; against it the 
trees, motionless, are ruffled out to the last twig, swollen, increased as 
though quick with young. 

It begins to rain. The first harsh, sparse, swift drops rush through the 

leaves and across the ground in a long sigh, as though of relief from 

intolerable suspense. They are big as buckshot, warm as though fired from a gun; 

they sweep across the lantern in a vicious hissing. Pa lifts his face, slackmouthed, 

the wet black rim of snuff plastered close along the base of his gums; 

from behind his slack-faced astonishment he 'muses as though from beyond time, 

upon the ultimate outrage. Cash looks once at the sky, then at the lantern. The 

saw has not faltered, the running gleam of its pistoning edge unbroken. "Get 

something to cover the lantern," he says. 

Pa goes to the house. The rain rushes suddenly down, without thunder, 
without warning of any sort; he is swept onto the porch upon the edge of it and 
in an instant Cash is wet to the skin. Yet the motion of the saw has not 
faltered, as though it and the arm functioned in a tranquil conviction that rain 
was an illusion of the mind. Then he puts down the saw and goes and crouches 
above the lantern, shielding it with his body, his back shaped lean and scrawny 
by his wet shirt as though he had been abruptly turned wrong, side out, shirt 
and all. 

Pa returns. He is wearing Jewel's raincoat and carrying Dewey Dell's. 



Squatting over the lantern, Cash reaches back and picks up four sticks and 
drives them into the earth and takes Dewey Dell's raincoat from pa and spreads 
it over the sticks, forming a roof above the lantern. Pa watches him. "I dont 
know what you'll do," he says. "Darl taken his coat with him." 
"Get wet", Cash says. He takes up the saw again; again it moves up and 
down, in and out of that unhurried imperviousness as a piston moves in the oil; 
soaked, scrawny, tireless, with the lean light body o a boy or an old man. Pa 
watches him, blinking, his. face streaming; again he looks up at the sky with 
that expression of dumb and brooding outrage and yet of vindication, as though 
he had expected no less; now and then he stirs, moves, gaunt and streaming, 
picking up a board or a tool and then laying it down. Vernon Tull is there now, 
and Cash is wearing Mrs Tull's raincoat and he and Vernon are hunting the saw. 
After a while they find it in pa's hand. 

"Why dont you go on to the house, out of the rain?" Cash says. Pa looks at 
him, his face streaming slowly. It is as though upon a face carved by a savage 
caricaturist a monstrous "burlesque of all bereavement flowed. "You go on in," 
Cash says. "Me and Vernon can finish it." 

Pa looks at item. The sleeves of Jewel's coat are too short for him. Upon 
his face the rain streams, slow as cold glycerin. "I dont begrudge her the 
wetting," he says. He moves again and falls to shifting the planks, picking them 
up, laying them down again carefully, as though they are glass. He goes to the 
lantern and pulls at the propped raincoat until he knocks it down and Cash 
conies and fixes it back. 

"You get on to the house," Cash says. He leads pa to the house and returns 

with the raincoat and folds it and places it beneath the shelter where the 

lantern sits. Vernon has not stopped. He looks up, still sawing. 

"You ought to done that at first," he says. "You knowed it was fixing to 

rain." 

"It's his fever," Cash says. He looks at the board. 

"Ay," Vernon says. "He'd a come, anyway." 

Cash squints at the board. On the long flank of it the rain crashes 

steadily, myriad, fluctuant. "I'm going to bevel it," he says. 

"It'll take more time," Vernon says. Cash sets the plank on edge; a moment 

longer Vernon watches him, then he hands him the plane. 

Vernon holds the board steady while Cash, bevels the edge of it with the 

tedious and minute care of a jeweler. Mrs Tull comes to the edge of the porch 

and calls Vernon. "How near are you done?" she says. 

Vernon does not look up. "Not long. Some, yet." 

She watches Cash stooping at the plank, the turgid savage gleam of the 

lantern slicking on the raincoat AS he moves. "You go down and get some planks 

off the barn and finish it and come in out of the rain," she says. "You'll both 

catch your death." Vernon does not move. "Vernon," she says. 

"We wont be long," he says. "We'll be done after a spell." Mrs Tull 

watches them a while. Then she reenters the house. 

"If we get in a tight, we could take some of them planks," Vernon says. 

"I'll help you put them back." 

Cash ceases the plane and squints along the plank, wiping it with his 
palm. "Give me the next one," he says. 

Some time toward dawn the rain ceases. But it is not yet day when Cash 
drives the last nail and stands stiffly up and looks down at the finished 
coffin, the others watching him. In the lantern light his face is calm, musing; 
slowly he strokes his hands on his rain-coated thighs in a gesture deliberate, 



final and composed. Then the four of them--Cash and pa and Vernon and Peabody- 
raise the coffin to their shoulders and turn toward the house. It is light, yet 
they move slowly; empty, yet they carry it carefully; lifeless, yet they move 
with hushed precautionary words to one another, speaking of it as though, 
complete, it now slumbered lightly alive, waiting to come awake. On the dark 
floor their feet clump awkwardly, as though for a long time they have not walked 
on floors. 

They set it down by the bed. Peabody says quietly: "Let's eat a snack. 
It's almost daylight. Where's Cash?" 

He has returned to the trestles, stooped again in the lantern's feeble 
glare as he gathers up his tools and wipes them on a cloth carefully and puts 
them into the box with its leather sling to go over the shoulder. Then he takes 
up box, lantern and raincoat and returns to the house, mounting the steps into 
faint silhouette against the paling east. 

In a strange room you must empty yourself for sleep. And before you are 
emptied for sleep, what are you. And when you are emptied for sleep, you are 
not. And when you are filled with sleep, you never were. I dont know what I am. 
I dont know if I am or not. Jewel knows he is, because he does not know that he 
does not know whether he is or not. He cannot empty himself for sleep because he 
is not what he is and he is what he is not. Beyond the unlamped wall I can hear 
the rain shaping the wagon that is ours, the load that is no longer theirs that 
felled and sawed it nor yet theirs that bought it and which is not ours either, 
lie on our wagon though it does, since only the wind and the rain shape it only 
to Jewel and me, that are not asleep. And since sleep is is-not and rain and 
wind are was, it is not. Yet the wagon is, because when the wagon is was, Addie 
Bundren will not be. And Jewel is, so Addie Bundren must be. And then I must be, 
or I could not empty myself for sleep in a strange room. And so if I am not 
emptied yet, I am is. 

How often have I lain beneath rain on a strange roof, thinking of home. 
Cash 

I made it on the bevel. 

1 . There is more surface for the nails to grip. 

2. There is twice the gripping-surface to each seam. 

3. The water will have to seep into it on a slant. Water moves easiest up 
and down or straight across. 

4. In a house people are upright two thirds of the time. So the seams and 
joints are made up-and-down. Because the stress is up-and-down. 

5. In a bed where people lie down all the time, the joints and seams are 
made sideways, because the stress is sideways. 

6. Except. 

7. A body is not square like a crosstie. 

8. Animal magnetism. 

9. The animal magnetism of a dead body makes the stress come slanting, so 
the seams and joints of a coffin are made on the bevel. 

10. You can see by an old grave that the earth sinks down on the bevel. 

1 1 . While in a natural hole it sinks by the center, the stress being upand- 
down. 

12. So I made it on the bevel. 

13. It makes a neater job. 



Vardaman 

My mother is a fish. 

Tull 

It was ten oclock when I got back, with Peabody's team hitched on to the back of 
the wagon. They had already dragged the buckboard back from where 
Quick found it upside down straddle of the ditch about a mile from the spring. 
It was pulled out of the road at the spring, and about a dozen wagons was 
already there. It was Quick found it. He said the rive was up and still rising. 
He said it had already covered the highest water-mark on the bridge-piling he 
ever seen. "That bridge wont stand a whole lot water," I said. "Has somebody 
told Anse about it?" 

"I told him," Quick said. "He says he reckons the boys has heard and 
unloaded and are on the way by now. He says they can load up and get across." 
"He better go on and bury her at New Hope," Armstid said. "That bridge is 
old. I wouldn't monkey with it." 

"His mind is set on taking her to Jefferson," Quick said. 

"Then he better get at it soon as he can," Armstid said. 

Anse meets us at the door. He has shaved, but not good. There is a long 

cut on his jaw, and he is wearing his Sunday pants and a white shirt with the 

neckband buttoned. It is drawn smooth over his hump, making it look bigger than 

ever, like a white shirt will, and his face is different too. He looks folks in 

the eye now, dignified, his face tragic and composed, shaking us by the hand as 

we walk up onto the porch and scrape our shoes, a little stiff in our Sunday 

clothes, our Sunday clothes rustling, not looking full at him as he meets us. 

"The Lord giveth," we say. 

"The Lord giveth." 

That boy is not there. Peabody told about how he come into the kitchen, 
hollering, swarming and clawing at Cora when he found her cooking that fish, and 
how Dewey Dell taken him down to the barn. "My team all right?" Peabody says. 
"All right," I tell him. "I give them a bait this morning. Your buggy 
seems all right too. It aint hurt." 

"And no fault of somebody's," he says. "I'd give a nickel to know where 
that boy was when that team broke away." 
"If it's broke anywhere, I'll fix it," I say. 

The women folks go on into the house. We can hear them, talking and 

fanning. The fans go whish. whish. whish and them talking, the talking sounding 

kind of like "bees murmuring in a water bucket. The men stop on the porch, 

talking some, not looking at one another. 

"Howdy, Vernon," they say. "Howdy, Tull." 

"Looks like more rain." 

"It does for a fact." 

"Yes, sir. It will rain some more." 

"It come up quick." 

"And going away slow. It dont fail." 

I go around to the back. Cash is filling up the holes lie bored in the top 

of it. He is trimming out plugs for them, one at a time, the wood wet and hard 

to work. He could cut up a tin can and hide the holes and nobody wouldn't know 

the difference. Wouldn't mind, anyway. I have seen him spend a hour trimming out 

a wedge like it was glass he was working, when, he could have reached around and 

picked tip a dozen sticks and drove them Into the joint and made it do. 



When we finished I go back to the front. The men have gone a little piece 
from the house, sitting on the ends of the boards and on the sawhorses where we 
made it last night, some sitting and some squatting, Whitfield aint come yet. 
They look up at me, their eyes asking. 
"It's about," I say. "He's ready to nail." 

While they are getting up Anse comes to file clod and looks at us and we 
return to the porch. We scrape our shoes again, careful, waiting for one another 
to go in first, milling a little at the door. Anse stands inside the door, 
dignified, composed. He waves us in and leads the way into the room. 
They had laid her in it reversed. Cash made it clock-shape, like this 
seam bevelled and with every joint a scrubbed with the plane, tight as a drum 
and neat as a sewing basket, and they had laid her in it head to foot so it 
wouldn't crush her dress. It was her wedding dress and it had a flare-out 
bottom, and they had laid her head to foot in it so the dress could spread out, 
and they had made her a veil out of a mosquito bar so the auger holes in her 
face wouldn't show. 

When we are going out, Whitfield comes. He is wet and muddy to the waist, 

coming in. "The Lord comfort this house," he says. "I was late because the 

bridge has gone. I went down to the old ford and swum my horse over, the Lord 

protecting me. His grace be upon this house." 

We go back to the trestles and plank-ends and sit or squat. 

"I knowed it would go," Armstid says. 

"It's been there a long time, that ere bridge," Quick says. 

"The Lord has kept it there, yon mean," Uncle Billy says. "I dont know ere 

a man that's touched hammer to it in twenty-five years." 

"How long has it been there, Uncle Billy?" Quick says. 

"It was built in let me see It was in the year 1 888," 

Uncle Billy says. "I mind it because the first man to cross it was Peabody 
coming to my house when Jody was born." 

"If I'd a crossed it every time your wife littered since, it'd a been wore 
out long before this, Billy," Peabody says. 

We laugh, suddenly loud, then suddenly quiet again. We look a little aside 
at one another. 

"Lots of folks has crossed it that wont cross no more bridges," Houston 
says. 

"It's a fact," Littlejohn says. It's so." 

"One more aint, no ways," Armstid says. "It'd taken them two-three days to 
got her to town in the wagon. They'd be gone a week, getting her to Jefferson 
and back." 

"What's Anse so itching to take her to Jefferson for, anyway?" Houston 
says. 

"He promised her," I say. "She wanted it. She come from there. Her mind 
was set on it." 

"And Anse is set on it, too," Quick says. 

"Ay," Uncle Billy says. "It's like a man that's let everything slide all 

his life to get set on something that will make the most trouble for everybody 

he knows." 

"Well, it'll take the Lord to get her over that river now," Peabody says. 
"Anse cant do it." 

"And I reckon He will," Quick says. "He's took care of Anse a long time, 
now." 

"It's a fact," Littlejohn says. 



"Too long to quit now," Armstid says. 

"I reckon He's like everybody else around here, Uncle Billy says. "He's 
done it so long now He cant quit." 

Cash comes out. He has put on a clean shirt; his hair wet, is combed 

smooth down on his brow, smooth and black as if he had painted it onto his head, 

squats stiffly among us, we watching him. 

"You feeling this weather, aint you?" Armstid says. 

Cash says nothing. 

"A broke bone always feels it," Littlejohn says. . fellow with a broke 
bone can tell it a-coming." 

"Lucky Cash got off with just a broke leg," Armstid says. "He might have 
hurt himself bed-rid. How far'd you fall, Cash?" 

"Twenty-eight foot, four and a half inches, about," Cash says. I move over 
beside him. 

"A fellow can sho slip quick on wet planks," Quick says. 
"It's too bad," I say. "But you couldn't a holp it." 

"It's them durn women," he says. "I made it to balance with her. I made it 
to her measure and weight" 

If it takes wet boards for folks to fall, it's fixing to be lots of 
falling before this spell is done. 
"You couldn't have holp it" I say. 

/ dont mind the folks falling. It's the cotton and corn I mind. 
Neither does Peabody mind the folks falling. How bout it, Doc? 
It's a fact. Washed clean outen the ground it will be. Seems like 
something is always happening to it. 

Course it does. That's why it's worth anything. If nothing didn't happen 
and everybody made a big crop, do you reckon it would be worth the raising? 
Well, I be durn if I like to see my work washed outen the ground, work I 
sweat over. 

It's a fact. A fellow wouldn't mind seeing it washed up if he could just 
turn on the rain himself. 

Who is that man can do that? Where is the color of his eyes? 

Ay. The Lord made it to grow. It's Hisn to wash up if He sees it fitten 

so. 

"You couldn't have holp it," I say. 
"It's them durn women," he says. 

In the house the women begin to sing. We hear the first line commence, 
beginning to swell as they take hold, and we rise and move toward the door, 
taking off our hats and throwing our chews away. We do not go in. We stop at the 
steps, clumped, holding our hats between our lax hands in front or behind, 
standing with one foot advanced and our heads lowered, looking aside, down at 
our hats in our hands and at the earth or now and then at the sky and at one 
another's grave, composed face. 

The song ends; the voices quaver away with a rich and dying fall. 
Whitfield begins. His voice in bigger than him. It's like they are not the same. 
It's like he is one, and his voice is one, swimming on two horses side by side 
across the ford and coming into the house, the mud-splashed one and the one that 
never even got Wet, triumphant and sad. Somebody in the house begins to cry. It 
sounds like her eyes and her voice were turned back inside her, listening; we 
move, shifting to the other leg, meeting one another's eye and making like they 
hadn't touched. 

Whitfield stops at last. The women sing again. In the thick air it's like 



their voices come out of the air, flowing together and on in the sad, comforting 
tunes, When they cease it's like they hadn't gone away. It's like they had just 
disappeared into the air and when we moved we would loose them again out of the 
air around us, sad and comforting. Then they finish and we put on our hats, our 
movements stiff, like we hadn't never wore hats before. 
On the way home Cora is still singing. "I am bounding toward my God and my 
reward," she sings, sitting on the wagon, the shawl around her shoulder and the 
umbrella open over her, though it is not raining. 

"She has hern," I say. "Wherever she went, she has her reward in being 

free of Anse Bundren." She laid there three days in that box, waiting for Darl 

and Jewel to come clean back home and get a new wheel and go back to where the 

wagon was in the ditch. Take my team, Anse, I said. 

We'll wait for ourn, he said. She'll want it so. She was ever a 

particular woman. 

On the third day they got back and they loaded her into the wagon and 
started and it already too late. You'll have to go all the way round by 
Samson's bridge. It'll take you a day to get there. Then you'll be forty miles 
from Jefferson. Take my team, Anse. 
We'll wait for ourn. She'll want it so. 

It was about a mile from the house we saw him, sitting on the edge of the 
slough. It hadn't had a fish in it never that I knowed. He looked around at us, 
his eyes round and calm, his face dirty, the pole across his knees. Cora was 
still singing. 

"This aint no good day to fish," I said, "You come on home with us and me 

and you'll go down to the river first thing in the morning and catch some fish." 

"It's one in here,' he said. "Dewey Dell seen it." 

"You come on with us. The river's the best place." 

"It's in here," he said. "Dewey Dell seen it." 

"I'm bounding toward my God and my reward," Cora sung. 

Darl 

It's not your horse that's dead, Jewel," I say. He sits erect on the seat, 
leaning a little forward, wooden-backed. The brim of his hat has soaked free of 
the crown in two places, drooping across his wooden face so that, head lowered, 
he looks through it like through the visor of a helmet, looking long across the 
valley to where the barn leans against the bluff, shaping the invisible horse. 
"See them?" I say. High above the house, against the quick thick sky, they hang 
in narrowing circles. From here they are no more than specks, implacable, 
patient, portentous. "But it's not your horse that's dead." 
"Goddamn you," he says. "Goddamn you." 

I cannot love my mother because I have no mother. Jewel's mother is a 
horse. 

Motionless, the tall buzzards hang in soaring circles, the clouds giving 
them an illusion of retrograde. 

Motionless, wooden-backed, wooden-faced, he shapes the horse in a rigid 
stoop like a hawk, hook-winged. They are waiting for us, ready for the moving of 
it, waiting for him. He enters the stall and waits until it kicks at him so that 
he can slip past and mount onto the trough and pause, peering out across the 
intervening stall-tops toward the empty path, before he reaches into the loft. 
"Goddamn him. Goddamn him." 



Cash 

It wont balance. If you want it to tote and ride on a balance, we will have--" 
"Pick up. Goddamn you, pick up." 

"I'm telling you it wont tote and it wont ride on a balance unless--" 
"Pick up! Pick up!, goddamn your thick-nosed soul to hell, pick up!" 
It wont balance. If they want it to tote and ride on a balance, they will 
have 



Darl 

He stoops among us above it, two of the eight hands. In his face the blood goes 
in waves. In between them his flesh is greenish looking, about that smooth, 
thick, pale green of cow's cud; his face suffocated, furious, his lip lifted 
upon his teeth. "Pick up!" he says. "Pick up, goddamn your thick-nosed soul!" 
He heaves, lifting one whole side so suddenly that we all spring into the 
lift to catch and balance it before he hurls it completely over. For an instant 
it resists, as though volitional, as though within it her pole-thin body clings 
furiously, even though dead, to a sort of modesty, as she would have tried to 
conceal a soiled garment that she could not prevent her body soiling. Then it 
breaks free, rising suddenly as though the emaciation of her "body had added 
buoyancy to the planks or as though, seeing that the garment was about to be 
torn from her, she rushes suddenly after it in a passionate reversal that flouts 
its own desire and need. Jewel's face goes completely green and I can hear teeth 
in his breath. 

We carry it down the hall, our feet harsh and clumsy on the floor, moving 
with shuffling steps, and through the door. 

"Steady it a minute, now," pa says, letting go. He turns back to shut and 

lock the door, but Jewel will not wait. 

"Come on," he says in that suffocating voice. "Come on." 

We lower it carefully down the steps. We move, Balancing it as though it 

were something infinitely precious, our faces averted, breathing through our 

teeth to keep our nostrils closed. We go down the path, toward the slope. 

"We better wait," Cash says. "I tell you it aint balanced now. We'll need 

another hand on that hill." 

"Then turn loose," Jewel says. He will not stop. Cash begins to fall 

behind, hobbling to keep up, breathing harshly; then he is distanced and Jewel 

carries the entire front end alone, so that, tilting as the path begins to 

slant, it begins to rush away from me and slip down the air like a sled upon 

invisible snow, smoothly evacuating atmosphere in which the sense of it is still 

shaped. 

"Wait, Jewel," I say. But he will not wait. He is almost running now and 

Cash is left behind. It seems to me that the end which I now carry alone has no 

weight, as though it coasts like a rushing straw upon the furious tide of 

Jewel's despair. I am not even touching it when, turning, he lets it overshoot 

him, swinging, and stops it and sloughs it into the wagon bed in the same motion 

and looks back at me, his face suffused with fury and despair. 

"Goddamn you. Goddamn you." 

Vardaman 

We are going to town. Dewey Dell says it wont be sold because it belongs to 
Santa Claus and he taken it back with him until next Christmas. Then it will be 



behind the glass again, shining with waiting. 

Pa and Cash are coming down the hill, but Jewel is going to the barn. 

"Jewel," pa says. Jewel does not stop. "Where you going?" pa says. But Jewel 

does not stop. "You leave that horse here," pa says. Jewel stops and looks at 

pa. Jewel's eyes look like marbles. "You leave that horse here," pa says. "We'll 

all go in. the wagon with ma, like she wanted." 

But my mother is a fish. Vernon seen it. He was there. 

"Jewel's mother is a horse," Darl said. 

"Then mine can be a fish, cant it, Darl?" I said. 

Jewel is my brother. 

"Then mine will have to be a horse, too," I said. 

"Why?" Darl said. "If pa is your pa, why does your ma have to be a horse 

just because Jewel's is?" 

"Why does it?" I said. "Why does it, Darl?" 

Darl is my brother. 

"Then what is your ma, Darl?" I said. 

"I haven't got ere one," Darl said. "Because if I had one, it is was. And 
if it is was, it cant be is. Can it?" 
"No," I said. 

"Then I am not," Darl said. "Am I?" 
"No," I said. 

I am. Darl is my brother. 
"But you are, Darl," I said. 

"I know it," Darl said. "That's why I am not is. Are is too many for one 
woman to foal." 

Cash is carrying his tool box. Pa looks at him. "Ill stop at Tull's on the 

way back," Cash. says. "Get on that barn roof." 

"It aint respectful," pa says. "It's a deliberate flouting of her and of 

me." 

"Do you want him to come all the way back hero and carry them up to Tull's 
afoot?" Darl says. Pa look's at Darl, his mouth chewing. Pa shaves every day now 
because my mother is a fish. 
"It aint right," pa says. 

Dewey Dell has the package in her hand. She has the basket with our dinner 
too. 

"What's that?" pa says. 

"Mrs Tull's cakes," Dewey Dell says, getting into the wagon. "I'm taking 
them to town for her." 

"It aint right," pa says. "It's a flouting of the dead." 

It'll be there. It'll be there come Christmas, she says, shining on the 

track. She says he wont sell it to no town boys. 

Darl 

He goes on toward the barn, entering the lot, wooden-backed. 
Dewey Dell carries the basket on one arm, in the other hand something 
wrapped square in a newspaper. Her face is calm and sullen, her eyes brooding 
and alert; within them I can see Peabody's back like two round peas in two 
thimbles: perhaps in Peabody's back two of those worms which work surreptitious 
and steady through you and out the other side and you waking suddenly from sleep 
or from waking, with on your face an expression sudden, intent, and concerned. 
She sets the basket into the wagon and climbs in, her leg coming long from 



beneath her tightening dress: that lever which moves the world; one of that 

caliper which measures the length and breadth of life. She sits on the seat 

beside Vardaman and sets the parcel on her lap. 

Then he enters the barn. He has not looked back. 

"It aint rights" pa says. It's little enough for him to do for her." 

"Go on," Cash says. "Leave him stay if he wants. He'll be all right here. 

Maybe he'll go up to Tull's and stay." 

"He'll catch us," I say. "He'll cut across and meet us at Tull's lane." 
"He would have rid that horse, too," pa says, "if I hadn't a stopped him. 
A durn spotted critter wilder than a cattymount. A deliberate flouting of her 
and of me." 

The wagon moves; the mules' ears begin to bob. Behind us, above the house, 
motionless in tall and soaring circles, they diminish and disappear. 

Anse 

I told him not to bring that horse out of respect for his dead ma, because it 
wouldn't look right, him prancing along on a durn circus animal and her wanting 
us all to be in the wagon with her that sprung; from her flesh and blood, but we 
hadn't no more than passed Tuffs lane when Darl begun to laugh. Setting: back 
there on the plank seat with Cash, with his dead ma laying in her coffin at his 
feet, laughing. How many times I told him if s doing such things as that that 
makes folks talk about him, I dont know. I says I got some regard for what folks 
says about my flesh, and blood even if you haven't, even if I have raised such a 
durn passel of boys, and when you fixes it so folks can say such about you, it's 
a reflection on your ma, I says, not me: I am a man and I can stand it; it's on 
your womenfolks, your ma and sister that you should care for, and I turned and 
looked back at him and him setting there, laughing. 
"I dont expect you to have no respect for me," I says. "But with your own 
ma not cold in her coffin yet." 

"Yonder," Cash says, jerking his head toward the lane. The horse is still 

a right smart piece away, coming up at a good pace, but I dont have to be told 

who it is. I just looked back at Darl, setting there laughing. 

"I done my best," I says. "I tried to do as she would wish it. The Lord 

will pardon me and excuse the conduct of them He sent me." And Darl setting on 

the plank seat right above her where she was laying, laughing. 

Darl 

He comes up the lane fast, yet we are three hundred yards beyond the mouth of it 
when he turns into the road, the mud flying beneath the flicking drive of the 
hooves. Then he slows a little, light and erect in the saddle, the horse mincing 
through the mud. 

Tull is in his lot. He looks at us, lifts his hand. We go on, the wagon 
creaking, the mud whispering on the wheels. Vernon still stands there. He 
watches Jewel as he passes, the horse moving with a light, high-kneed driving 
gait, three hundred yards back. We go on, with a motion so soporific, so 
dreamlike as to be uninferant of progress, as though time and not space were 
decreasing between us and it. 

It turns off at right angles, the wheel-marts of last Sunday healed away 
now: a smooth, red scoriation curving away into the pines; a white signboard 
with faded lettering: New Hope Church. 3 mi. It wheels up like a motionless hand 



lifted above the profound desolation of the ocean; beyond it the red road lies 
like a spoke of which Addie. Bundren. is the rim. It wheels past, empty, 
unscarred, the white signboard turns away-its fading and tranquil assertion. 
Cash, looks lip the road quietly, his bead turning as we pass It like an owls 
head, his face composed. Pa looks straight ahead, humped. Dewey Dell looks at 
the road too, then she looks back at me, her eyes watchful and repudiant, not 
like that question which was in those of Cash, for a smoldering while. The 
signboard passes; the unscarred road wheels on. Then Dewey Dell turns her head. 
The wagon creaks on. 

Cash spits over the wheel. "In a couple of days now it'll be smelling," he 
says. 

"You might tell Jewel that," I say. 

He is motionless now, sitting the horse at the function, upright, watching 
us, no less still than the signboard that lifts its fading capitulation opposite 
him. 

"It aint balanced right for no long ride," Cash says. 
"Tell him that, too," I say. The wagon creaks on. 

A mile further along he passes us, the horse, arch-necked, reined back to 
a swift singlefoot. He sits lightly, poised, upright, wooden-faced in the 
saddle, the broken hat raked at a swaggering angle. He passes us swiftly, 
without looking at us, the horse driving, its hooves hissing in the mud. A gout 
of mud, back-flung, plops onto the box. Cash leans forward and takes a tool from 
his box and removes it carefully. When the road crosses Whiteleaf, the willows 
leaning near enough, he breaks off a branch and scours at the stain with the wet 
leaves. 



Anse 

It's a hard country on man; it's hard. Eight miles of the sweat of his body 
washed up outen the Lord's earth, where the Lord Himself told him to put it. 
Nowhere in this sinful world can a honest, hardworking man profit. It takes them 
that runs the stores in the towns, doing no sweating, living off of them that 
sweats. It aint the hardworking man, the farmer. Sometimes I wonder why we keep 
at it. It's because there is a reward for us above, where they cant take their 
autos and such. Every man will be equal there and it will be taken from them 
that have and give to them that have not by the Lord. 
But it's a long wait, seems like. It's bad that a fellow must earn the 
reward of his right-doing by flouting hisself and his dead. We drove all the 
rest of the day and got to Samson's at dust-dark and then that bridge was gone, 
too. They hadn't never see the river so high, and it not done raining yet There 
was old men that hadn't never see nor hear of it being so in the memory of man. 
I am the chosen of the Lord, for who He loveth, so doeth He chastiseth. But I be 
durn if He dont take some curious ways to show it, seems like. 
But now I can get them teeth. That will be a comfort. It will. 



Samson 

It was just before sundown. We were sitting on the porch when the wagon came up 
the road with the five of them in it and the other one on the horse behind. One 
of them raised his hand, but they was going on past the store without stopping. 
"Who's that?" MacCallum says: I cant think of his name: Rate's twin; that 
one it was. 



It's Bundren, from down beyond New Hope," Quick says. "There's one of them 
Snopes horses Jewel's riding." 

"I didn't know there was ere a one of them horses left," MacCallum says. 
"I thought you folks down there finally contrived to give them all away." 
"Try and get that one," Quick says. The wagon went on. 
"I bet old man Lon never gave it to him," I says. 

"No," Quick says. "He bought it from pappy." The wagon went on. "They must 

not a heard about the bridge," he says. 

"What're they doing up here, anyway?" MacCallum says. 

"Taking a holiday since he got his wife buried, I reckon," Quick says. 

"Heading for town, I reckon, with Tull's bridge gone too. I wonder if they aint 

heard about the bridge." 

"They'll have to fly, then," I says. "I dont reckon there's ere a bridge 
between here and Mouth of Ishatawa." 

They had something in the wagon. But Quick had been to the funeral three 
days ago and we naturally never thought anything about it except that they were 
heading away from home mighty late and that they hadn't heard about the bridge. 
"You better holler at them," MacCallum says. Durn it, the name is right on the 
tip of my tongue. So Quick hollered and they stopped and he went to the wagon 
and told them. 

He come back with them. "They're going to Jefferson," he says. "The bridge 
at Tull's is gone, too." Like we didn't know it, and his face looked funny, 
around the nostrils, but they just sat there, Bundren and the girl and the chap 
on the seat, and Cash and the second one, the one folks talks about, on a plank 
across the tail-gate, and the other one on that spotted horse. But I reckon they 
was used to it by then, because when I said to Cash that they'd have to pass by 
New Hope again and what they'd better do, he just says, 
"I reckon we can get there." 

I aint much for meddling. Let every man run his own business to suit 
himself, I say. But after I talked to Rachel about them not having a regular man 
to fix her and it being July and all, I went back down to the barn and tried to 
talk to Bundren about it. 

"I give her my promise," he says. "Her mind was set on it." 
I notice how it takes a lazy man, a man that hates moving, to get set on 
moving once he does get started off, the same as he was set on staying still, 
like it aint the moving he hates so much as the starting and the stopping. And 
like he would be kind of proud of whatever come up to make the moving or the 
setting still look hard. He set there on the wagon, hunched up, blinking, 
listening to us tell about how quick the bridge went and how high the water was, 
and I be durn if he didn't act like he was proud of it, like he had made the 
river rise himself. 

"You say it's higher than you ever see it before?" he says. "God's will be 
done," he says. "I reckon it wont go down much by morning, neither," he says. 
"You better stay here tonight," I says, "and get a early start for New 
Hope tomorrow morning." I was just sorry for them bone-gaunted mules. I told 
Rachel, I says, "Well, would you have had me turn them away at dark, eight miles 
from home? What else could I do," I says. "It wont be but one night, and they'll 
keep it in the barn, and they'll sholy get started by daylight." And so I says, 
"You stay here tonight and early tomorrow you can go back to New Hope. I got 
tools enough, and the boys can go on right after supper and have it dug and 
ready if they want" and then I found that girl watching me. If her eyes had a 
been pistols, I wouldn't be talking now. I be dog if they didn't blaze at me. 



And so when I went down to the barn I come on them, her talking so she never 
noticed when I come up. 

"You promised her," she says. "She wouldn't go until you promised. She 
thought she could depend on you. If you dont do it, it will be a curse on you." 
"Cant no man say I dont aim to keep my word," Bundren says. "My heart is 
open to ere a man." 

"I dont care what your heart is," she says. She was whispering, kind of, 
talking fast. "You promised her. You've got to. You--" then she seen me and 
quit, standing there. If they'd been pistols, I wouldn't be talking now. So when 
I talked to him about it, he says, 
"I give her my promise. Her mind is set on it." 

"But seems to me she'd rather have her ma buried close by, so she could--" 
"It's Addie I give the promise to," he says. "Her mind is set on it." 
So I told them to drive it into the barn, because it was threatening rain 
again, and that supper was about ready. Only they didn't want to come in. 
"I thank you," Bundren says. "We wouldn't discommode you. We got a little 
something in the basket. We can make out." 

"Well," I says, "since you are so particular about your womenfolks, I am 

too. And when folks stops with us at meal time and wont come to the table, my 

wife takes it as a insult." 

So the girl went on to the kitchen to help Rachel. And then Jewel come to 
me. 

"Sho," I says. "Help yourself outen the loft. Feed him when you bait the 
mules." 

"I ratter pay you for him," he says. 

"What for?" I says. "I wouldn't begrudge no man a bait for his horse." 

"I rather pay you," he says; I thought he said extra. 

"Extra for what?" I says. "Wont he eat hay and corn?" 

"Extra feed," he says. "I feed him a little extra and I dont want him 

beholden to no man." 

"You cant buy no feed from me, boy," I says. "And if he can eat that loft 
clean, I'll help you load the ham onto the wagon in the morning." 
"He aint never been beholden to no man," he says. "I rather pay you for 
it." 

And if I had my rathers, you wouldn't be here a-tall, I wanted to say. But 

I just says, "Then it's high time he commenced. You cant buy no feed from me." 

When Rachel put supper on, her and the girl went and fixed some beds. But 

wouldn't any of them come in. "She's been dead long enough to get over that sort 

of foolishness," I says. Because I got just as much respect for the dead as ere 

a man, but you've got to respect the dead themselves, and a woman that's been 

dead in a box four days, the best way to respect her is to get her into the 

ground as quick as you can. But they wouldn't do it. 

"It wouldn't be right," Bundren says. "Course, if the boys wants to go to 

bed, I reckon I can set up with her. I dont begrudge her it." 

So when I went back down there they were squatting on the ground around 

the wagon, all of them. "Let that chap come to the house and get some sleep, 

anyway," I says. "And you better come too," I says to the girl. I wasn't aiming 

to interfere with them. And I sholy hadn't done nothing to her that I knowed. 

"He's done already asleep," Bundren says. They had done put him to bed in 

the trough in a empty stall. 

"Well, you come on, then," I says to her. But still she never said 

nothing. They just squatted there. You couldn't hardly see them. "How about you 



boys?" I says. "You got a full day tomorrow." After a while Cash says, 
"I thank you. We can make out." 

"We wouldn't be beholden," Bundren says. "I thank you kindly." 

So I left them squatting there. I reckon after four days they was used to 

it. But Rachel wasn't. 

"It's a outrage," she says. "A outrage." 

"What could he a done?" I says. "He give her his promised word." 

"Who's talking about him?" she says. "Who cares about him?" she says, 

crying. "I just wish that you and him and all the men in the world that torture 

us alive and flout us dead, dragging us up and down the country--" 

"Now, now," I says. "You're upset." 

"Dont you touch me!" she says. "Dont you touch me!" 

A man cant tell nothing about them. I lived with the same one fifteen 

years and I be durn if I can. And I imagined a lot of things coming up between 

us, but I be durn if I ever thought it would be a body four days dead and that a 

woman. But they make life hard on them, not taking it as it comes up, like a man 

does. 

So I laid there, hearing it commence to rain, thinking about them down 

there, squatting around the wagon and the rain on the roof, and thinking about 

Rachel crying there until after a while it was like I could still hear her 

crying even after she was asleep, and smelling it even when I knowed I couldn't. 

I couldn't decide even then whether I could or not, or if it wasn't just knowing 

it was what it was. 

So next morning I never went down there. I heard them hitching up and then 
when I knowed they must be about ready to take out, I went out the front and 
went down the road toward the bridge until I heard the wagon come out of the lot 
and go back toward New Hope. And then when I come back to the house, Rachel 
jumped on me because I wasn't there to make them come in to breakfast. You cant 
tell about them. Just about when you decide they mean one tiling, I be durn if 
you not only haven't got to change your mind, like as not you got to take a 
rawhiding for thinking they meant it. 

But it was still like I could smell it. And so I decided then that it 
wasn't smelling it, but it was just knowing it was there, like you will get 
fooled now and then. But when I went to the barn I knew different When I walked 
into the hallway I saw something. It kind of hunkered up when I come in and I 
thought at first it was one of them got left, then I saw what it was. It was a 
buzzard. It looked around and saw me and went on down the hall, spraddle-legged, 
with its wings kind of hunkered out, watching me first over one shoulder and 
then over the other, like a old bald-headed man. When it got outdoors it begun 
to fly. It had to fly a long time before it ever got up into the air, with it 
thick and heavy and full of rain like it was. 

If they was bent on going to Jefferson, I reckon they could have gone 

around up by Mount Vernon, like MacCallum did. He'll get home about day after 

tomorrow, horseback. Then they'd be just eighteen miles from town. But maybe 

this bridge being gone too has learned him the Lord's sense and judgment. 

That MacCallum. He's been trading with me off and on for twelve years. I 

have known him from a boy up; know his name as well as I do my own. But be durn 

if I can say it. 

Dewey Dell 

The signboard comes in sight. It is looking out at the road now, because it can 



wait. New Hope. 3 mi. it will say. New Hope. 3 mi. New Hope. 3 mi. And then the 
road will begin, curving away into the trees, empty with waiting, saying New 
Hope three miles. 

I heard that my mother is dead. I wish I had time to let her die. I wish I 
had time to wish I had. It is because in the wild and outraged earth too soon 
too soon too soon. It's not that I wouldn't and will not it's that it is too 
soon too soon too soon. 

Now it begins to say it. New Hope three miles. New Hope three miles. 
That's what they mean by the womb of time: the agony and the despair of 
spreading bones, the hard girdle in which lie the outraged entrails of events 
Cash's head turns slowly as we approach, his pale empty sad composed and 
questioning face following the red and empty curve; beside the bade wheel Jewel 
sits the horse, gazing straight ahead. 

The land runs out of Darl's eyes; they swim to pinpoints. They begin at my 
feet and rise along my body to my face, and then my dress is gone: I sit naked 
on the seat above the unhurrying mules, above the travail. Suppose I tell him 
to turn. He will do what I say. Dont you know he will do what I say? Once I 
waked with a black void rushing under me. I could not see. I saw Vardaman rise 
and go to the window and strike the knife into the fish, the blood gushing, 
hissing like steam but I could not see. He'll do as I say. He always does. I 
can persuade him to anything. "You know I can. Suppose I say Turn here. That was 
when I died that time. Suppose I do. We'll go to New Hope. We wont have to go 
to town. I rose and took the knife from the streaming fish still hissing and 
I killed Darl. 

When I used to sleep with Vardaman I had a nightmare once I thought I was 
awake but I couldn't see and couldn't feel I couldn't feel the bed under me and 
I couldn't think what I was I couldn't think of my name I couldn't even think I 
am a girl I couldn't even think I nor even think I want to wake up nor remember 
what was opposite to awake so I could do that I knew that something was passing 
but I couldn't even think of time then all of a sudden I knew that something 
was it was wind blowing over me it was like the wind came and blew me back from 
where it was I was not blowing the room and Vardaman asleep and all of them 
back, under me again and going on like a piece of cool silk dragging across my 
naked legs 

It blows cool out of the pines, a sad steady sound. New Hope. Was 3 mi. 
Was 3 mi. I believe in God I believe in God. 

"Why didn't we go to New Hope, pa?" Vardaman says. "Mr Samson said we was, 
but we done passed the road." 

Darl says, "Look, Jewel." But He is not looking at me. He is looking at 

the sky. He buzzard is as still as if He were nailed to it. 

We turn into Tull's lane. We pass the barn and go on, the wheels 

whispering in the mud, passing the green rows of cotton in the wild earth, and 

Vernon little across the field behind the plow. He lifts his hand as we pass and 

stands there looking after us for a long while. 

"Look, Jewel," Darl says. Jewel sits on his horse like they were both made 

out of wood, looking straight ahead. 

I believe in God, God. God, I believe in God. 

Tull 

After they passed I taken the mule out and looped up the trace chains and 
followed. They was setting in the wagon at the end of the levee when I caught up 



with them. Anse was setting there, looking at the bridge where it was swagged 
down into the river with just the two ends in sight. He was looking at it like 
he had believed all the time that folks had been lying to him about it being 
gone, but like he was hoping all the time it really was. Kind of pleased 
astonishment he looked, setting on the wagon in his Sunday pants, mumbling his 
mouth. Looking like a uncurried horse dressed up: I dont know. 
The boy was watching the bridge where it was mid-sunk and logs and such 
drifted up over it and it swagging and shivering like the whole thing would go 
any minute, big-eyed he was watching it, like he was to a circus. And the gal 
too. When I come up she looked around at me, her eyes kind of blaring up and 
going hard like I had made to touch her. Then she looked at Anse again and then 
back at the water again. 

It was nigh up to the levee on both sides, the earth hid except for the 
tongue of it we was on going out to the bridge and then down into the water, and 
except for knowing how the road and the bridge used to look, a fellow couldn't 
tell where was the river and where the land. It was just a tangle of yellow and 
the levee not less wider than a knife-back land of, with us setting in the wagon 
and on the horse and the mule. 

Darl was looking at me, and then Cash turned and looked at me with that 
look in his eyes like when he was figuring on whether the planks would fit her 
that night, like he was measuring them inside of him and not asking you to say 
what you thought and not even letting on he was listening if you did say it, but 
listening all right. Jewel hadn't moved. He sat there on the horse, leaning a 
little forward, with that same look on his face when him and Darl passed the 
house yesterday, coming back to get her. 

"If it was just up, we could drive across," Anse says, "We could drive 
right on across it." 

Sometimes a log would get shoved over the jam and float on, rolling and 
turning, and we could watch it go on to where the ford used to be. It would slow 
up and whirl crossways and hang out of water for a minute, and you could tell by 
that that the ford used to be there. 

"But that dont show nothing," I say. It could he a bar of quicksand built 
up there." We watch the log. Then the gal is looking at me again. 
"Mr Whitfield crossed it," she says. 

"He was a-horseback," I say. "And three days ago. Its riz five foot 
since." 

"If the bridge was just up," Anse says. 

The log bobs up and goes on again. There is a lot of trash and foam, and 
you can hear the water. 
"But its down," Anse says. 

Cash says, "A careful fellow could walk across yonder on the planks and 
logs." 

"But you couldn't tote nothing," I say. "Likely time you set foot on that 
mess, it'll all go, too. What you think, Darl?" 

He is looking at me. He dont say nothing; just looks at me with them queer 
eyes of hisn that makes folks talk. I always say it aint never been what he done 
so much or said or anything so much as how he looks at you. It's like he had got 
into the inside of you, someway. Like somehow you was looking at yourself and 
your doings outen his eyes. Then I can feel that gal watching me like I had made 
to touch her. She says something to Anse. ". . . Mr Whitfield . .." she says. 
"I give her my promised word in the presence of the Lord," Anse says. "I 
reckon it aint no need to worry." 



But still he does not start the mules. We set there above the water. 

Another log bobs up over the jam and goes on; we watch it check up and swing 

slow for a minute where the ford used to be. Then it goes on. 

"It might start falling tonight," I say. "You could lay over one more 

day." 

Then Jewel turns sideways on the horse. He has not moved until then, and 
he turns and looks at me. His face is kind of green, then it would go red and 
then green again. "Get to hell on back to your damn plowing," he says. "Who the 
hell asked you to follow us here?" 
"I never meant no harm," I say. 

"Shut up, Jewel," Cash says. Jewel looks back at the water, his face 
gritted, going red and green and then red. "Well," Cash says after a while, 
"what you want to do?" 

Anse dont say nothing. He sets humped up, mumbling his mouth. "If it was 
just up, we could drive across it," he says. 
"Come on," Jewel says, moving the horse. 

"Wait," Cash says. He looks at the bridge. We look at him, except Anse and the 
gal. They are looking at the water. "Dewey Dell and Vardaman and pa better walk 
across on the bridge," Cash says. 

"Vernon can help them," Jewel says. "And we can hitch his mule ahead of 
ourn." 

"You aint going to take my mule into that water," I say. 

Jewel looks at me. His eyes look like pieces of a broken plate. I'll pay 

for your damn mule. I'll buy it from you right now." 

"My mule aint going into that water," I say. 

"Jewel's going to use his horse," Darl says. "Why wont you risk your mule, 
Vernon?" 

"Shut up, Darl," Cash says. "You and Jewel both." 
"My mule aint going into that water," I say. 

Darl 

He sits the horse, glaring at Vernon, his lean face suffused up to and beyond 
the pale rigidity of his eyes. The summer when he was fifteen, he took a spell 
of sleeping. One morning when I went to feed the mules the cows were still in 
the tie-up and then I heard pa go back to the house and call him. When we came 
on back to the house for breakfast he passed us, carrying the milk buckets, 
stumbling along like he was drunk, and he was milking when we put the mules in 
and went on to the field without him. We had been there an hour and still he 
never showed up. When Dewey Dell came with our lunch, pa sent her back to find 
Jewel. They found him in the tie-up, sitting on the stool, asleep. 
After that, every morning pa would go in and wake him. He would go to 
sleep at die supper table and soon as supper was finished he would go to bed, 
and when I came in to bed he would be lying there like a dead man. Yet still pa 
would have to wake him in the morning. He would get up, but he wouldn't hardly 
have half sense: he would stand for pa's jawing and complaining without a word 
and take the milk buckets and go to the barn, and once I found him asleep at the 
cow, the bucket in place and half full and his hands up to the wrists in the 
milk and his head against the cow's flank. 

After that Dewey Dell had to do the milking. He still got up when pa waked 
him, going about what we told him to do in that dazed way. It was like he was 
trying hard to do them; that he was as puzzled as anyone else. 



"Are you sick?" ma said. "Dont you feel all right?" 
"Yes," Jewel said. "I feel all right." 

"He's just lazy, trying me," pa said, and Jewel standing there, asleep on 
his feet like as not. "Aint you?" he said, waking Jewel up again to answer. 
"No," Jewel said. 

"You take off and stay in the house today," ma said. 

"With that whole bottom piece to be busted out?" pa said. 'If you aint 

sick, what's the matter with you?" 

"Nothing," Jewel said. "I'm all right." 

"All right?" pa said. "You're asleep on your feet this minute." 

"No," Jewel said. "I'm all right." 

"I want him to stay at home today," ma said. 

"Ill need him," pa said. "It's tight enough, with all of us to do it." 

"You'll just have to do the best you can with Cash and Darl," ma said. "I 

want him to stay in today." 

But he wouldn't do it. "I'm all right," he said, going on. But he wasn't 
all right. Anybody could see it. He was losing flesh, and I have seen him go to 
sleep chopping; watched the hoe going slower and slower up and down, with less 
and less of an arc, until it stopped and he leaning on it motionless in the hot 
shimmer of the sun. 

Ma wanted to get the doctor, but pa didn't want to spend the money without 
it was needful, and Jewel did seem all right except for his thinness and his way 
of dropping off to sleep at any moment. He ate hearty enough, except for his way 
of going to sleep in his plate, with a piece of bread halfway to his mouth and 
his jaws still chewing. But he swore he was all right. 
It was ma that got Dewey Dell to do his milking, paid her somehow, and the 
other jobs around the house that Jewel had been doing before supper she found 
some way for Dewey Dell and Vardaman to do them. And doing them herself when pa 
wasn't there. She would fix him special things to eat and hide them for him. And 
that may have been when I first found it out, that Addie Bundren should be 
hiding anything she did, who had tried to teach us that deceit was such that, in 
a world where it was, nothing else could be very bad or very important, not even 
poverty. And at times when I went in to go to bed she would be sitting in the 
dark by Jewel where he was asleep. And I knew that she was hating herself for 
that deceit and hating Jewel because she had to love him so that she had to act 
the deceit. 

One night she was taken sick and when I went to the barn to put the team 
in and drive to Tull's, I couldn't find the lantern. I remembered noticing it on 
the nail the night before, but it wasn't there now at midnight. So I hitched in 
the dark and went on and came back with Mrs Tull just after daylight. And there 
the lantern was, hanging on the nail where I remembered it and couldn't find it 
before. And then one morning while Dewey Dell was milking just before sunup, 
Jewel came into the barn from the back, through the hole in the back wall, with 
the lantern in his hand. 

I told Cash, and Cash and I looked at one another. 
"Rutting," Cash said. 

"Yes," I said. "But why the lantern? And every night, too. No wonder he's 

losing flesh. Are you going to say anything to him?" 

"Wont do any good," Cash said. 

"What he's doing now wont do any good, either." 

"I know. But he'll have to learn that himself. Give him time to realise 

that it'll save, that there'll be just as much more tomorrow, and he'll be all 



right. I wouldn't tell anybody, I reckon." 

"No," I said. "I told Dewey Dell not to. Not ma, anyway." 

"No. Not ma." 

After that I thought it was right comical: he acting so bewildered and 
willing and dead for sleep and gaunt as a bean-pole, and thinking he was so 
smart with it. And I wondered who the girl was. I thought of all I knew that it 
might be, but I couldn't say for sure. 

"Taint any girl," Cash said. "It's a married woman somewhere. Aint any 

young girl got that much daring and staying power. That's what I dont like about 

it." 

"Why?" I said. "She'll be safer for him than a girl would. More judgment." 
He looked at me, his eyes fumbling, the words fumbling at what he was 
trying to say. "It aint always the safe things in this world that a fellow . . . 

"You mean, the safe things are not always the best things?" 
"Ay; best," he said, fumbling again. "It aint the best things, the things 
that are good for him ... A young boy. A fellow kind of hates to see . . . 
wallowing in somebody else's mire . . ." That's what he was trying to say. When 
something is new and hard and bright, there ought to be something a little 
better for it than just being safe; since the safe things are just the things 
that folks have been doing so long they have worn the edges off and there's 
nothing to the doing of them that leaves a man to say, That was not done before 
and it cannot be done again. 

So we didn't tell, not even when after a while he'd appear suddenly in the 
field beside us and go to work, without having had time to get home and make out 
he had been in bed all night. He would tell ma that he hadn't been hungry at 
breakfast or that he had eaten a piece of bread while he was hitching up theteam. 
But Cash and I knew that he hadn't been home at all on those nights and he 
had come up out of the woods when we got to the field. But we didn't tell. 
Summer was almost over then; we knew that when the nights began to get cool, she 
would be done if he wasn't. 

But when fall came and the nights began to get longer, the only difference 
was that he would always be in bed for pa to wake him, getting him up at last in 
that first state of semi-idiocy like when it first started, worse than when he 
had stayed out all night. 

"She's sure a stayer," I told Cash. "I used to admire her, but I downright 

respect her now." 

"It aint a woman," he said. 

"You know," I said. But he was watching me. "What is it, then?" 
"That's what I aim to find out," he said. 

"You can trail him through the woods all night if you want to," I said. 
"I'm not." 

"I aint trailing him," he said. 
"What do you call it, then?" 

"I aint trailing him," he said. I dont mean it that way." 

And so a few nights later I heard Jewel get up and climb out the window, 

and then I heard Cash get up and follow him. The next morning when I went to the 

barn, Cash was already there, the mules fed, and he was helping Dewey Dell milk. 

And when I saw him I knew that he knew what it was. Now and then I would catch 

him watching Jewel with a queer look, like having found out where Jewel went and 

what he was doing had given him something to really think about at last. But it 

was not a worried look; it was the kind of look I would see on him when I would 



find him doing some of Jewel's work around the house, work that pa still thought 
Jewel was doing and that ma thought Dewey Dell was doing. So I said nothing to 
him, believing that when he got done digesting it in his mind, he would tell me. 
But he never did. 

One morning-it was November then, five months since it started-Jewel was 
not in bed and he didn't join us in the field. That was the first time ma 
learned anything about what had been going on. She sent Vardaman down to find 
where Jewel was, and after a while she came down too. It was as though, so long 
as the deceit ran along quiet and monotonous, all of us let ourselves be 
deceived, abetting it unawares or maybe through cowardice, since all people are 
cowards and naturally prefer any kind of treachery because it has a bland 
outside. But now it was like we had all--and by a kind of telepathic agreement 
of admitted fear flung the whole thing back like covers on the bed and we all 
sitting bolt upright in our nakedness, staring at one another arid saying "Now 
is the truth. He hasn't come home. Something has happened to him. We let 
something happen to him." 

Then we saw him. He came up along the ditch and then turned straight 
across the field, riding the horse. Its mane and tail were going, as though in 
motion they were carrying out the splotchy pattern of its coat: he looked like 
he was riding on a big pinwheel, bare-hacked, with a rope bridle, and no hat on 
his head. It was a descendant of those Texas ponies Flem Snopes brought here 
twenty-five years ago and auctioned off for two dollars a head and nobody but 
old Lon Quick ever caught his and still owned some of the blood because he could 
never give it away. 

He galloped up and stopped, his heels in the horse's ribs and it dancing 
and swirling like the shape of its: mane and tail and the splotches of its coat 
had nothing whatever to do with the flesh-and-bone horse inside them, and he sat 
there, looking at us. 

"Where did you get that horse?" pa said. 
"Bought it," Jewel said. "From Mr Quick." 

"Bought it?" pa said. "With what? Did you buy that thing on my word?" 
"It was my money," Jewel said. "I earned it. You wont need to worry about 
it" 

"Jewel," ma said; "Jewel." 

"It's all right," Cash said. "He earned the money, He cleaned up that 

forty acres of new ground Quick laid out last spring. He did it single handed, 

working at night by lantern. I saw him. So I dont reckon that horse cost anybody 

anything except Jewel. I dont reckon we need worry." 

"Jewel," ma said. "Jewel . . ." Then she said: "You come right to the 

house and go to bed." 

"Not yet," Jewel said. "I aint got time. I got to get me a saddle and 
bridle. Mr Quick says he .,. ." 

"Jewel," ma said, looking at him. I'll giveI'll give. . .give . . ." 
Then she began to cry. She cried hard, not hiding her face, standing there in 
her faded wrapper, looking at him and him on the horse, looking down at her, his 
face growing cold and a little sick looking, until he looked away quick and Cash 
came and touched her. 

"You go on to the house," Cash said. "This here ground is too wet for you. 
You go on, now." She put her hands to her face then and after a while she went 
on, stumbling a little on the plow-marks. But pretty soon she straightened up 
and went on, She didn't look back. When she reached the ditch she stopped and 
called Vardaman. He was looking at the horse, land of dancing up and down by it. 



"Let me ride, Jewel," he said. "Let me ride, Jewel." 

Jewel looked at him, then he looked away again, holding the horse reined 

back. Pa watched him, mumbling his lip. 

"So you bought a horse," he said. "You went behind my back and bought a 
horse. You never consulted me; you know how tight it is for us to make by, yet 
you bought a horse for me to feed. Taken the work from your flesh and blood and 
bought a horse with it." Jewel looked at pa, his eyes paler than ever. "He wont 
never eat a mouthful of yours," he said. "Not a mouthful. Ill kill him first. 
Dont you never think it. Dont you never." 

"Let me ride, Jewel," Vardaman said. "Let me ride, Jewel." He sounded like 

a cricket in the grass, a little one. "Let me ride, Jewel." 

That night I found ma sitting beside the bed where he was sleeping, in the 

dark. She cried hard, maybe because she had to cry so quiet; maybe because she 

felt the same way about tears she did about deceit, hating herself for doing it, 

hating him because she had to. And then I knew that I knew. I knew that as plain 

on that day as I knew about Dewey Dell on that day. 

Tull 

So they finally got Anse to say what he wanted to do, and him and the gal and 
the boy got out of the wagon. But even when we were on the bridge Anse kept on 
looking back, like he thought maybe, once he was outen the wagon, the whole 
thing would kind of blow Tip and he would find himself back yonder in the field 
again and her laying up there in the house, waiting to die and it to do all over 
again. 

"You ought to let them taken your mule," he says, and the bridge shaking 
and swaying under us, going down into the moiling water like it went down 
through to the other side of the earth, and the other end coming up outen the 
water like it wasn't the same bridge a-tall and that them that would walk up 
outen the water on that side must come from the bottom of the earth. But it was 
still whole; you could tell that by the way when this end swagged, it didn't 
look like the other end swagged at all: just like the other trees and the bank 
yonder were swinging back and forth slow like on a big clock. And them logs 
scraping and Bumping at the sunk part and tilting end-up and shooting clean 
outen the water and tumbling on toward the ford and the waiting, slick, 
whirling, and foamy. 

"What good would that a done?" I says. If your team cant find the ford and 
haul it across, what good would three mules or even ten mules do?" 
"I aint asking it of you," he says. "I can always do for me and mine. I 
aint asking you to risk your mule. It aint your dead; I am not blaming you." 
"They ought to went back and laid over until tomorrow," I says. The water 
was cold. It was thick, like slush ice. Only it kind of lived. One part of you 
knowed it was just water, the same thing that had been running under this same 
bridge for a long time, yet when them logs would come spewing up outen it, you 
were not surprised, like they was a part of water, of the waiting and the 
threat. 

It was like when we was across, up out of the water again and the hard 
earth under us, that I was surprised. It was like we hadn't expected the bridge 
to end on the other bank, on something tame like the hard earth again that we 
had tromped on before this time and knowed well. Like it couldn't be me here, 
because I'd have had better sense than to done what I just done. And when I 
looked back and saw the other bank and saw my mule standing there where I used 



to be and knew that I'd have to get back there someway, I knew it couldn't be, 
became I just think of anything that could make me cross bridge ever even once. 
Yet here I was, and the fellow that could make himself cross it twice, couldn't 
be met, not even if Cora told him to. 

It was that boy. I said "Here; you better take a holt of my hand" and he 

waited and held to me. I be dam if it wasn't Wee he come back and got me? like 

he -was saying They wont nothing hurt you; Like he was saying about a fine place 

he knowed, where Christmas come twice with Thanksgiving and lasts on through the 

winter and the spring and the summer, had all just stayed with him I'd be all 

right too. 

When I looked back at my mule it was like he was one of these here spyglasses 
and I could look at him standing there and see all the broad land and my 
house sweated outen it like & was the more the sweaty the broader the land; the 
more the sweat, the tighter the house because it would take a tight house for 
Cora, to hold Cora like a jar of milk in the spring; you've got to have a tight 
jar oaf you'll need a powerful spring, so if you have a big spring, why dies, 
you have the incentive to have tight, wellmade jars, because it is your milk, 
soar or not, because you would lather have milk that will sour than to have milk 
that wont, because you are a man. 

And him holding to my hand, his hand that hot and confident; so that I was 
like to say: Look-a-here. Cant you see that mule yonder? He never had no 
business over here, so he never come, not being nothing but a mule. Because a 
fellow can see ever now and then that children have more sense than him. But he 
dont like to admit it to them until they have beards. After they have a beard, 
they are too busy because they dont know it they'll ever quite make it back to 
where they were in sense before they was haired, so you dont mind admitting then 
to folks that are worrying about the same thing that aint worth the worry that 
you are yourself. 

Then we was over and we stood there, looking at Cash turning the wagon 

around. We watched them drive back down the road to where the trail tamed oil 

into the bottom. After a while the wagon was out of sight. 

"We better get on down to the ford and git ready to help," I said. 

"I give her my word," Anse says. "It is sacred on me. I know you begrudge 

it, but she will bless you in heaven." 

"Well, they got to finish circumventing the land before they can dare the 
water," I said. "Come on." 

"It's the turning back," he said. "It aint no luck in turning back." 
He was standing there, humped, mournful, looking at the empty road beyond 
the swagging and swaying bridge. And that gal, too, with the lunch basket on one 
arm and that package under the other. Just going to town. Bent on it. They would 
risk the fire and the earth and the water and all just to eat a sack of bananas. 
"You ought to laid over a day," I said. It would a fell some by morning. It 
mought not a rained tonight. And it cant get no higher." 
"I give my promise," he says. "She is counting on it." 

Darl 

Before us the thick dark current runs. It talks up to us in a murmur become 
ceaseless and myriad, the yellow surface dimpled monstrously into fading swirls 
travelling along the surface for an instant, silent, impermanent and profoundly 
significant, as though just beneath the surface something huge and alive waked 
for a moment of lazy alertness out of and into light slumber again. 



It clucks and murmurs among the spokes and about the mules' knees, yellow, 
skummed with flotsam and with thick soiled gouts of foam as though it had sweat, 
lathering, like a driven horse. Through the undergrowth it goes with a plaintive 
sound, a musing sound; in it the unwinded cane and saplings lean as before a 
little gale, swaying without reflections as though suspended on invisible wires 
from the branches overhead. Above the ceaseless surface they stand-trees, cane, 
vines-rootless, severed from the earth, spectral above a scene of immense yet 
circumscribed desolation filled with the voice of the waste and mournful water. 
Cash and I sit in the wagon; Jewel sits the horse at the off rear wheel. 
The horse is trembling, its eye rolling wild and baby-blue in its long pink 
face, its breathing stertorous like groaning. He sits erect, poised, looking 
quietly and steadily and quickly this way and that, his face calm, a little 
pale, alert. Cash's face is also gravely composed; he and I look at one another 
with long probing looks, looks that plunge unimpeded through one another's eyes 
and into the ultimate secret place where for an instant Cash and Darl crouch 
flagrant and unabashed in all the old terror and the old foreboding, alert and 
secret and without shame. When we speak our voices are quiet, detached. 
"I reckon we're still in the road, all right." 

"Tull taken and cut them two big whiteoaks. I heard tell how at high water 

in the old days they used to line up the ford by them trees." 

"I reckon he did that two years ago when he was logging down here. I 

reckon he never thought that anybody would ever use this ford again." 

"I reckon not. Yes, it must have been then. He cut a sight of timber outen 

here then. Payed off that mortgage with it, I hear tell." 

"Yes. Yes, I reckon so. I reckon Vernon could have done that." 

"That's a fact. Most folks that logs in this here country, they need a 

durn good farm to support the sawmill. Or maybe a store. But I reckon Vernon 

could." 

"I reckon so. He's a sight." 

"Ay. Vernon is. Yes, it must still be here. He never would have got that 

timber out of here if he hadn't cleaned out that old road. I reckon we are still 

on it." He looks about quietly, at the position of the trees, leaning this way 

and that, looking back along the floorless road shaped vaguely high in air by 

the position of the lopped and felled trees, as if the road too had been soaked 

free of earth and floated upward, to leave in its spectral tracing a monument to 

a still more profound desolation than this above which we now sit, talking 

quietly of old security and old trivial things. Jewel looks at him, then at me, 

then his face turns in in that quiet; constant, questing about the scene, the 

horse trembling quietly and steadily between his knees. 

"He could go on ahead slow and sort of feel it out," I say. 

"Yes," Cash says, not looking at me. His face is in profile as he looks 

forward where Jewel has moved on ahead. 

"He cant miss the river," I say. "He couldn't miss seeing it fifty yards 

ahead." 

Cash does not look at me, his face in profile, "If I'd just suspicioned 
it, I could a come down last week and taken a sight on it." 
"The bridge was up then," I say. He does not look at me. "Whitfield 
crossed it a-horseback." 

Jewel looks at us again, his expression sober and alert and subdued. His 
voice is quiet. "What you want me to do?" 

"I ought to come down last week and taken a sight on it," Cash says. 
"We couldn't have known," I say. "There wasn't any way for us to know." 



"I'll ride on ahead," Jewel says. "You can follow where I am." He lifts 
the horse. It shrinks, bowed; he leans to it, speaking to it, lifting it forward 
almost bodily, it setting its feet down with gingerly splashings, trembling, 
breathing harshly. He speaks to it, murmurs to it. "Go on," he says. "I aint 
going to let nothing hurt you. Go on, now." 

"Jewel," Cash says. Jewel does not look back. He lifts the horse on. 
"He can swim," I say. "If he'll just give the horse time, anyhow . . ." 
When he was born, he had a bad time of it Ma would sit in the lamp-light, 
holding him on a pillow on her lap. We would wake and find her so. There would 
be no sound from them. 

"That pillow was longer than him," Cash says. He is leaning a little 
forward, "I ought to come down last week and sighted. I ought to done it." 
"That's right," I say. "Neither his feet nor his head would reach the end 
of it. You couldn't have known." I say. 

"I ought to done it," he says. He lifts the reins. The mules move, into 

the traces; the wheels murmur alive in the water. He looks back and down at 

Addie. "It aint on a balance," he says. 

At last the trees open; against the open river Jewel sits the horse, half 
turned, it belly deep now. Across the river we can see Vernon and pa and 
Vardaman and Dewey Dell Vernon is waving at us, waving us further down stream. 
"We are too high up," Cash says. Vernon is shouting too, but we cannot 
make out what he says for tie noise of the water. It runs steady and deep now, 
tin-broken, without sense of motion until a log comes along, turning slowly. 
"Watch it," Cash says. We watch it and see it falter and hang for a moment, the 
current building up behind it in a thick wave, submerging it for an instant 
before it shoots up and tumbles on. 
"There it is," I say. 

"Ay," Cash says. It's there." We look at Vernon again. He is now flapping 

his arms up and down. We move on downstream, slowly and carefully, watching 

Vernon. He drops his hands. "This is the place," Cash says. 

"Well, goddamn it, let's get across, then," Jewel says, He moves the horse 

on. 

"You wait," Cash says. Jewel stops again. 

"Well, by God--" he says. Cash looks at the water, then he looks back at 
Addie. "It aint on a balance," he says. 

"Then go on back to the goddamn bridge and walk across," Jewel says. "You 
and Darl both. Let me on that wagon." 

Cash does not pay him any attention. It aint on a balance," he says. "Yes, 
sir. We got to watch it." 

"Watch it, hell," Jewel says. "You get out of that wagon and let me have 

it. By God, if you're afraid to drive it over . . ." His eyes are pale as two 

bleached chips in his face. Cash is looking at him. 

"We'll get it over," he says. "I tell you what you do. You ride on back 

and walk across the bridge and come down the other bank and meet us with the 

rope. Vernon'll take your horse home with him and keep it till we get back." 

"You go to hell," Jewel says. 

"You take the rope and come down the bank and be ready with it," Cash 
says. "Three cant do no more than two can-one to drive and one to steady it." 
"Goddamn you," Jewel says. 

"Let Jewel take the end of the rope and cross upstream of us and brace 
it," I say. "Will you do that, Jewel?" 

Jewel watches me, hard. He looks quick at Cash, then back at me, his eyes 



alert and hard. "I dont give a damn. Just so we do something. Setting here, not 

lifting a goddamn hand ..." 

"Let's do that, Cash," I say. 

"I reckon we'll have to," Cash says. 

The river itself is not a hundred yards across, and pa and Vernon and 
Vardaman and Dewey Dell are the only things in sight not of that single monotony 
of desolation leaning with, that terrific quality a little from right to left, 
as though we had reached the place where the motion of the wasted world 
accelerates just before the final precipice. Yet they appear dwarfed. It is as 
though the space between us were time: an irrevocable quality. It is as though 
time, no longer running straight before us in a diminishing line, now runs 
parallel between us like a looping string, tie distance being the doubling 
accretion of the thread and not the interval between. The mules stand, their 
fore quarters already sloped a little, their romps high. They too are breathing 
now with a deep groaning sound; looking back once, their gaze sweeps across us 
with in their eyes a wild, sad, profound and despairing quality as though they 
had already seen in the thick water the shape of the disaster which they could 
not speak and we could not see. 

Cash turns back into the wagon. He lays his hands flat on Addie, rocking 

her a little. His face is calm, down-sloped, calculant, concerned. He lifts his 

box of tools and wedges it forward tinder the seat; together we shove Addie 

forward, wedging her between the tools and the wagon bed. Then he looks at me. 

"No," I say. "I reckon I'll stay. Might take both of us." 

From the tool box he takes his coiled rope and carries the end twice 

around the seat stanchion and passes the end to me without tying it. The other 

end he pays out to Jewel, who takes a turn about his saddle horn. 

He must force the horse down into the current. It moves, highkneed, 

archnecked, boring and chafing. Jewel sits lightly forward, his knees lifted a 

little; again his swift alert calm gaze sweeps upon us and on. He lowers the 

horse into the stream, speaking to it in a soothing murmur. The horse slips, 

goes under to the saddle, surges to its feet again, the current building up 

against Jewel's thighs. 

"Watch yourself," Cash says. 

"I'm on it now," Jewel says. "You can come ahead now." 

Cash takes the reins and lowers the team carefully and skillfully into the 

stream. 

/ felt the current take us and I knew we were on the ford by that reason, 
since it was only by means of that slipping contact that we could tell that we 
were in motion at all. What had once been a -flat surface was now a succession 
of troughs and hillocks lifting and falling about us, shoving at us, teasing at 
us with light lazy touches in the vain instants of solidity underfoot. Cash 
looked back at me, and then I knew that we were gone. But I did not realise the 
reason for the rope until I saw the log. It surged up out of the water and 
stood for an instant upright upon that surging and heaving desolation like 
Christ. Get out and let the current take you down to the bend, Cash said. You 
can make it all right. No, I said, I'd get just as wet that way as this 
The log appears suddenly between two hills, as if it had rocketed suddenly 
from the bottom of the river. Upon the end of it a long gout of foam hangs like 
the beard of an old man or a goat. When Cash speaks to me I know that he has 
been watching it all the time, watching it and watching Jewel ten feet ahead of 
us. "Let the rope go," he says. With his other hand he reaches down and reeves 
the two turns from the stanchion. "Ride on, Jewel," he says; "see if you can 



pull us ahead of the log." 

Jewel shouts at the horse; again he appears to lift it bodily between his 
knees. He is just above the top of the ford and the horse has a purchase of some 
sort for it surges forward, shining wetly half out of water, crashing on in a 
succession of lunges. It moves unbelievably fast; by that token Jewel realises 
at last that the rope is free, for I can see him sawing back on the reins, his 
head turned, as the log rears in a long sluggish lunge between us, bearing down 
upon the team. They see it too; for a moment they also shine black out of water. 
Then the downstream one vanishes, dragging the other with him; the wagon sheers 
crosswise, poised on the crest of the ford as the log strikes it, tilting it up 
and on. Cash is half turned, the reins running taut from his hand and 
disappearing into the water, the other hand reached back upon Addie, holding her 
jammed over against the high side of the wagon. "Jump clear," he says quietly. 
"Stay away from the team and dont try to fight it. It'll swing you into the bend 
all right." 

"You come too," I say. Vernon and Vardaman are running along the bank, pa 
and Dewey Dell stand watching us, Dewey Dell with the basket and the package in 
her arms. Jewel is trying to fight the horse back. The head of one mule appears, 
its eyes wide; it looks back at us for an instant, making a sound almost human. 
The head vanishes again. 

"Back, Jewel," Cash shouts. "Back, Jewel." For another instant I see him 
leaning to the tilting wagon, his arm braced back against Addie and his tools; I 
see the bearded head of the rearing log strike up again, and beyond it Jewel 
holding the horse upreared, its head wrenched around, hammering its head with 
his fist. I jump from the wagon on the downstream side. Between two hills I see 
the mules once more. They roll up out of the water in succession, turning 
completely over, their legs stiffly extended as when they had lost contact with 
the earth. 



Vardaman 

Cash tried but she fell off and Darl jumped going under he went under and Cash 
hollering to catch her and I hollering running and hollering and Dewey Dell 
hollering at me Vardaman you Vardaman you Vardaman and Vernon passed me because 
he was seeing her come up and she jumped into the water again and Darl hadn't 
caught her yet 

He came up to see and I hollering catch her Darl catch her and he didn't 

come back because she was too heavy he had to go on catching at her and I 

hollering catch her darl catch her darl because in the water she could go faster 

than a man and Darl had to grabble for her so I knew he could catch her because 

he is the best grabbler even with the mules in the way again they dived up 

rolling their feet stiff rolling down again and their backs up now and Darl had 

to again because in the water she could go faster than a man or woman and I 

passed Vernon and be wouldn't get in the water and help Darl he wouldn't grabble 

for her with Darl he knew but he wouldn't help 

The mules dived up again diving their legs stiff their stiff legs rolling 

slow and then Darl again and I hollering catch her darl catch her head her into 

the bank darl and Vernon wouldn't help and then Darl dodged past the mules where 

he could he had her under the water coming in to the bank coming in slow because 

in the water she fought to stay under the water but Darl is strong and he was 

coming in slow and so I knew he had her because he came slow and I ran down into 

the water to help and I couldn't stop hollering because Darl was strong and 



steady holding her under the water even if she did fight he would not let her go 
he was seeing me and he would hold her and it was all right now it was all right 
now it was all right 

Then he comes up out of the water. He comes a long way up slow before his 
hands do but he's got to have her got to so I can bear it. Then his hands come 
up and all of him above the water. I cant stop. I have not got "time to try. I 
will try to when I can but his hands came empty out of the water emptying the 
water emptying away 

"Where is ma, Darl?" I said. "You never got her. You knew she is a fish 
but you let her get away. You never got her. Darl. Darl. Darl." I began to run 
along the bank, watching the mules dive up slow again and then down again. 

Tull 

When I told Cora how Darl jumped out of the wagon and left Cash sitting there 

trying to save it and the wagon turning over, and Jewel that was almost to the 

hank fighting that horse back where it had more sense than to go, she says "And 

you're one of the folks that says Darl is the queer one, the one that aint 

bright; and him the only one of them that had sense enough to get off that 

wagon. I notice Anse was too smart to been on it a-tall." 

"He couldn't a done no good, if he'd been there," I said. "They was going 

about it right and they would have made it if it hadn't a been for that log." 

"Log, fiddlesticks," Cora said. "It was the hand of God." 

"Then how can you say it was foolish?" I said. "Nobody cant guard against 

the hand of God. It would be sacrilege to try to." 

"Then why dare it?" Cora says. "Tell me that." 

"Anse didn't." I said. "That's just what you faulted him for." 

"His place was there," Cora said. "If he had been a man, he would a been 

there instead of making his sons do what he dursn't." 

"I dont know what you want, then," I said. "One breath you say they was 

daring the hand of God to try it, and the next breath you jump on Anse because 

he wasn't with them." Then she begun to sing again, working at the washtub, with 

that singing look in her face like she had done give up folks and all their 

foolishness and had done went on ahead of them, marching up the sky, singing. 

The wagon hung for a long time while the current built up under it, 

shoving it off the ford, and Cash leaning more and more, trying to keep the 

coffin braced so it wouldn't slip down and finish tilting the wagon over. Soon 

as the wagon got tilted good, to where the current could finish it, the log went 

on. It headed around the wagon and went on good as a swimming man could have 

done. It was like it had been sent there to do a job and done it and went on. 

When the mules finally kicked loose, it looked for a minute hike maybe 

Cash would get the wagon back, It looked like him and the wagon wasn't moving at 

all, and just Jewel fighting that horse back to the wagon. Then that boy passed 

me, running and hollering at Darl and the gal trying to catch him, and then I 

see the mules come rolling slow up out of the water, their legs spraddled stiff 

like they had balked upside down, and roll on into the water again. 

Then the wagon tilted over and then it and Jewel and the horse was all 

mixed up together. Cash went outen sight, still holding the coffin braced, and 

then I couldn't tell anything for the horse lunging and splashing. I thought 

that Cash had give up then and was swimming for it and I was yelling at Jewel to 

come on back and then all of a sudden him and the horse went under too and I 

thought they was all going. I knew that the horse had got dragged off the ford 



too, and with that wild drowning horse and that wagon and that loose box, it was 
going to be pretty bad, and there I was, standing knee-deep in the water, 
yelling at Anse behind me: "See what you done now? See what you done now?" 
The horse come up again. It was headed for the hank now, throwing its head 
up, and then I saw one of them holding to the saddle on the downstream side, so 
I started running along the bank, trying to catch sight of Cash because, he 
couldn't swim, yelling at Jewel where Cash was like a durn fool, bad as that boy 
that was on down the bank still hollering at Darl. 
So I went down into the water so I could still keep some kind of a grip in 
the mud, when I saw Jewel. He was middle deep, so I knew he was on the ford, 
anyway, leaning hard upstream, and then I see the rope, and then I see the water 
building up where he was holding the wagon snubbed just below the ford. 
So it was Cash holding to the horse when it come splashing and scrambling 
up the bank, moaning and groaning like a natural man. When I come to it it was 
just kicking Cash loose from his holt on the saddle. His face turned up a second 
when he was sliding back into the water. It was gray, with his eyes closed and a 
long swipe of mud across his face. Then he let go and turned over in the water. 
He looked just like a old bundle of clothes kind of washing up and down against 
the bank. He looked like he was laying there in the water on his face, rocking 
up and down a little, looking at something on the bottom. 
We could watch the rope cutting down into the water, and we could feel the 
weight of the wagon kind of blump and lunge lazy like, like it just as soon as 
not, and that rope cutting down into the water hard as a iron bar. We could hear 
the water hissing on it like it was red hot Like it was a straight iron bar 
stuck into the bottom and us holding the end of it, and the wagon lazing up and 
down, kind of pushing and prodding at us like it had come around and got behind 
us, lazy like, like it just as soon as not when it made up its mind. There was a 
shoat come by, blowed up hike a balloon: one of them spotted shoats of Lon 
Quick's. It bumped against the rope like it was a iron bar and bumped off and 
went on, and. us watching that rope slanting down into the water. We watched it. 

Darl 

Cash lies on his back on the earth, his head raised on a rolled garment. His 
eyes are closed, his face is gray, his hair plastered in a smooth smear across 
his forehead as though done with, a paint brush. His face appears sunken a 
little, "sagging from the bony ridges of eye sockets, nose, gums, as though the 
wetting had slacked the firmness which had held the skin full; his teeth, set in 
pale gums, are parted a little as if he had been laughing quietly. He lies polethin 
in his wet clothes, a little pool of vomit at his head and a thread of it 
running from the corner of his mouth and down his cheek where he couldn't turn 
his head quick or far enough, until Dewey Dell stoops and wipes it away with the 
hem of her dress. 

Jewel approaches. He has the plane. "Vernon just found the square," he 

says. He looks down at Cash, dripping too. "Aint he talked none yet?" 

"He had his saw and hammer and chalk-line and rule," I say. "I know that." 

Jewel lays the square down. Pa watches him. "They cant be far away," pa 

says. 'It all went together. Was there ere a such misfortunate man." 

Jewel does not look at pa. "You better call Vardaman back here," he says. 

He looks at Cash. Then he turns and goes away. "Get him to talk soon as he can," 

he says, "so he can tell us what else there was." 

We return to the river. The wagon is hauled clear, the wheels chocked 



(carefully: we all helped; it is as though upon the shabby, familiar, inert 
shape of the wagon there lingered somehow, latent yet still immediate, that 
violence which had slain the mules that drew it not an hour since) above the 
edge of the flood. In the wagon bed it lies profoundly, the long pale planks 
hushed a little with wetting yet still yellow, like gold seen through water, 
save for two long muddy smears. We pass it and go on to the bank. 
One end of the rope is made fast to a tree. At the edge of the stream, 
knee-deep, Vardaman stands, bent forward a little, watching Vernon with rapt 
absorption. He has stopped yelling and he is wet to the armpits. Vernon is at 
the other end of the rope, shoulder-deep in the river, looking back at Vardaman, 
"Further back than that," he says. "You git back by the tree and hold the rope 
for me, so it cant slip." 

Vardaman backs along the rope, to the tree, moving blindly, watching 

Vernon. When we come up he looks at us once, his eyes round and a little dazed. 

Then Be looks at Vernon again in that posture of rapt alertness. 

"I got the hammer too," Vernon says. "Looks like we ought to done already 

got that chalk-line. It ought to floated." 

"Floated clean away," Jewel says. "We wont get it. We ought to find the 
saw, though." 

"I reckon so," Vernon says. He looks at the water. "That chalk-line, too. 
What else did he have?" 

"He aint talked yet," Jewel says, entering the water. He looks back at me. 

"You go back and get him roused up to talk," he says. 

"Pa's there," I say. I follow Jewel into the water, along the rope. It 

feels alive in my hand, bellied faintly in a prolonged and resonant arc. Vernon 

is watching me. 

"You better go," he says. "You better be there." 

"Let's see what else we can get before it washes on down," I say. 

We hold to the rope, the current curling and dimpling about our shoulders. 

But beneath that false blandness the true force of it leans against us lazily. I 

had not thought that water in July could be so cold. It is like hands molding 

and prodding at the very bones. Vernon is still looking back toward the bank. 

"Reckon it'll hold us all?" he says. We too look back, following the rigid 

bar of the rope as it rises from the water to the tree and Vardaman crouched a 

little beside it, watching us. "Wish my mule wouldn't strike out for home." 

Vernon says. 

"Come on," Jewel says. "Let's get outen here." 

We submerge in turn, holding to the rope, Being clutched by one another 
while the cold wall of the water sucks the slanting mud backward and upstream 
from beneath our feet and we are suspended so, groping along the cold bottom. 
Even the mud there is not still. It has a chill, scouring quality, as though the 
earth under us were in motion too. We touch and fumble at one another's extended 
arms, letting ourselves go cautiously against the rope; or, erect in turn, watch 
the water suck and boil where one of the other two gropes beneath the surface. 
Pa has come down to the shore, watching us. 

Vernon comes up, streaming, his face sloped down into his pursed blowing 
mouth. His mouth is bluish, like a circle of weathered rubber. He has the rule. 
"He'll be glad of that," I say. It's right new. He bought it just last 
month out of the catalogue." 

"If we just knowed for sho what else," Vernon says, looking over his 
shoulder and then turning to face where Jewel had disappeared. "Didn't he go 
down fore me?" Vernon says. 



"I dont know," I say. "I think so. Yes. Yes, he did." 

We watch the thick curling surface, streaming away from us in slow whorls. 

"Give him a pull on the rope," Vernon says. 

"He's on your end of it," I say. 

"Aint nobody on my end of it," he says. 

"Pull it in," I say. But he has already done that, holding the end above 

the water; and then we see Jewel. He is ten yards away; he comes up, blowing, 

and looks at us, tossing his long hair back with a jerk of his head, then he 

looks toward the bank; we can see him filling his lungs. 

"Jewel," Vernon says, not loud, but his voice going full and clear along 

the water, peremptory yet tactful. "It'll be back here. Better come back." 

Jewel dives again. We stand there, leaning back against the current, 

watching the water where he disappeared, holding the dead rope between us like 

two men holding the nozzle of a fire hose, waiting for the water. Suddenly Dewey 

Dell is behind us in the water. "You make him come back," she says. "Jewel!" she 

says. He comes up again, tossing his hair back from his eyes. He is swimming 

now, toward the bank, the current sweeping him downstream quartering. "You, 

Jewel!" Dewey Dell says. We stand holding the rope and see him gain the bank and 

climb out. As he rises from the water, he stoops and picks up something. He 

comes back along the bank. He has found the chalk-line. He comes opposite us and 

stands there, looking about as if he were seeking something. Pa goes on down the 

bank. He is going back to look at the mules again where their round bodies float 

and rub quietly together in the slack water within the bend. 

"What did you do with the hammer, Vernon?" Jewel says. 

"I give it to him," Vernon says, jerking his head at Vardaman. Vardaman is 

looking after pa. Then he looks at Jewel. "With the square." Vernon is watching 

Jewel. He moves toward the bank, passing Dewey Dell and me. 

"You get on out of here," I say. She says nothing, looking at Jewel and 

Vernon. 

"Where's the hammer?" Jewel says. Vardaman scuttles tip the bank and 
fetches it. 

"It's heavier than the saw," Vernon says. Jewel is tying the end of the 
chalk-line about the hammer shaft. 

"Hammer's got the most wood in it," Jewel says. He and Vernon face one 
another, watching Jewel's hands. 

"And flatter, too," Vernon says. 'It'd float three to one, almost. Try the 
plane." 

Jewel looks at Vernon. Vernon is tall, too; long and lean, eye to eye they 

stand in their close wet clothes. Lon Quick could look even at a cloudy sky and 

tell the time to ten minutes. Big Lon I mean, not little Lon. 

"Why dont you get out of the water?" I say. 

"It wont float like a saw," Jewel says. 

"It'll float nigher to a saw than a hammer will," Vernon says. 

"Bet you," Jewel says. 

"I wont bet," Vernon says. 

They stand there, watching Jewel's still hands. 

"Hell," Jewel says. "Get the plane, then." 

So they get the plane and tie it to the chalk-line and enter the water 
again. Pa comes back along the bank. He stops for a while and looks at us, 
hunched, mournful, like a failing steer or an old tall bird. 
Vernon and Jewel return, leaning against the current. "Get out of the 
way," Jewel says to Dewey Dell. "Get out of the water." 



She crowds against me a little so they can pass, Jewel holding the plane 
high as though it were perishable, the blue string trailing back over his 
shoulder. They pass us and stop; they fall to arguing quietly about just where 
the wagon went over. 

"Darl ought to know," Vernon says. They look at me. 
"I dont know," I says. "I wasn't there that long" 

"Hell," Jewel says. They move on, gingerly, leaning against the current, 
reading the ford with their feet. 

"Have you got a holt of the rope?" Vernon says. Jewel does not answer. He 
glances back at the shore, calculant, then at the water. He flings the plane 
outward, letting the string run through his fingers, his fingers turning blue 
where it runs over them. When the line stops, he hands it back to Vernon. 
"Better let me go this time," Vernon says. Again Jewel does not answer; we 
watch him duck beneath the surface. 
"Jewel," Dewey Dell whimpers. 

"It aint so deep there," Vernon says. He does not look back. He is 
watching the water where Jewel went under. 
When Jewel comes up he has the saw. 

When we pass the wagon pa is standing beside it; scrubbing at the two mud 
smears with a handful of leaves. Against the jungle Jewel's horse looks like a 
patchwork quilt hung on a line. 

Cash has not moved. We stand above him, holding the plane, the saw, the 

hammer, the square, the rule, the chalk-line, while Dewey Dell squats and lifts 

Cash's head. "Cash," she says; "Cash." 

He opens his eyes, staring profoundly up at our inverted faces. 

"If ever was such a misfortunate man," pa says. 

"Look, Cash," we say, holding the tools up so he can see; "what else did 

you have?" 

He tries to speak, rolling his head, shutting his eyes. 
"Cash," we say; "Cash." 

It is to vomit he is turning his head. Dewey Dell wipes his mouth on the 
wet hem of her dress; then he can speak. 

"It's his saw-set," Jewel says. "The new one he bought when he bought the 
rule." He moves, turning away. Vernon looks tip after him, still squatting. Then 
he rises and follows Jewel down to the water. 

"If ever was such a misfortunate man," pa says. He looms tall above us as 
we squat; he looks like a figure carved clumsily from tough wood by a drunken 
caricaturist. "It's a trial." he says. "But I doat begrudge her it. No man can 
say I begrudge her it" Dewey Dell-has kid Cash's head back on the folded coat 
twisting his head a little to avoid the vomit Beside him his tools lie. "A 
fellow might call ft lucky it was the same leg he broke when he fell offen that 
church," pa says. "But I dont begrudge her it." 

Jewel and Vernon are in the river again. From here they do not appear to 
violate the surface at all; it is as though it had severed them both at a single 
blow, the two torsos moving with infinitesimal and ludicrous care upon the 
surface. It looks peaceful, like machinery does after you have watched it and 
listened to it for a long time. As though the clotting which is you had 
dissolved into the myriad original motion, and seeing and hearing in themselves 
blind and deaf; fury in itself quiet with stagnation. Squatting, Dewey Dell's 
wet dress shapes for the dead eyes of three blind men those mammalian 
ludicrosities which are the horizons and the valleys of the earth. 



Cash 

It wasn't on a balance. I told them that if they wanted it to tote and ride on a 
balance, they would have to 

Cora 

One day we were talking. She had never been pure religious, not even after that 
summer at the camp meeting when Brother Whitfield wrestled with her spirit, 
singled her out and strove with the vanity in her mortal heart, and I said to 
her many a time, "God gave you children to comfort your hard human lot and for a 
token of His own suffering and love, for in love you conceived and bore them." I 
said that because she took God's love and her duty to Him too much as a matter 
of course, and such conduct is not pleasing to Him. I said, "He gave us the gift 
to raise our voices in His undying praise" because I said there is more 
rejoicing in heaven over one sinner than over a hundred that never sinned. And 
she said, "My daily life is an acknowledgment and expiation of my sin" and I 
said "Who are you, to say what is sin and what is not sin? It is the Lord's part 
to judge; ours to praise His mercy and His holy name in the hearing of our 
fellow mortals" because He alone can see into the heart, and just because a 
woman's Me is right in the sight of man, she cant know if there is no sin in her 
heart without she opens her heart to the Lord and receives His grace. I said, 
"Just because you have been a faithful wife is no sign that there is no sin in 
your heart, and just because your Me is hard is no sign that the Lord's grace is 
absolving you." And she said, "I know my own sin. I know that I deserve my 
punishment. I do not begrudge it." And I said, 'It is out of your vanity that 
you would judge sin and salvation in the Lord's place. It is our mortal lot to 
suffer and to raise our voices in praise of Him who judges the sin and offers 
the salvation through our trials and tribulations time out of mind amen. Not 
even after Brother Whitfield, a godly man if ever one breathed God's breath, 
prayed for you and strove as never a man could except him," I said. 
Because it is not us that can judge our sins or know what is sin in the 
Lord's eyes. She has had a hard Me, but so does every woman. But you'd think 
from the way she talked that she knew more about sin and salvation than the Lord 
God Himself, than them who have strove and labored with the sin in this human 
world. When the only sin she ever committed was being partial to Jewel that 
never loved her and was its own punishment, in preference to Darl that was 
touched by God Himself and considered queer by us mortals and that did love her. 
I said, "There is your sin. And your punishment too. Jewel is your punishment. 
But where is your salvation? And life is short enough," I said, "to win eternal 
grace in. And God is a jealous God. It is His to judge and to mete; not yours." 
"I know," she said. I--" Then she stopped, and I said, 
"Know what?" 

"Nothing," she said. He is my cross and he will be my salvation. He will 

save me from, the water and from the fire. Even though I have laid down my life, 

he will save me." 

"How do you know, without you open your heart to Him and lift your voice 
in His praise?" I said. Then I realised that she did not mean God. I realised 
that out of the vanity of her heart she had spoken sacrilege. And I went down on 
my knees right there. I begged her to kneel and open her heart and cast from ft 
the devil of vanity and cast herself upon the mercy of the Lord. But she 
wouldn't. She just sat there, lost in her vanity and her pride, that had closed 
her heart to God and set that selfish mortal boy in His place. Kneeling there I 



prayed for her. I prayed for that poor blind woman as I had never prayed for me 
and mine. 



Addie 

In the afternoon when school was out and the last one had left with his little 
dirty snuffling nose, instead of going home I would go down the hill to the 
spring where I could be quiet and hate them. It would he quiet there then, with 
the water bubbling up and away and the sun slanting quiet in the trees and the 
quiet smelling of damp and rotting leaves and new earth; especially in the early 
spring, for it was worst then. 

I could just remember how my father used to say that the reason for living 
was to get ready to stay dead a long time And when I would have to look at them 
day after day, "each with his and her secret and selfish thought, and blood 
strange to each other blood and strange to mine, and think that this seemed to 
be the only way I could get ready to stay dead, I would hate my father for 
having ever planted me. I would look forward to the times when they faulted, so 
I could whip them. When the switch fell I could feel it upon my flesh; when it 
welted and ridged it was my blood that ran, and I would think with each blow of 
the switch: Now you are aware of me Now I am something in your secret and 
selfish life, who have marked your blood with my own for ever and ever. 
And so I took Anse. I saw him pass the school house three or four times 
before I learned that he was driving four miles out of his way to do it. I 
noticed then how he was beginning to hump--a tall man and young --so that he 
looked already like a tall bird hunched in the cold weather, on the wagon seat 
He would pass the school house, the wagon creaking slow, his head turning slow 
to watch the door of the school house as the wagon passed, until he went on 
around the curve and out of sight. One day I went to the door and stood there 
when he passed. When he saw me he looked quickly away and did not look back 
again. 

In the early spring it was worst. Sometimes I thought that I could not 

bear it, lying in bed at night, with the wild geese going north and their 

honking coming faint and high and wild out of the wild darkness, and during the 

day it would seem as though I couldn't wait for the last one to go so I could go 

down to the spring. And so when I looked up that day and saw Anse standing there 

in his Sunday clothes, turning his hat round and round in his hands, I said: 

"If you've got any womenfolks, why in the world dont they make you get 

your hair cut?" 

"I aint got none," he said. Then he said suddenly, driving his eyes at me 
like two hounds in a strange yard: "That's what I come to see you about," 
"And make you hold your shoulders up," I said. "You haven't got any? But 
you've got a house. They tell me you've got a house and a good farm. And you 
live there alone, doing for yourself, do you?" He just looked at me, turning the 
hat in his hands. "A new house," I said. "Are you going to get married?" 
And he said again, holding his eyes to mine: "That's what I come to see 
you about." 

Later he told me, "I aint got no people. So that wont be no worry to you. 
I dont reckon you can say the same." 
"No. I have people. In Jefferson." 

His face fell a little. "Well, I got a little property. I'm forehanded; I 

got a good honest name. I know how town folks are, but maybe when they talk to 

me ..." 



"They might listen," I said. "But they'll be hard to talk to." He was 
watching my face. "They're in the cemetery." 
"But your living kin," he said. "They'll be different." 
"Will they?" I said. 'I dont know. I never had any other kind." 
So I took Anse. And when I knew that I had Cash, I knew that living was 
terrible and that this was the answer to it. That was when I learned that words 
are no good; that words dont ever fit even what they are trying to say at. When 
he was born I knew that motherhood was invented by someone who had to have a 
word for it because the ones that had the children didn't care whether there was 
a word for it or not. I knew that fear was invented by someone that had never 
had the fear; pride, who never had the pride. I knew that it had been, not that 
they had dirty noses, but that we had had to use one another by words like 
spiders dangling by their mouths from a beam, swinging and twisting and never 
touching, and that only through the blows of die switch could my blood and their 
blood flow as one stream. I knew that it had. been, not that my aloneness had to 
be violated over and over each day, but that it had never been violated until 
Cash came. Not even by Anse in the nights. 

He had a word, too. Love, he called it. But I had been used to words for a 
long time. I knew that that word was like the others: just a shape to fill a 
lack; that when the right time Came, you wouldn't need a word for that anymore 
than for pride or fear. Cash did not need to say it to me nor I to him, and I 
would say Let Anse use it, if he wants to. So that it was Anse or love; love or 
Anse: it didn't matter. 

I would think that even while I lay with him in the dark and Cash asleep 
in the cradle within the swing of my hand. I would think that if he were to wake 
and cry, I would suckle him, too. Anse or love: it .didn't matter. My aloneness 
had been violated and then made whole again by the violation: time, Anse, love, 
what you will, outside the circle. 

Then I found that I had Dark At first I would not believe it. Then I 
believed that I would kill Anse. It was as though he had tricked me, hidden 
within a word like within a paper screen and struck me in the back through it. 
But then I realised that I had been tricked by words older than Anse or love, 
and that the same word had tricked Anse too, and that my revenge would be that 
he would never know I was taking revenge. And when Darl was born I asked Anse to 
promise to take me back to Jefferson when I died, because I knew that father had 
been right, even when he couldn't have known he was right anymore than I could 
have known I was wrong. 

"Nonsense," Anse said; "you and me aint nigh done chapping yet, with just 
two." 

He did not know that he was dead, then. Sometimes I would lie by him in 
the dark, hearing the land that was now of my blood and flesh, and I would 
think: Anse. Why Anse. Why are you Anse. I would think about his name until 
after a while I could see the word as a shape, a vessel, and I would watch him 
liquefy and flow into it like cold molasses flowing out of the darkness into the 
vessel, until the jar stood full and motionless: a significant shape profoundly 
without Me like an empty door frame; and then I would find that I had forgotten 
the name of the jar. I would think: The shape of my body where I used to be a 
virgin is in the shape of a and I couldn't think Anse, couldn't remember 
Anse. It was not that I could think of myself as no longer unvirgin, because I 
was three now. And when I would think Cash and Darl that way until their names 
would die and solidify into a shape and then fade away, I would say, All right. 
It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter what they call them. 



And so when Cora Tull would tell me I was not a true mother, I would think 
how words go straight up in a thin, line, quick and harmless, and how terribly 
doing goes along the earth, clinging to it, so that after a while the two lines 
are too far apart for the same person to straddle from one to the other and that 
sin and love and fear are-just sounds that people who never sinned nor loved nor 
feared have for what they never had and cannot have until they forget the words. 
Like Cora, who could never even cook. 

She would tell me what I owed to my children and to Anse and to God. I 

gave Anse the children. I did not ask for them. I did not even ask him for what 

he could have given me: not-Anse. That was my duty to him, to not ask that, and 

that duty I fulfilled. I would be I; I would let him be the shape and echo of 

his word. That was more than he asked, because he could not have asked for that 

and been Anse, using himself so with a word. 

And then he died. He did not know he was dead. I would lie by him in the 
dark, hearing the dark land talking of Cod's love and His beauty and His sin; 
hearing the dark voicelessness in which the words are the deeds, and the other 
words that are not deeds, that are just the gaps in peoples' lacks, coming down 
like the cries of the geese out of the wild darkness in the old terrible nights, 
fumbling at the deeds like orphans to whom are pointed out in a crowd two faces 
and told, That is your father, your mother. 

I believed that I had found it. I believed that the reason was the duty to 
the alive, to the terrible blood, the red bitter flood boiling through the land. 
I would think of sin as I would think of the clothes we both wore in the world's 
face, of the circumspection necessary because he was he and I was I; the sin the 
more utter and terrible since he was the instrument ordained by God who created 
the sin, to sanctify that sin He had created. While I waited for him in the 
woods, waiting for him before he saw me, I would think of him as dressed in sin. 
I would think of him as thinking of me as dressed also in sin, he the more 
beautiful since the garment which he had exchanged for sin was sanctified. I 
would think of the sin as garments which we would remove in order to shape and 
coerce the terrible blood to the forlorn echo of the dead word high in the air. 
Then I would lay with Anse again-l did not lie to him: I just refused, just as 
I refused my breast to Cash, and Darl after their time was up-hearing the dark 
land talking the voiceless speech. 

I hid nothing. I tried to deceive no one. I would not have cared. I merely 
took the precautions that he thought necessary for his sake, not for my safety, 
but just as I wore clothes in the world's face. And I would think then when Cora 
talked to me, of how the high dead words in time seemed to lose even the 
significance of their dead sound. 

Then it was over. Over in the sense that he was gone and I knew that, see 
him again though I would, I would never again see him coming swift and secret to 
me in the woods dressed in sin like a gallant garment already blowing aside with 
the speed of his secret coming. 

But for me it was not over. I mean, over in the sense of beginning and 

ending, because to me there was no beginning nor ending to anything then. I even 

held Anse refraining still, not that I was holding him recessional, but as 

though nothing else had ever been. My children were of me alone, of the wild 

blood boiling along the earth, of me and of all that lived; of none and of all. 

Then I found that I had Jewel. When I waked to remember to discover it, he was 

two months gone. 

My father said that the reason for living is getting ready to stay dead. I 

knew at last what he meant and that he could not have known what he meant 



himself, because a man cannot know anything about cleaning up the house 
afterward. And so I have cleaned my house. With Jewel--I lay by the lamp, 
holding up my own head, watching him cap and suture it before he breathed-the 
wild blood boiled away and the sound of it ceased. Then there was only the milk, 
warm and calm, and I lying calm in the slow silence, getting ready to clean my 
house. 

I gave Anse Dewey Dell to negative Jewel. Then I gave him Vardaman to 

replace the child I had robbed him of. And now he has three children that are 

his and not mine. And then I could get ready to die. 

One day I was talking to Cora. She prayed for me because she believed I 

was blind to sin, wanting me to kneel and pray too, because people to whom sin 

is just a matter of words, to them salvation is just words too. 

Whitfield 

When they told me she was dying, all that night I wrestled with Satan, and I 
emerged victorious. I woke to the enormity of my sin; I saw the true light at 
last, and I fell on my knees and confessed to God and asked His guidance and 
received it. "Rise," He said; "repair to that home in which you have put a 
living lie, among those people with whom you have outraged My Word; confess your 
sin aloud. It is for them, for that deceived husband, to forgive you: not I." 
So I went. I heard that Tull's bridge was gone; I said "Thanks, O Lord, O Mighty 
Ruler of all"; for by those dangers and difficulties which I should have to 
surmount I saw that He had not abandoned me; that my reception again into His 
holy peace and love would be the sweeter for it. "Just let me not perish before 
I have begged the forgiveness of the man whom I betrayed," I prayed; "let me not 
be too late; let not the tale of mine and her transgression come from her lips 
instead of mine. She had sworn then that she would never tell it, but eternity 
is a fearsome thing to face: have I not wrestled thigh to thigh with Satan 
myself? let me not have also the sin of her broken vow upon my soul. Let not the 
waters of Thy Mighty Wrath encompass me until I have cleansed my soul in the 
presence of them whom I injured." 

It was His hand that bore me safely above the flood, that fended from methe 
dangers of the waters. My horse was frightened, and my own heart failed me 
as the logs and the uprooted trees bore down upon my littleness. But not my 
soul: time after time I saw them averted at destruction's final instant, and I 
lifted my voice above the noise of the flood: "Praise to Thee, O Mighty Lord and 
King. By this token shall I cleanse my soul and gain again into the fold of Thy 
undying love." 

I knew then that forgiveness was mine. The flood, the danger, behind, and 
as I rode on across the firm earth again and the scene of my Gethsemane drew 
closer and closer, I framed the words which I should use. I would enter the 
house; I would stop her before she had spoken; I would say to her husband: 
"Anse, I have sinned. Do with me as you will." 

It was already as though it were done. My soul felt freer, quieter than it 
had in years; already I seemed to dwell in abiding peace again as I rode on. To 
either side I saw His hand; in my heart I could hear His voice: "Courage. I am 
with thee." 

Then I reached Tull's house. His youngest girl came out and called to me 
as I was passing. She told me that she was already dead. 
"I have sinned, O Lord. Thou knowest the extent of my remorse and the will 
of my spirit. But He is merciful; He will accept the will for the deed, Who knew 



that when I framed the words of my confession it was to Anse I spoke them, even 

though he was not there. It was He in His infinite wisdom that restrained the 

tale from her dying lips as she lay surrounded by those who loved and trusted 

her; mine the travail by water which I sustained by the strength of His hand. 

Praise to Thee in Thy bounteous and omnipotent love; O praise. 

I entered the house of bereavement, the lowly dwelling where another 

erring mortal lay while her soul faced the awful and irrevocable judgment, peace 

to her ashes. 

"God's grace upon this house," I said. 
Darl 

On the horse he rode up to Armstid's and came back on the horse, leading 
Arrnstid's team. We hitched up and laid Cash on top of Addie. When we laid him 
down he vomited again, but he got his head over the wagon bed in time. 
"He taken a lick in the stomach, too," Vernon said. 
"The horse may have kicked him in the stomach too," I said. "Did he kick 
you in the stomach, Cash?" 

He tried to say something. Dewey Dell wiped his mouth again. 
"What's he say?" Vernon said. 

"What is it, Cash?" Dewey Dell said. She leaned down. "His tools," she 

said. Vernon got them and put them into the wagon. Dewey Dell lifted Cash's head 

so he could see. We drove on, Dewey Dell and I sitting beside Cash to steady him 

and he riding on ahead on the horse. Vernon stood watching us for a while. Then 

he turned and went back toward the bridge. He walked gingerly, beginning to 

flap, the wet sleeves of his shirt as though he had just got wet. 

He was sitting the horse before the gate. Armstid was waiting at the gate. 

We stopped and he got down and we lifted Cash down and carried him into the 

house, where Mrs Armstid had the bed ready. We left her and Dewey Dell 

undressing him. 

We followed pa out to the wagon. He went back and got into the wagon and 
drove on, we following on foot, into the lot. The wetting had helped, because 
Armstid said, "You're welcome to the house. You can put it there." He followed, 
leading the horse, and stood beside the wagon, the reins in his hand. 
"I thank you," pa said. "We'll use in the shed yonder. I know it's a 
imposition on you." 

"You're welcome to the house," Armstid said. He had that wooden look on 
his face again; that bold, surly, high-colored rigid look like his face and 
eyes were two colors of wood, the wrong one pale and the wrong one dark. His 
shirt was beginning to dry, but it still clung close upon him when he moved. 
"She would appreciate it," pa said. 

We took the team out and rolled the wagon bade under the shed. One side of 
the shed was open. 

"It wont rain under," Armstid said. "But if you'd rather . . ." 

Back of the barn was some rusted sheets of tin roofing. We took two of 

them and propped them against the open side. 

"You're welcome to the house," Armstid said. 

"I thank you," pa said. "I'd take it right kind if you'd give them a 

little snack." 

"Sho," Armstid said. "We'll have supper ready soon as she gets Cash 
comfortable." He had gone back to the horse and he took taking the saddle off, 
his damp shirt lapping flat to him when he moved. 



Pa wouldn't come in the house. "Come in and eat," Armstid said. "It's nigh 
ready." 

"I wouldn't crave nothing," pa said. "I thank you." 

"You come in and dry and eat," Armstid said. "It'll be all right here." 

"It's for her," pa said. "It's for her sake I am taking the food. I got no 

team, no nothing. But she will be grateful to ere a one of you." 

"Sho," Armstid said. "You folks come in and dry." 

But after Armstid gave pa a drink, he felt better, and when we went in to 

see about Cash he hadn't come in with us. When I looked back he was leading the 

horse into the barn he was already talking about getting another team, and by 

supper time he had good as bought it. He is down there in the barn, sliding 

fluidly past the gaudy lunging swirl, into the stall with it. He climbs onto 

the manger and drags the hay down and leaves the stall and seeks and finds the 

currycomb. Then he returns and slips quickly past the single crashing thump and 

up against the horse, where it cannot overreach. He applies the curry-comb, 

holding himself within the horse's striking radius with the agility of an 

acrobat, cursing the horse in a whisper of obscene caress. Its head flashes 

back, tooth -cropped; its eyes roll in the dusk like marbles on a gaudy velvet 

cloth as he strikes it upon the face with the back of the curry-comb. 



Armstid 

But time I give him another sup of whisky and supper was about ready, he had 

done already bought a team from somebody, on a credit. Picking and choosing he 

were by then, saying how he didn't nice this span and wouldn't put his money in 

nothing so-and-so owned, not even a hen coop. 

"You might try Snopes," I said. "He's got three-four span. Maybe one of 

them would suit you." 

Then he begun to mumble his mouth, looking at me nice it was me that owned 
the only span of mules in the county and wouldn't sell them to him, when I knew 
that like as not it would be my team that would ever get them out of the lot at 
all. Only I dont know what they would do with them, if they had a team. 
Littlejohn had told me that the levee through Haley bottom had done gone for 
two miles and that the only way to get to Jefferson would be to go around by 
Mottson. But that was Anse's business. 

"He's a close man to trade with," he says, mumbling his mouth. But when I 
give him another sup after supper, he cheered up some. He was aiming to go back 
to the barn and set up with her. Maybe he thought that if he Just stayed down 
there ready to take out Santa Claus would maybe bring him a span of mules. "But 
I reckon I can talk him around," he says. "A man'll always help a fellow in a 
tight, if he's got ere a drop of Christian blood in him." 

"Of course you're welcome to the use of mine," I said, me knowing how much 
he believed that was the reason. 

"I thank you," he said. "She'll want to go in ourn," and him knowing how 
much I believed that was the reason. 

After supper Jewel rode over to the Bend to get Peabody. I heard he was to 
be there today at Varner's. Jewel come back about midnight. Peabody had gone 
down below Inverness somewhere, but Uncle Billy come back with him, with his 
satchel of horse physic. Like he says, a man aint so different from a horse or a 
mule, come long come short, except a mule or a horse has got a little more 
sense. "What you been Into now, boy?" he says, looking at Cash. "Get me a 
mattress and a chair and a glass of whisky," he says. 



He made Cash drink the whisky, then he run Anse out of the room. "Lucky it 
was the same leg he broke last summer," Anse says, mournful, mumbling and 
blinking. "That's something." 

We folded the mattress across Cash's legs and set the chair on the 
mattress and me and Jewel set on the chair and the gal held the lamp and Uncle 
Billy taken a chew of tobacco and went to work. Cash fought pretty hard for a 
while, until he fainted. Then he laid still, with big balls of sweat standing on 
his face like they had started to roll down and then stopped to wait for him. 
When he waked up, Uncle Billy had done packed up and left. He kept on 
trying to say something until the gal leaned down and wiped his mouth. "It's his 
tools," she said. 

"I brought them in," Darl said. "I got them." 

He tried to talk again; she leaned down. "He wants to see them," she said. 

So Darl brought them in where he could see them. They shoved them under the side 

of the bed, where he could reach his hand and touch them when he felt better. 

Next morning Anse taken that horse and rode over to the Bend to see Snopes. Him 

and Jewel stood in the lot talking a while, then Anse got on the horse and rode 

off. I reckon that was the first time Jewel ever let anybody ride that horse, 

and until Anse come back he hung around in that swole-up way, watching the road 

like he was half a mind to take out after Anse and get the horse back. 

Along toward nine oclock it begun to get hot. That was when I see the 

first buzzard. Because of the wetting, I reckon. Anyway it wasn't until well 

into the day that I see them. Lucky the breeze was -setting away from the house, 

so it wasn't until well into the morning. But soon as I see them it was like I 

could smell it in the field a mile away from just watching them, and them 

circling and circling for everybody in the county to see what was in my barn. 

I was still a good half a mile from the house when I heard that boy 

yelling. I thought maybe he might have fell into the well or something, so I 

whipped up and come into the lot on the lope. 

There must have been a dozen of them setting along the ridge-pole of the 
bam, and that boy was chasing another one around the lot like it was a turkey 
and it just lifting enough to dodge him and go flopping bade to the roof of the 
shed again where he had found it setting on the coffin. It had got hot then, 
right, and the breeze had dropped or changed or something, so I went and found 
Jewel, but Lula come out. 

"You got to do something,'" she said. "It's a outrage." 
"That's what I aim to do," I said. 

"It's a outrage," she said. "He should be lawed for treating her so." 

"He's getting her into the ground the best he can," I said. So I found 

Jewel and asked him if he didn't want to take one of the mules and go over to 

the Bend and see about Anse. He didn't say nothing. He just looked at me with 

his jaws going bone-white and them bone-white eyes of hisn, then he went and 

begun to call Darl. 

"What you fixing to do?" I said. 

He didn't answer. Darl come out. "Come on," Jewel said. 
"What you aim to do?" Darl said. 

"Going to move the wagon," Jewel said over his shoulder. 

"Dont be a fool," I said. "I never meant nothing. You couldn't help it." 

And Darl hung back too but nothing woulddn't suit Jewel. 

"Shut your goddamn mouth," he says. 

"It's got to be somewhere," Darl said. "We'll take out soon as pa gets 
back." 



"You wont help me?" Jewel says, them white eyes of hisn kind of blaring 
and his face shaking like he had a aguer. 
"No," Darl said. "I wont. Wait till pa gets back." 

So I stood in the door and watched him push and pull at that wagon. It was 
on a downhill, and once I thought he was fixing to beat out the back end of the 
shed. Then, the dinner bell rung. I called him, but he didn't look around. "Come 
on to dinner," I said. 'Tell that boy." But he didn't answer, so I went on to 
dinner. The gal went down to get that boy, but she come back without him. About 
half through dinner we heard him yelling again, running that buzzard out. 
"It's a outrage," Lula said; "a outrage." 

"He's doing the best he can," I said. "A fellow dont trade with Snopes in 

thirty minutes. They'll set in die shade all afternoon to dicker." 

"Do?" she says. "Do? He's done too much, already." 

And I reckon he had. Trouble is, his quitting was Just about to start our 

doing. He couldn't buy no team from nobody, let alone Snopes, withouten he had 

something to mortgage he didn't know would mortgage yet. And so when I went back 

to the field I looked at my mules and same as told them goodbye for a spell And 

when I come back that evening and the sun shining all day on that shed, I wasn't 

so sho I would regret it. 

He come riding up just as I went out to the porch, where they all was. He 

looked kind of funny: kind of more hang-dog than common, and kind of proud too. 

Like he had done something he thought was cute but wasn't so sho now how other 

folks would take it. 

"I got a team," he said. 

"You bought a team from Snopes?" I said. 

"I reckon Snopes aint the only man in this country that can drive a 

trade," he said. 

"Sho," I said. He was looking at Jewel, with that funny look, but Jewel 

had done got down from the porch and was going toward the horse. To see what 

Anse had done to it, I reckon. 

"Jewel," Anse says. Jewel looked back. "Come here," Anse says. Jewel come 
back a little and stopped again, 
"What you want?" he said. 

"So you got a team from Snopes," I said. "He'll send them over tonight, I 
reckon? You'll want a early start tomorrow, long as you'll have to go by 
Mottson." 

Then he quit looking like he had been for a while. He got that badgered 

look like he used to have, mumbling his mouth. 

"I do the best I can," he said. "Fore God, if there were ere a man in the 

living world suffered the trials and floutings I have suffered." 

"A fellow that just beat Snopes in a trade ought to feel pretty good," I 

said. "What did you give him, Anse?" 

He didn't look at me. "I give a chattel mortgage on my cultivator and 
seeder," he said. 

"But they aint worth forty dollars. How far do you aim to get with a forty 
dollar team?" 

They were all watching him now, quiet and steady. Jewel was stopped, 
halfway back, waiting to go on to the horse. "I give other things," Anse said. 
He begun to mumble his mouth again, standing there like he was waiting for 
somebody to hit him and him with his mind already made up not to do nothing 
about it. 

"What other things?" Darl said. 



"Hell," I said. "You take my team. You can bring them back. Ill get along 
someway." 

"So thats what you were doing in Cash's clothes last night," Darl said. He 
said it just like he was reading it outen the paper. Like he never give a durn 
himself one way or the other. Jewel had come back now, standing there, looking 
at Anse with them marble eyes of hisn. "Cash aimed to buy that talking machine 
from Suratt with that money," Darl said. 

Anse stood there, mumbling his mouth. Jewel watched him. He aint never 
blinked yet. 

"But that's just eight dollars more," Darl said, in that voice like he was 

just listening and never give a durn himself. "That still wont buy a team." 

Anse looked at Jewel, quick, kind of sliding his eyes that way, then he 

looked down again. "God knows, if there were ere a man," he says. Still they 

didn't say nothing. They just watched him, waiting, and hire sliding his eyes 

toward their feet and up their legs but no higher. "And the horse," he says. 

"What horse?" Jewel said. Anse just stood there. I be durn, if a man cant 

keep the upper hand of his sons, he ought to run them away from home, no matter 

how big they are. And if he cant do that, I be durn if he oughtn't to leave 

himself. I be durn if I wouldn't. "You mean, you tried to swap my horse?" Jewel 

says. 

Anse stands there, dangle-armed. "For fifteen years I aint had a tooth in 
my head," he says. "God knows it. He knows in fifteen years I aint et the 
victuals He aimed for man to eat to keep his strength up, and me saving a nickel 
here and a nickel there so my family wouldn't suffer it to buy them teeth so I 
could eat God's appointed food. I give that money. I thought that if I could do 
without eating, my sons could do without riding. God knows I did." 
Jewel stands with his hands on his hips, looking at Anse. Then he looks 
away. He looked out across the field, his face still as a rode, like it was 
somebody else talking about somebody else's horse and him not even listening. 
Then he spit; slow, and said "Hell" and he turned and went on to the gate and 
unhitched the horse and got on it. It was moving when he come into the saddle 
and by the time he was on it they was tearing down the road like the Law might 
have been behind them. They went out of sight that way, the two of them looking 
like some kind of a spotted cyclone. 

"Well," I says. "You take my team," I said. But he wouldn't do it And they 
wouldn't even stay, and that boy chasing them buzzards all day in the hot sun 
until he was nigh as crazy as the rest of them. "Leave Cash here, anyway," I 
said. But they wouldn't do that. They made a pallet for him with quilts on top 
of the coffin and laid him on it and set his tools by him, and we put my team in 
and hauled the wagon about a mile down the road. 
"If we'll bother you here," Anse says, "just say so." 
"Sho," I said. "It'll be fine here. Safe, too. Now let's go back and eat 
supper." 

"I thank you," Anse said. "We got a little something in the basket. We can 
make out." 

"Where'd you get it?" I said. 
"We brought it from home." 

"But it'll be stale now," I said. "Come and get some hot victuals." 

But they wouldn't come. "I reckon we can make out," Anse said. So I went 

home and et and taken a basket back to them and tried again to make them come 

back to the house. 

"I thank you," he said. "I reckon we can make out." So I left them there, 



squatting around a little fire, waiting; God knows what for. 

I come on home. I kept thinking about them there, and about that fellow 

tearing away on that horse. And that would be the last they would see of him. 

And I be durn if I could blame him. Not for wanting to not give up his horse, 

but for getting shut of such a durn fool as Anse. 

Or that's what I thought then. Because be durn if there aint something 

about a durn fellow like Anse that seems to make a man have to help him, even 

when he knows hell be wanting to kick himself next minute. Because about a hour 

after breakfast next morning Eustace Grimm that works Snopes place come up with 

a span of mules, hunting Anse. 

"I thought him and Anse never traded," I said. 

"Sho," Eustace said. "All they liked was the horse. Like I said to Mr 

Snopes, he was letting this team go for fifty dollars, because if his uncle Flem 

had a just kept them Texas horses when he owned them, Anse wouldn't a never--" 

"The horse?" I said. "Anse's boy taken that horse and cleared out last 

night, probably halfway to Texas by now, and Anse  " 

"I didn't know who brung it," Eustace said. "I never see them. I just 

found the horse in the barn this morning when I went to feed, and I told Mr 

Snopes and he said to bring the team on over here." 

Well, that'll be the last they'll ever see of him now, sho enough. Come 

Christmas time they'll maybe get a postal -card from nim in Texas, I reckon. And 

if it hadn't a been Jewel, I reckon it'd a been me; I owe him that much, myself. 

I be durn if Anse dont conjure a man, some way. I be durn if he aint a sight. 

Vardaman 

Now there are seven of them, in little tall black circles. 
"Look, Darl," I say; "see?" 

He looks up. We watch them in little tall black circles of not-moving. 
"Yesterday there were just four," I say. 
There were more than four on the barn. 

"Do you know what I would do if he tries to light on the wagon again?" I 
say. 

"What would you do?" Darl says. 

"I wouldn't let him light on her," I say. "I wouldn't let him light on 
Cash, either." 

Cash is sick. He is sick on the box. But my mother is a fish. 

"We got to get some medicine in Mottson," pa says. "I reckon well just 

have to." 

"How do you feel, Cash?" Darl says. 

"It dont bother none," Cash says. 

"Do you want it propped a little higher?" Darl says. 

Cash has a broken leg. He has had two broken legs. He lies on the box with 

a quilt rolled under his head and a piece of wood under his knee. 

"I reckon we ought to left him at Armstid's," pa says. 

I haven't got a broken leg and pa hasn't and Darl hasn't and "It's just 

the bumps," Cash says. "It kind of grinds together a little on a bump. It dont 

bother none." Jewel has gone away. He and his horse went away one supper time 

"It's because she wouldn't have us beholden," pa says. "Fore God, I do the 

best that ere a man" Is it because Jewel's mother is a horse Darl? I said. 

"Maybe I can draw the ropes a little tighter," Darl says. That's why 

Jewel and I were both in the shed 'and she was in the wagon because the horse 



lives in the barn and I had to keep on running the buzzard away from 

"If you just would," Cash says. And Dewey Dell hasn't got a broken leg and 

I haven't. Cash is my brother. 

We stop. When Darl loosens the rope Cash begins to sweat again. His teeth 
look out. 

"Hurt?" Darl says. 

"I reckon you better put it back," Cash says. 

Darl puts the rope back, pulling hard. Cash's teeth look out. 

"Hurt?" Darl says. 

"It dont bother none," Cash says. 

"Do you want pa to drive slower?" Darl says. 

"No," Cash says. "Aint no time to hang back. It dont bother none." 

"We'll have to get some medicine at Mottson," pa says. "I reckon we'll 

have to." 

"Tell him to go on," Cash says. We go on. Dewey Dell leans back and wipes 
Cash's face. Cash is my brother. But Jewel's mother is a horse. My mother is a 
fish. Darl says that when we come to the water again I might see her and Dewey 
Dell said, She's in the box; how could she have got out? She got out through 
the holes I bored, into the water I said, and when we come to the water again I 
am going to see her. My mother is not in the box. My mother does not smell like 
that. My mother is a fish 

"Those cakes will be in fine shape by the time we get to Jefferson," Darl 
says. 

Dewey Dell does not look around. 

"You better try to sell them in Mottson," Darl says. 

"When will we get to Mottson, Darl?" I say. 

"Tomorrow," Darl says. "If this team dont rack to pieces. Snopes must have 
fed them on sawdust." 

"Why did he feed them on sawdust, Darl?" I say. 
"Look," Darl says. "See?" 

Now there are nine of them, tall in little tall black circles. 
When we come to the foot of the hill pa stops and Darl and Dewey Dell and 
I get out. Cash cant walk because he has a broken leg. "Come up, mules," pa 
says. The mules walk hard; tie wagon creaks. Darl and Dewey Dell and I walk 
behind the wagon, up the hill. When we come to the top of the hill pa stops and 
we get back into the wagon. 

Now there are ten of them, tall in little tall black circles on the sky. 
Moseley 

I happened to look up, and saw her outside the window, looking in. Not close to 
the glass, and not looking at anything in particular; just standing there with 
her head turned this way and her eyes full on me and kind of blank too, like she 
was waiting for a sign. When I looked up again she was moving toward the door. 
She kind of bumbled at the screen door a minute, like they do, and came 
in. She had on a stiff-brimmed straw hat setting on the top of her head and she 
was carrying a package wrapped in newspaper: I thought that she had a quarter or 
a dollar at the most, and that after she stood around a while she would maybe 
buy a cheap comb or a bottle of nigger toilet water, so I never disturbed her 
for a minute or so except to notice that she was pretty in a kind of sullen, 
awkward way, and that she looked a sight better in her gingham dress and her own 
complexion than she would after she bought whatever she would finally decide on. 



Or tell that she wanted. I knew that she had already decided before she came in. 
But you have to let them take their time. So I went on with what I was doing, 
figuring to let Albert wait on her when he caught up at the fountain, when he 
came back to me. 

"That woman," he said. "You better see what she wants." 
"What does she want?" I said. 

"I dont know. I cant get anything out of her. You better wait on her." 
So I went around the counter. I saw that she was barefooted, standing with 
her feet flat and easy on the floor, like she was used to it. She was looking at 
me, hard, holding the package; I saw she had about as black a pair of eyes as 
ever I saw, and she was a stranger. I never remembered seeing her in Mottson 
before. "What can I do for you?" I said. 

Still she didn't say anything. She stared at me without winking. Then she 
looked back at the folks at the fountain. Then she looked past me, toward the 
back of the store. 

"Do you want to look at some toilet things?" I said. "Or is it medicine 
you want?" 

"That's it," she said. She looked quick back at the fountain again. So I 

thought maybe her ma or somebody had sent her in for some of this female dope 

and she was ashamed to ask for it. I knew she couldn't have a complexion like 

hers and use it herself, let alone not being much more than old enough to barely 

know what it was for. It's a shame, the way they poison themselves with it. But 

a man's got to stock it or go out of business in this country. 

"Oh," I said. "What do you use? We have--" She looked at me again, almost 

like she had said hush, and looked toward the back of the store again. 

"I'd liefer go back there," she said. 

"All right," I said. You have to humor them. You save time by it. I 

followed her to the back. She put her hand on the gate. "There's nothing back 

there but the prescription case," I said. "What do you want?" She stopped and 

looked at me. It was like she had taken some kind of a lid off her face, her 

eyes. It was her eyes: kind of dumb and hopeful and sullenly willing to be 

disappointed all at the same time. But she was in trouble of some sort; I could 

see that. "What's your trouble?" I said. "Tell me what it is you want. I'm 

pretty busy." I wasn't meaning to hurry her, but a man just hasn't got the time 

they have out there. 

"It's the female trouble," she said. 

"Oh," I said. "Is that all?" I thought maybe she was younger than she 
looked, and her first one had scared her, or maybe one had been a little 
abnormal as it will in young women. "Where's your ma?" I said. "Haven't you got 
one?" 

"She's out yonder in the wagon," she said. 

"Why not talk to her about it before you take any medicine," I said. "Any 
woman would have told you about it." She looked at me, and I looked at her again 
and said, "How old are you?" 
"Seventeen," she said. 

"Oh," I said. "I thought maybe you were . . . She was watching me. But 

then, in the eyes all of them look like they had no age and knew everything in 

the world, anyhow. "Are you too regular, or not regular enough?" 

She quit looking at me but she didn't move. "Yes," she said. "I reckon so. 

Yes." 

"Well, which?" I said. "Dont you know?" It's a crime and a shame; but 
after all, they'll buy it from somebody. She stood there, not looking at me. 



"You. want something to stop it?" I said. "Is that it?" 

"No," she said. "That's it. It's already stopped." 

"Well, what--" Her face was lowered a little, still, like they do in all 

their dealings with a man so he-dont ever know just where the lightning will 

strike-next. "You are not married, are you?" I said. 

"No." 

"Oh," I said. "And how long has it been since it stopped? about five 

months maybe?" 

"It aint been but two," she said. 

"Well, I haven't got anything in my store you want to buy," I said, 

"unless it's a nipple. And I'd advise you to buy that and go back home and tell 

your pa, if you have one, and let him make somebody buy you a wedding license. 

Was that all you wanted?" 

But she just stood there, not looking at me. 

"I got the money to pay you," she said. 

"Is it your own, or did he act enough of a man to give you the money?" 

"He give it to me. Ten dollars. He said that would be enough." 

"A thousand dollars wouldn't be enough in my store and ten cents wouldn't 

be enough," I said. "You take my advice and go home and tell your pa or your 

brothers if you have any or the first man you come to in the road." 

But she, didn't move. "Lafe said I could get it at the drugstore. He said 

to tell you me and him wouldn't never tell nobody you sold it to us." 

"And I just wish your precious Lafe had come for it himself; that's what I 

wish. I dont know: I'd have had a little respect for him then. And you can go 

back and tell him I said so if he aint halfway to Texas by now, which I dont 

doubt. Me, a respectable druggist, that's kept store and raised a family and 

been a church-member for fifty-six years in this town. I'm a good mind to tell 

your folks myself, if I can just find who they are." 

She looked at me now, her eyes and face kind of blank again like when I 

first saw her through the window. "I didn't know," she said. "He told me I could 

get something at the drugstore. He said they might not want to sell it to me, 

but if I had ten dollars and told them I wouldn't never tell nobody . . ." 

"He never said this drugstore," I said. "If he did or mentioned my name, I 

defy him to prove it. I defy him to repeat it or I'll prosecute him to the full 

extent of the law, and you can tell him so." 

"But maybe another drugstore would," she said. 

"Then I dont want to know it. Me, that's--" Then I looked at her. But it's 

a hard life they have; sometimes a man ... if there can ever be any excuse for 

sin, which it cant be. And then, life wasn't made to be easy on folks: they 

wouldn't ever have any reason to be good and die. "Look here," I said. "You get 

that notion out of your head. The Lord gave you what you have, even if He did 

use the devil to do it; you let Him take it away from you if it's His will to do 

so. You go on back to Lafe and you and him take that ten dollars and get married 

with it." 

"Lafe said I could get something at the drugstore," she said. 

"Then go and get it," I said. "You wont get it here." 

She went out, carrying the package, her feet making a little hissing on 

the floor. She bumbled again at the door and went out. I could see her through 

the glass going on down the street. 

It was Albert told me about the rest of it He said the wagon was stopped 

in front of Grummet's hardware store, with the ladies all scattering up and down 

the street with handkerchiefs to their noses, and a crowd of hard-nosed men and 



boys standing around the wagon, listening to the marshal arguing with the man. 
He was a kind of tall, gaunted man sitting on the wagon, saying it. was a public 
street and he reckoned he had as much right there as anybody, and the marshal 
telling him he would have to move on; folks couldn't stand it. It had been dead 
eight days, Albert said. They came from some place out in Yoknapatawpha county, 
trying to get to Jefferson with it. It must have been like a piece of rotten 
cheese coming into an ant-hill, in that ramshackle wagon that Albert said folks 
were scared would fall all to pieces before they could get it out of town, with 
that home-made box and another fellow with a broken leg lying on a quilt on top 
of it, and the father and a little boy sitting on the seat and the marshal 
trying to make them get out of town. 

"It's a public street," the man says. 'I reckon we can stop to buy 

something same as airy other man. We got the money to pay for hit, and hit aint 

airy law that says a man cant spend his money where he wants." 

They had stopped to buy some cement. The other son was in Grummet's, 

trying to make Grummet break a sack and let him have ten cents' worth, and 

finally Grummet broke the sack to get him out. They wanted the cement to fix the 

fellow's broken leg, someway. 

"Why, you'll kill him," the marshal said. "You'll cause him to lose his 

leg. You take him on to a doctor, and you get this thing buried soon as you can. 

Dont you know you're liable to jail for endangering the public health?" 

"We're doing the best we can," the father said. Then he told a long tale 

about how they had to wait for the wagon to come back and how the bridge was 

washed away and how they went eight miles to another bridge and it was gone too 

so they came back and swum the ford and the mules got drowned and how they got 

another team and found that the road was washed out and they had to come clean 

around by Mottson, and then the one with the cement came back and told him to 

shut up. 

"We'll be gone in a minute," he told the marshal. 

"We never aimed to bother nobody," the father said. 

"You take that fellow to a doctor," the marshal told the one with the 

cement. 

"I reckon he's all right," he said. 

"It aint that we're hard-hearted," the marshal said. "But I reckon you can 
tell yourself how it is." 

"Sho," the other said. "We'll take out soon as Dewey Dell comes back. She 
went to deliver a package." 

So they stood there with the folks backed off with handkerchiefs to their 
faces, until in a minute the girl came up with that newspaper package. 
"Come on," the one with the cement said, "we've lost too much time." So 
they got in the wagon and went on. And when I went to supper it still seemed 
like I could smell it. And the next day I met the marshal and I began to sniff 
and said, 
"Smell anything?" 

"I reckon they're in Jefferson by now," he said. 
"Or in jail. Well, thank the Lord it's not our jail." 
"That's a fact," he said. 

Darl 

"Here's a place," pa says. He pulls the team up and sits looking at the house, 
"We could get some water over yonder." 



"All right," I say. 'You'll have to borrow a bucket from them, Dewey 
Dell." 

"God knows," pa says. "I wouldn't be beholden, God knows." 

"If you see a good-sized can, you might bring it," I say. Dewey Dell gets 

down from the wagon, carrying the package. "You had more trouble than you 

expected, selling those cakes in Mottson," I say. How do our lives ravel out 

into the no-wind, no-sound, the weary gestures wearily recapitulant: echoes of 

old compulsions with no-hand on no-strings: in sunset we fall into furious 

attitudes, dead gestures of dolls. Cash broke his leg and now the sawdust is 

running out. He is bleeding to death is Cash. 

"I wouldn't be beholden," pa says. "God knows." 

"Then make some water yourself," I say. "We can use Cash's hat." 

When Dewey Dell comes back the man comes with her. Then he stops and she 

comes on and he stands there and after a while he goes back to the house and 

stands on the porch, watching us. 

"We better not try to lift him down," pa says. "We can fix it here." 
"Do you want to be lifted down, Cash?" I say. 

"Wont we get to Jefferson tomorrow?" he says. He is watching us, his eyes 

interrogatory, intent, and sad. "I can last it out." 

"It'll be easier on you," pa says. "It'll keep it from rubbing together." 

"I can last it," Cash says. "We'll lose time stopping." 

"We done bought the cement, now," pa says. 

"I could last it," Cash says. "It aint but one more day. It dont bother to 

speak of." He looks at us, his eyes wide in his thin gray face, questioning. "It 

sets up so," he says. 

"We done bought it now," pa says. 

I mix the cement in the can, stirring the slow water into the pale green 
thick coils. I bring the can to the wagon where Cash can see. He lies on his 
back, his thin profile in silhouette, ascetic and profound against the sky. 
"Does that look about right?" I say. 

"You dont want too much water, or it wont work right," he says. 
"Is this too much?" 

"Maybe if you could get a little sand," he says. "It aint but one more 
day," he says. "It dont bother me none." 

Vardaman goes back down the road to where we crossed the branch and 
returns with sand. He pours it slowly into the thick coiling in the can. I go to 
the wagon again. 
"Does that look all right?" 

"Yes," Cash says. "I could have lasted. It dont bother me none." 

We loosen the splints and pour the cement over his leg, slow. 

"Watch out for it," Cash says. "Dont get none on it if you can help." 

"Yes," I say. Dewey Dell tears a piece of paper from the package and wipes 

the cement from the top of it as it drips from Cash's leg. 

"How does that feel?" 

"It feels fine," he says. "It's cold. It feels fine." 

"If it'll just help you," pa says. "I asks your forgiveness. I never 

foreseen it no more than you." 

"It feels fine," Cash says. 

If you could just ravel out into time. That would be nice. It would be 
nice if you could just ravel out into time. 

We replace the splints, the cords, drawing them tight, the cement in thick 
pale green slow surges among the cords, Cash watching us quietly with that 



profound questioning look. 

"That'll steady it," I say. 

"Ay," Cash says. "I'm obliged." 

Then we all turn on the wagon and watch him. He is coming up the road 
behind us, wooden-backed, wooden-faced, moving only from his hips down. He 
comes tip without a word, with his pale rigid eyes in his high sullen face, and 
gets into the wagon. 

"Here's a hill," pa says. "I reckon you'll have to get out and walk." 



Vardaman 

Darl and Jewel and Dewey Dell and I are walking tip the hill, behind the wagon. 
Jewel came back. He came up the road and got into the wagon. He was walking. 
Jewel hasn't got a horse anymore. Jewel is my brother. 'Cash is my brother. Cash 
has a broken leg. We fixed Cash's leg so it doesn't hurt. Cash is my brother. 
Jewel is my brother too, but he hasn't got a broken leg. 
Now there are five of them, tall in little tall black circles. 
"Where do they stay at night, Darl?" I say. "When we stop at night in the 
barn, where do they stay?" 

The hill goes off into the sky. Then the sun comes up from behind the hill 
and the mules and the wagon and pa walk on the sun. You cannot watch them, 
walking slow on the sun. In Jefferson it is red on the track behind the glass. 
The track goes shining round and round. Dewey Dell says so. 
Tonight I am going to see where they stay while we are in the barn. 



Darl 

Jewel," I say, "whose son are you?" 

The breeze was setting up from the barn, so we put her under the apple 
tree, where the moonlight can dapple the apple tree upon the long slumbering 
flanks within which now and then she talks in little trickling bursts of secret 
and murmurous bubbling. I took Vardaman to listen. When we came up the cat 
leaped down from it and flicked away with silver claw and silver eye into the 
shadow. 

"Your mother was a horse, but who was your father, Jewel?" 

"You goddamn lying son of a bitch." 

"Dont call me that," I say. 

"You goddamn lying son of a bitch." 

"Dont you call me that, Jewel." In the tall moonlight his eyes look like 

spots of white paper pasted on a high small football. 

After supper Cash began to sweat a little. "It's getting a little hot," he 

said. "It was the sun shining on it all day, I reckon." 

"You want some water poured on it?" we say. "Maybe that will ease it 

some." 

"I'd be obliged," Cash said. "It was the sun shining on it, I reckon. I 
ought to thought and kept it covered." 

"We ought to thought," we said. "You couldn't have suspicioned." 

"I never noticed it getting hot," Cash said. "I ought to minded it." 

So we poured the water over it. His leg and foot below the cement looked 

like they had been boiled. "Does that feel better?" we said. 

"I'm obliged," Cash said. "It feels fine." 

Dewey Dell wipes his face with the hem of her dress. 



"See if you can get some sleep," we say. 
"Sho," Cash says. "I'm right obliged. It feels fine now." 
Jewel, I say, Who was your father, Jewel? 
Goddamn you. Goddamn you. 



Vardaman 

She was under the apple tree and Darl and I go across the moon and the cat jumps 
down and runs and we can hear her inside the wood. 
"Hear?" Darl says. "Put your ear close." 

I put my ear close and I can hear her. Only I cant tell what she is 
saying. 

"What is she saying, Darl?" I say. "Who is she talking to?" 

"She's talking to God," Darl says. "She is calling on Him to help her." 

"What does she want Him to do?" I say. 

"She wants Him to hide her away from the sight of man," Darl says. 

"Why does she want to hide her away from the sight of man, Darl?" 

"So she can lay down her life," Darl says. 

"Why does she want to lay down her life, Darl?" 

"Listen," Darl says. We hear her. We hear her turn over on her side. 

"Listen," Darl says. 

"She's turned over," I say. "She's looking at me through the Wood." 
"Yes," Darl says. 

"How can she see through the wood, Darl?" 

"Come," Darl says. "We must let her be quiet. Come." 

"She cant see out there, because the holes are in the top," I say. "How 

can she see, Darl?" 

"Let's go see about Cash," Darl says. 

And I saw something Dewey Dell told me not to tell nobody 

Cash is sick in his leg. We fixed his leg this afternoon, but he is sick 

in it again, lying on the bed. We pour water on his leg and then he feels fine. 

"I feel fine," Cash says. I'm obliged to you." 

"Try to get some sleep," we say. 

"I feel fine," Cash says. "I'm obliged to you." 

And I saw something Dewey Dell told me not to tell nobody. It is not 

about pa and it is not about Cash and it is not about Jewel and it is not about 

Dewey Dell and it is not about me 

Dewey Dell and I are going to sleep on the pallet It is on the back porch, 
where we can see the barn, and the moon shines on half of the pallet and we will 
lie half in the white and half in the black, with the moonlight on our legs. And 
then I am going to see where they stay at night while we are in the barn. We are 
not in the barn tonight but I can see the barn and so I am going to find where 
they stay at night. 

We lie on the pallet, with our legs in the moon. 

"Look," I say, "my legs look black. Your legs look black, too." 

"Go to sleep," Dewey Dell says. 

Jefferson is a far piece. 

"Dewey Dell." 

"What" 

"If it's not Christmas now, how will it be there?" 

It goes round and round on the shining track. Then the track goes shining 
round and round. 



"Will what be there?" 
"That train. In the window." 

"You go to sleep. You can see tomorrow if it's there." 
Maybe Santa Claus wont know they are town boys. 
"Dewey Dell." 

"You go to sleep. He aint going to let none of them town boys have it." 
It was behind the window, red on the track, the track shining round and 
round. It made my heart hurt And then it was pa and Jewel and Darl and Mr 
Gillespie's boy. Mr Gillespie's boy's legs come down under his nightshirt When 
he goes into the moon, his legs fuzz. They go on around the house toward the 
apple tree. 

"What are they going to do, Dewey Dell?" 

They went around the house toward the apple tree. 

"I can smell her," I say. "Can you smell her, too?" 

"Hush," Dewey Dell says. "The wind's changed. Go to sleep." 

And so I am going to know where they stay at night soon. They come around 

the house, going across the yard in the moon, carrying her on their shoulders. 

they carry her down to the barn, the moon shining flat and quiet on her. Then 

they come back and go into the house again. While they were in the moon, Mr 

Gillespie's boy's legs fuzzed. And then I waited and I said Dewey Dell? and then 

I waited and then I went to find where they stay at night and I saw something 

that Dewey Dell told me not to tell nobody. 

Darl 

Against the dark doorway he seems to materialise out of darkness, lean as a race 

horse in his underclothes in the beginning of the glare. He leaps to the ground 

with on his face an expression of furious unbelief. He has seen me without even 

turning his head or his eyes in which the glare swims like two small torches. 

"Come on," he says, leaping down the slope toward the barn. 

For an instant longer he runs silver in the moonlight, then he springs out 

like a flat figure cut leanly from tin against an abrupt and soundless explosion 

as the whole loft of the barn takes fire at once, as though it had been stuffed 

with powder. The front, the conical facade with the square orifice of doorway 

broken only by the square squat shape of the coffin on the sawhorses like a 

cubistic bug, conies into relief. Behind me pa and Gillespie and Mack and Dewey 

Dell and Vardaman emerge from the house. 

He pauses at the coffin, stooping, looking at me, his face furious. 

Overhead the flames sound like thunder; across us rushes a cool draft: there is 

no heat in it at all yet, and a handful of chaff lifts suddenly and sucks 

swiftly along the stalls where a horse is screaming. "Quick," I say; "the 

horses." 

He glares a moment longer at me, then at the roof overhead, then he leaps 
toward the stall where the horse screams. It plunges and kicks, the sound of the 
crashing blows sucking up into the sound of the flames. They sound like an 
interminable train crossing an endless trestle. Gillespie and Mack pass me, in 
knee-length nightshirts, shouting, their voices thin and high and meaningless 
and at the same time profoundly wild and sad: ". . . cow . . . stall . . ." 
Gillespie's nightshirt rushes ahead of him on the draft, ballooning about his 
hairy thighs. 

The stall door has swung shut. Jewel thrusts it back with his buttocks and 

he appears, his back arched, the muscles ridged through his garment as he drags 



the horse out by its head. In the glare its eyes roll with soft, fleet, wild 
opaline fire; its muscles bunch and run as it flings its head about, lifting 
Jewel clear of the ground. He drags it on, slowly, terrifically; again he gives 
me across his shoulder a single glare furious and brief. Even when they are 
clear of the barn the horse continues to fight and lash backward toward the 
doorway until Gillespie passes me, stark-naked, his nightshirt wrapped about the 
mule's head, and beats the maddened horse on out of the door. 
Jewel returns, running; again he looks down at file coffin. But he comes 
on. "Where's cow?" he cries, passing me. I follow him. In the stall Mack is 
struggling with the other mule. When its head turns into the glare I can see the 
wild rolling of its eye too, but it makes no sound. It just stands there, 
watching Mack over its shoulder, swinging its hind quarters toward him whenever 
he approaches. He looks back at us, his eyes and mouth three round holes in his 
face on which the freckles look like english peas on a plate. His voice is thin, 
high, faraway. 

"I cant do nothing ..." It is as though the sound had been swept from his 
lips and up and away, speaking back to us from an immense distance of 
exhaustion. Jewel slides past us; the mule whirls and lashes out, but he has 
already gained its head. I lean to Mack's ear: 
"Nightshirt. Around his head." 

Mack stares at me. Then he rips the nightshirt off and flings it over the 

mule's head, and it becomes docile at once. Jewel is yelling at him: "Cow? Cow?" 

"Back," Mack cries. "Last stall." 

The cow watches us as we enter. She is backed into the corner, head 
lowered, still chewing though rapidly. But she makes no move. Jewel has paused, 
looking up, and suddenly we watch the entire floor to the loft dissolve. It just 
turns to fire; a faint litter of sparks rains down. He glances about. Back under 
the trough is a three legged milking stool. He catches it up and swings it into 
the planking of the rear wall. He splinters a plank, then another, a third; we 
tear the fragments away. While we are stooping at the opening something charges 
into us from behind. It is the cow; with a single whistling breath she rushes 
between us and through the gap and into the outer glare, her tail erect and 
rigid as a broom nailed upright to the end of her spine. 
Jewel turns back into the barn. "Here," I say; "Jewel!" I grasp at him; he 
strikes my hand down. "You fool," I say, "dont you see you cant make it hack 
yonder?" The hallway looks like a searchlight turned into rain. "Come on," I 
say, "around this way." 

When we are through the gap he begins to run. "Jewel," I say, running. He 
darts around the corner. When I reach it he has almost reached the next one, 
running against the glare like that figure cut from tin. Pa and Gillespie and 
Mack are some distance away, watching the barn, pink against the darkness where 
for the time the moonlight has been vanquished. "Catch him!" I cry; "stop him!" 
When I reach the front, he is struggling with Gillespie; the one lean in 
underclothes, the other stark naked. They are like two figures in a Greek 
frieze, isolated out of all reality by the red glare. Before I can reach them he 
has struck Gillespie to the ground and turned and run back into the barn. 
The sound of it has become quite peaceful now, like the sound of the river 
did. We watch through the dissolving proscenium of the doorway as Jewel runs 
crouching to the far end of the coffin and stoops to it. For an instant he looks 
up and out at us through the rain of burning hay like a portiere of flaming 
beads, and I can see his mouth shape as he calls my name. 
"Jewel!" Dewey Dell cries; "Jewel!" It seems to me that I now hear the 



accumulation of her voice through the last five minutes, and I hear her 
scuffling and struggling as pa and Mack hold her, screaming "Jewell Jewel!" But 
he is no longer looking at us. We see his shoulders strain as he upends the 
coffin and slides it single-handed from the sawhorses. It looms unbelievably 
tall, hiding him: I would not have believed that Addie Bundren would have needed 
that much room to lie comfortable in; for another instant it stands upright 
while the sparks rain on it in scattering bursts as though they engendered other 
sparks from the contact. Then it topples forward, gaining momentum, revealing 
Jewel and the sparks raining on him too in engendering gusts, so that he appears 
to be enclosed in a thin nimbus of fire. Without stopping it overends and rears 
again, pauses, then crashes slowly forward and through the curtain. This time 
Jewel is riding upon it, clinging to it, until it crashes down and flings him 
forward and clear and Mack leaps forward into a thin smell of scorching meat and 
slaps at the widening crimson-edged holes that bloom like flowers in his 
undershirt. 



Vardaman 

When I went to find where they stay at night, I saw something They said, "Where 

is Darl? Where did Darl go?" 

They carried her back under the apple tree. 

The barn was still red, but it wasn't a barn now. It was sunk down, and 
the red went swirling up. The barn went swirling up in little red pieces, 
against the sky and the stars so that the stars moved backward. 
And then Cash was still awake. He turned his head from side to side, with 
sweat on his face. 

"Do you want some more water on it, Cash?" Dewey Dell said. 

Cash's leg and foot turned black. We held the lamp and looked at Cash's 

foot and leg where it was black. 

"Your foot looks like a nigger's foot, Cash," I said. "I reckon we'll have 
to bust it off," pa said. "What in the tarnation you put it on there for," Mr 
Gillespie said. 

"I thought it would steady it some," pa said. "I just aimed to help him." 

They got the flat iron and the hammer. Dewey Dell held the lamp. They had 

to hit it hard. And then Cash went to sleep. 

"He's asleep now," I said. "It cant hurt him while he's asleep." 

It just cracked. It wouldn't come off. 

"It'll take the hide, too," Mr Gillespie said. "Why in the tarnation you 
put it on there. Didn't none of you think to grease his leg first?" 
"I just aimed to help him," pa said. "It was Darl put it on." 
"Where is Darl?" they said. 

"Didn't none of you have more sense than that?" Mr Gillespie said. "I'd a 
thought he would, anyway." 

Jewel was lying on his face. His back was red. Dewey Dell put the medicine 
on it. The medicine was made out of butter and soot, to draw out the fire. Then 
his back was black. 

"Does it hurt, Jewel?" I said. "Your back looks like a nigger's, Jewel," I 

said. Cash's foot and leg looked like a nigger's. Then they broke it off. Cash's 

leg bled. 

"You go on back and lay down," Dewey Dell said. "You ought to be asleep." 
"Where is Darl?" they said. 

He is out there under the apple tree with her, lying on her. He is there 



so the cat wont come back. I said, "Are you going to keep the cat away, Darl?" 
The moonlight dappled on him too. On her it was still, but on Darl it 
dappled up and down. 

"You needn't to cry," I said. "Jewel got her out. You needn't to cry, 
Darl." 

The barn is still red. It used to be redder than this. Then it went 

swirling, making the stars run backward without falling. It hurt my heart like 

the train did. 

When I went to find where they stay at night, I saw something that Dewey 
Dell says I mustn't tell nobody 

Darl 

We have been passing the signs for some time now: the drugstores, the clothing 
stores, the patent medicine and the garages and cafes, and the mile-boards 
diminishing, becoming more starkly raccruent: 3 mi. 2 mi. From the crest of a 
hill, as we get into the wagon again, we can see the somke low and flat, 
seemingly unmoving in the unwinded afternoon. 
"Is that it, Darl?" Vardaman says. "Is that Jefferson?" He too has lost 
flesh; like ours, his face has an expression strained, dreamy and gaunt. 
"Yes," I say. He lifts his head and looks at the sky. 

High against it they hand in narrowing circles, like the smoke, with an outward 
semblance of from and purpose, but with no inference of motion, progress or 
retrograde, We mount the wagon again where Cash lies on the box, the Jagged 
shards of cement cracked about his leg. The shabby mules droop rattling and 
clanking down the hill. 

"We'll have to take him to the doctor," pa says. "I reckon it aint no way 
around it." The back of Jewel's shirt, where it touches him, stains slow and 
black with grease. Life was created in the valleys. It blew up onto the hills on 
the old terrors, the old lusts, the old 'despairs. That's why you must walk up 
the hills so you can ride down. 

Dewey Dell sits on the seat, the newspaper package on her lap. When we 
reach the foot of the hill where the road flattens between close walls of trees, 
she begins to look about quietly from one side of the road to the other. At last 
she says, 
"I got to stop." 

Pa looks at her, his shabby profile that of anticipant and disgruntled 
annoyance. He does not check the team. "What for?" 
"I got to go to the bushes," Dewey Dell says. 

Pa does not check the team. "Cant you wait till we get to town? It aint 
over a mile now." 

"Stop," Dewey Dell says. "I got to go to the bushes." 

Pa stops in the middle of the road and we watch Dewey Dell descend, 

carrying the package. She does not look back. 

"Why not leave your cakes here?" I say. "We'll watch them." 

She descends steadily, not looking at us. 

"How would she know where to go if she waited till we get to town?" 
Vardaman says. "Where would you go to do it in town, Dewey Dell?" 
She lifts the package down and turns and disappears among the trees and 
undergrowth. 

"Dont be no longer than you can help," pa says. "We aint got no time to 

waste." She does not answer. After a while we cannot hear her even. "We ought to 



done like Armstid and Gillespie said and sent word to town and had it dug and 
ready," he said. 

"Why didn't you?" I say. "You could have telephoned." 

"What for?" Jewel says. "Who the hell cant dig a hole in the ground?" 

A car comes over the hill. It begins to sound the torn, slowing. It runs 

along the roadside in low gear, the outside wheels in the ditch, and passes us 

and goes on. Vardaman watches it until it is out of sight. 

"How far is it now, Darl?" he says. 

"Not far," I say. 

"We ought to done it," pa says. "I just never wanted to be beholden to 
none except her flesh and blood." 

"Who the hell cant dig a damn hole in the ground?" Jewel says. 

"It aint respectful, talking that way about her grave," pa says. "You all 

dont know what it is. You never pure loved her, none of you." Jewel does not 

answer. He sits a little stiffly erect, his body arched away from his shirt. His 

high-colored jaw juts. 

Dewey Dell returns. We watch her emerge from the bushes, carrying the 
package, and climb into the wagon. She now wears her Sunday dress, her beads, 
her shoes and stockings. 

"I thought I told you to leave them clothes to home," pa says. She does 

not answer, does not look at us. She sets the package in the wagon and gets in. 

The wagon moves on. 

"How many more hills now, Darl?" Vardaman says. 

"Just one," I say. "The next one goes right up into town." 

This hill is red sand, bordered on either hand by negro cabins; against 

the sky ahead the massed telephone lines run, and the clock on the courthouse 

lifts among the trees. In the sand the wheels whisper, as though the very earth 

would hush our entry. We descend as the hill commences to rise. 

We follow the wagon, the whispering wheels, passing the cabins where faces 

come suddenly to the doors, white-eyed. We hear sudden voices, ejaculant. Jewel 

has been looking from side to side; now his head turns forward and I can see his 

ears taking on a still deeper tone of furious red. Three negroes walk beside the 

road ahead of us; ten feet ahead of them a white man walks. When we pass the 

negroes their heads turn suddenly with that expression of shock and instinctive 

outrage. "Great God," one says; "what they got in that wagon?" 

Jewel whirls. "Son of a bitches," he says. As he does so he is abreast of 

the white man, who has paused. It is as though Jewel had gone blind for the 

moment, for it is the white man toward whom he whirls. 

"Darl!" Cash says from the wagon. I grasp at Jewel. The white man has 

fallen back a pace, his face still slack-jawed; then his jaw tightens, claps to. 

Jewel leans above him, his jaw muscles gone white. 

"What did you say?" he says. 

"Here," I say. "He dont mean anything, mister. Jewel," I say. When I touch 
him he swings at the man. I grasp his arm; we struggle. Jewel has never looked 
at me. He is trying to free his arm. When I see the man again he has an open 
knife in his hand. 

"Hold up, mister," I say; "I've got him. Jewel," I say. 

"Thinks because he's a goddamn town fellow," Jewel says, panting, 

wrenching at me. "Son of a bitch," he says. 

The man moves. He begins to edge around me, watching Jewel, the knife low 
against his flank. "Cant no man call me that," he says. Pa has got down, and 
Dewey Dell is holding Jewel, pushing at him. I release him and face the man. 



"Wait," I say. "He dont mean nothing. He's sick; got burned in a fire last 
night, and he aint himself." 

"Fire or no fire," the man says, "cant no man call me that." 
"He thought you said something to him," I say. 
"I never said nothing to him. I never see him before." 
"Fore God," pa says; "Fore God." 

"I know," I say. "He never meant anything. He'll take it back." 
"Let him take it back, then." 
"Put up your knife, and he will." 

The man looks at me. He looks at Jewel. Jewel is quiet now. 
"Put up your knife," I say. The man shuts the knife. 
"Fore God," pa says. "Fore God." 

"Tell him you didn't mean anything, Jewel," I say. "I thought he said 

something," Jewel says. "Just because he's--" 

"Hush," I say. "Tell him you didn't mean it." 

"I didn't mean it," Jewel says. 

"He better not," the man says. "Calling me a-" 

"Do you think he's afraid to call you that?" I say. 

The man looks at me. "I never said that," he said. 

"Dont think it, neither," Jewel says. 

"Shut up," I say. "Come on. Drive on, pa." 

The wagon moves. The man stands watching us. Jewel does not look back. 
"Jewel would a whipped him," Vardaman says. 
We approach the crest, where the street runs, where cars go back and 
forth; the mules haul the wagon up and onto the crest and the street. Pa stops 
them. The street runs on ahead, where the square opens and the monument stands 
before the courthouse. We mount again while the heads turn with that expression 
which we know; save Jewel. He does not get on, even though the wagon has started 
again. "Get in, Jewel," I say. "Come on. Let's get away from here." But he does 
not get in. Instead he sets his foot on the turning hub of the rear wheel, one 
hand grasping the stanchion, and with the hub turning smoothly under his sole he 
lifts the other foot and squats there, staring straight ahead, motionless, lean, 
wooden-backed, as though carved squatting out of the lean wood. 



Cash 

It wasn't nothing else to do. It was either send him to Jackson, or have 
Gillespie sue us, because he knowed some way that Darl set fire to it. I dont 
know how he knowed, but he did. Vardaman see him do it, but he swore he never 
told nobody but Dewey Dell and that she told him not to tell nobody. But 
Gillespie knowed it. But he would a suspicioned it sooner or later. He could 
have done it that night just watching the way Darl acted. 
And so pa said, "I reckon there aint nothing else to do," and Jewel said, 
"You want to fix him now?" 
"Fix him?" pa said. 

"Catch him and tie him up," Jewel said. "Goddamn it; do you want to wait 

until he sets fire to the goddamn team and wagon?" 

But there wasn't no use in that. "There aint no use in that," I said. "We 

can wait till she is underground." A fellow that's going to spend the rest of 

his life locked up, he ought to be let to have what pleasure he can have before 

he goes. 

"I reckon he ought to be there," pa says. "God knows, it's a trial on me. 



Seems like it aint no end to bad luck when once it starts." 

Sometimes I aint so sho who's got ere a right to say when a man is crazy 

and when he aint. Sometimes I think it aint none of us pure crazy and aint none 

of us pure sane until the balance of us talks him that-a-Way. It's like it aint 

so much what a fellow does, but it's the way the majority of folks is looking at 

him when he does it. 

Because Jewel is too hard on him. Of course it was Jewel's horse was 
traded to get her that nigh to town, and in a sense it was the value of his 
horse Darl tried to burn up. But I thought more than once before we crossed the 
river and after, how it would be God's blessing if He did take her outen our 
hands and get shut of her in some clean way, and it seemed to me that when Jewel 
worked so to get her outen the river, he was going against God in a way, and 
then when Darl seen that it looked like one of us would have to do something, I 
can almost believe he done right in a way. But I dont reckon nothing excuses 
setting fire to a man's barn and endangering his stock and destroying his 
property. That's how I reckon a man is crazy. That's how he cant see eye to eye 
with other folks. And I reckon they aint nothing else to do with him but what 
the most folks says is right. 

But it's a shame, in a way. Folks seems to get away from the olden right 
teaching that says to drive the nails down and trim the edges well always Like 
it was for your own use and comfort you were making it. It's like some folks has 
the smooth, pretty boards to build a courthouse with and others dont have no 
more than rough lumber fitten to build a chicken coop. But it's better to build 
a tight chicken coop than a shoddy courthouse, and when they both build shoddy 
or build well, neither because it's one or toothier is going to make a man feel 
the better nor the worse. 

So we went up the street, toward the square, and he said, "We better take 
Cash to the doctor first. We can leave him there and come back for him." That's 
it. It's because me and him was born close together, and it nigh ten years 
before Jewel and Dewey Dell and Vardaman begun to come along. I feel kin to 
them, all right, but I dont know. And me being the oldest, and thinking already 
the very thing that he done: I dont know. 
Pa was looking at me, then at him, mumbling his mouth. 
"Go on," I said. "We'll get it done first." 
"She would want us all there," pa says. 

"Let's take Cash to the doctor first," Darl said. "She'll Wait. She's 
already waited nine days." 

"You all dont know," pa says. "The somebody you was young with and you 
growed old in her and she growed old in you, seeing the old coming on and it was 
the one somebody you could hear say it dont matter and know it was the truth 
outen the hard world and all a man's grief and trials. You all dont know." 
"We got the digging to do, too," I said. 

"Armstid and Gillespie both told you to send word ahead," Darl said. "Dont 
you want to go to Peabody's now, Cash?" 

"Go on," I said. "It feels right easy now. It's best to get things done in 
the right place." 

"If it was just dug," pa says. "We forgot our spade, too." 

"Yes," Darl said. "I'll go to the hardware store. We'll have to buy one." 

"It'll cost money," pa says. 

"Do you begrudge her it?" Darl says. 

"Go on and get a spade," Jewel said. "Here. Give me the money." 
But pa didn't stop. "I reckon we can get a spade," he said. "I reckon 



there are Christians here." So Darl set still and we went on, with Jewel 

squatting on the tail-gate, watching the back of Darl's head. He looked like one 

of these bull dogs, one of these dogs that dont bark none, squatting against the 

rope, watching the thing he was waiting to jump at. 

He set that way all the time we was in front of Mrs Bundren's house, 

hearing the music, watching the back of Darl's head with them hard white eyes of 

hisn. 

The music was playing in the house. It was one of them graphophones. It 
was natural as a music-band. 

"Do you want to go to Peabody's?" Darl said. "They can wait here and tell 
pa, and l'1 1 drive you to Peabody's and come back for them." 
"No," I said. It was better to get her underground, now we was this close, 
just waiting until pa borrowed the shovel. He drove along the street until we 
could hear the music. 

"Maybe they got one here," he said. He pulled up at Mrs Bundren's. It was 

like he knowed. Sometimes I think that if a working man could see work as far 

ahead as a lazy man can see laziness. So he stopped there like he knowed, before 

that little new house, where the music was. We waited there, hearing it. I 

believe I could have dickered Suratt down to five dollars on that one of his. 

It's a comfortable thing, music is. "Maybe they got one here," pa says. 

"You want Jewel to go," Darl says, "or do you reckon I better?" 

"I reckon I better," pa says. He got down and went up the path and around 

the house to the back. The music stopped, then it started again. 

"He'll get it, too," Darl said. 

"Ay," I said. It was just like he knowed, like he could see through the 
walls and into the next ten minutes. 

Only it was more than ten minutes. The music stopped and never commenced 
again for a good spell, where her and pa was talking at the back. We waited in 
the wagon. 

"You let me take you back to Peabody's," Darl said. 
"No," I said. "We'll get her underground." 

"If he ever gets back," Jewel said. He begun to cuss. He started to get 
down from the wagon. "I'm going," he said. 

Then we saw pa coming back. He had two spades, coming around the house. He 

laid them in the wagon and got in and we went on. The music never started again. 

Pa was looking back at the house. He kind of lifted his hand a little and I saw 

the shade pulled back a little at the window and her face in it. 

But the curiousest thing was Dewey Dell. It surprised me. I see all the 

while how folks could say he was queer, but that was the very reason couldn't 

nobody hold it personal. It was like he was outside of it too, same as you, and 

getting mad at it would be kind of like getting mad at a mud-puddle that 

splashed you when you stepped in it. And then I always kind of had a idea that 

him and Dewey Dell kind of knowed things betwixt them. If I'd a said it was ere 

a one of us she liked better than ere a other, I'd a said it was Darl. But when 

we got it filled and covered and drove out the gate and turned into the lane 

where them fellows was waiting, when they come out and come on him and he jerked 

back, it was Dewey Dell that was on him before even Jewel could get at him. And 

then I believed I knowed how Gillespie knowed about how his barn taken fire. 

She hadn't said a word, hadn't even looked at him, but when them fellows 

told him what they wanted and that they had come to get him and he throwed back, 

she jumped on him like a wild cat so that one of the fellows had to quit and 

hold her and her scratching and clawing at him Like a wild cat, while the other 



one and pa and Jewel throwed Darl down and held him lying on his back, looking 
up at me. 

"I thought you would have told me," he said. "I never thought you wouldn't 
have." 

"Darl," I said. But he fought again, him and Jewel and the fellow, and the 
other one holding Dewey Dell and Vardaman yelling and Jewel saying, 
"Kill him. Kill the son of a bitch." 

It was bad so. It was bad. A fellow cant get away from a shoddy job. He 

cant do it. I tried to tell him, but he just said, "I thought you'd a told me. 

It's not that I," he said, then he begun to laugh. The other fellow pulled Jewel 

off of him and he sat there on the ground, laughing. 

I tried to tell him. If I could have just moved, even set up. But I tried 

to tell him, and he quit laughing, looking up at me. 

"Do you want me to go?" he said. 

"It'll be better for you," I said. "Down there it'll be quiet, with none 
of the bothering and such. It'll be better for you, Darl," I said. 
"Better," he said. He begun to laugh again. "Better," he said. He couldn't 
hardly say it for laughing. He sat on the ground and us watching him, laughing 
and laughing. It was bad. It was bad so. I be durn if I could see anything to 
laugh at. Because there just aint nothing justifies the deliberate destruction 
of what a man has built with his own sweat and stored the fruit of his sweat 
into. 

But I aint so sho that ere a man has the right to say what is crazy and 
what aint. It's like there was a fellow in every man that's done a-past the 
sanity or the insanity, that watches the sane and the insane doings of that man 
with the same horror and the same astonishment. 



Peabody 

I said, "I reckon a man in a tight might let Bill Varner patch him up like a 

damn mule, but I be damned if the man that'd let Anse Bundren treat him with raw 

cement aint got more spare legs than I have." 

"They just aimed to ease hit some," he said. 

"Aimed, hell," I said. "What in hell did Armstid mean by even letting them 
put you on that wagon again?" 

"Hit was gittin right noticeable," he said. "We never had time to wait." I 

just looked at him. "Hit never bothered me none," he said. 

"Dont you lie there and try to tell me you rode six days on a wagon 

without springs, with a broken leg and it never bothered you." 

"It never bothered me much," he said. 

"You mean, it never bothered Anse much," I said. "No more than it bothered 
him to throw that poor devil down in the public street and handcuff him like a 
damn murderer. Dont tell me. And dont tell me it aint going to bother you to 
lose sixty-odd square inches of skin to get that concrete off. And dont tell me 
it aint going to bother you to have to limp around on one short leg for the 
balance of your life--if you walk at all again. Concrete," I said. "God Amighty, 
why didn't Anse carry you to the nearest sawmill and stick your leg in the saw? 
That would have cured it. Then you all could have stuck his head into the saw 
and cured a whole family . . . Where is Anse, anyway? What's lie up to now?" 
"He's takin back them spades he borrowed," he said. 
"That's right," I said. "Of course he'd have to borrow a spade to bury his 
wife with. Unless he could borrow a hole in the ground. Too bad you all didn't 



put him in it too . . . Does that hurt?" 

"Not to speak of," he said, and the sweat big as marbles running down his 
face and his face about the color of blotting paper. 
"Course not," I said. "About next summer you can hobble around fine on 
this leg. Then it wont bother you, not to speak of ... If you had anything you 
could call luck, you might say it was lucky this is the same leg you broke 
before," I said. 

"Hit's what paw says," he said. 



MacGowan 

It happened I am back of the prescription case, pouring up some chocolate sauce, 

when Jody comes back and says, "Say, Skeet, there's a woman up front that wants 

to see the doctor and when I said What doctor you want to see, she said she 

wants to see the doctor that works here and when I said There aint any doctor 

works here, she just stood there, looking back this way." 

"What kind of a woman is it?" I says. "Tell her to go upstairs to Alford's 

office." 

"Country woman," he says. 

"Send her to the courthouse," I says. "Tell her all the doctors have gone 
to Memphis to a Barbers' Convention." 

"All right," he says, going away. "She looks pretty good for a country 
girl," he says. 

"Wait," I says. He waited and I went and peeped through the crack. But I 
couldn't tell nothing except she had a good leg against the light. "Is she 
young, you say?" I says. 

"She looks like a pretty hot mamma, for a country girl," he says. 

"Take this," I says, giving him the chocolate. I took off my apron and 

went up there. She looked pretty good. One of them black eyed ones that look 

like she'd as soon put a knife in you as not if you two-timed her. She looked 

pretty good. There wasn't nobody else in the store; it was dinner time. 

"What can I do for you?" I says. 

"Are you the doctor?" she says. 

"Sure," I says. She quit looking at me and was kind of looking around. 
"Can we go back yonder?" she says. 

It was just a quarter past twelve, but I went and told Jody to kind of watch out 
and whistle if the old man come in sight, because he never got back before one. 
"You better lay off of that," Jody says. "He'll fire your stern out of 
here so quick you cant wink." 

"He dont never get back before one," I says. "You can see him go into the 

postoffice. You keep your eye peeled, now, and give me a whistle." 

"What you going to do?" he says. 

"You keep your eye out. I'll tell you later." 

"Aint you going to give me no seconds on it?" he says. 

"What the hell do you think this is?" I says; "a studfarm? You watch out 

for him. I'm going into conference." 

So I go on to the back. I stopped at the glass and smoothed my hair, then 

I went behind the prescription case, where she was waiting. She is looking at 

the medicine cabinet, then she looks at me. 

"Now, madam," I says; "what is your trouble?" 

"It's the female trouble," she says, watching me. "I got the money," she 

says. 



"Ah," I says. "Have you got female troubles or do you want female 
troubles? If so, you come to the right doctor." Them country people. Half the 
time they dont know what they want, and the balance of the time they cant tell 
it to you. The clock said twenty past twelve. 
"No," she says. 
"No which?" I says. 

"I aint had it," she says. "That's it." She looked at me. "I got the 
money," she says. 

So I knew what she was talking about. 

"Oh," I says. "You got something in your belly you wish you didn't have." 

She looks at me. "You wish you had a little more or a little less, huh?" 

"I got the money," she says. "He said I could git something at the 

drugstore for hit," 

"Who said so?" I says. 

"He did," she says, looking at me. 

"You dont want to call no names," I says. "The one that put the acorn in 
your belly? He the one that told you?" She dont say nothing. "You aint married, 
are you?" I says. I never saw no ring. But Like as not, they aint heard yet out 
there that they use rings. 

"I got the money," she says. She showed it to me, tied up in her 

handkerchief: a ten spot. 

"I'll swear you have," I says. "He give it to you?" 

"Yes," she says. 

"Which one?" I says. She looks at me. "Which one of them give it to you?" 
"It aint but one," she says. She looks at me. 

"Go on," I says. She dont say nothing. The trouble about the cellar is, it 
aint but one way out and that's back up the inside stairs. The clock says 
twenty-five to one. "A pretty girl like you," I says. 

She looks at me. She begins to tie the money back up in the handkerchief. 
"Excuse me a minute," I says. I go around the prescription case. "Did you hear 
about that fellow sprained his ear?" I says. "After that he couldn't even hear a 
belch." 

"You better get her out from back there before the old man comes," Jody 
says. 

"If you'll stay up there in front where he pays you to stay, he wont catch 
nobody but me," I says. 

He goes on, slow, toward the front "What you doing to her, Skeet?" he 
says. 

"I cant tell you," I says. 'It wouldn't be ethical. You go on up there and 
watch." 

"Say, Skeet," he says. 

"Ah, go on," I says. "I aint doing nothing but filling a prescription." 
"He may not do nothing about that woman back there, but if he finds you 
monkeying with that prescription case, he'll kick your stern clean down them 
cellar stairs." 

"My stern has been kicked by bigger bastards than him," I says. "Go back 
and watch out for him, now." 

So I come back. The clock said fifteen to one. She is tying the money in 
the handkerchief. "You aint the doctor," she says. 
"Sure I am," I says. She watches me. "Is it because I look too young, or 
am I too handsome?" I says. "We used to have a bunch of old water-jointed 
doctors here," I says; "Jefferson used to be a kind of Old Doctors' Home for 



them. But business started falling off and folks stayed so well until one day 
they found out that the women wouldn't never get sick at all. So they run all 
the old doctors out and got us young good-looking ones that the women would like 
and then the women begun to get sick again and so business picked up. They're 
doing that all over the country. Hadn't you heard about it? Maybe it's because 
you aint never needed a doctor." 
"I need one now," she says. 

"And you come to the right one," I says. "I already told you that." 

"Have you got something for it?" she says. "I got the money." 

"Well," I says, "of course a doctor has to learn all sorts of things while 

he's learning to roll calomel; he cant help himself. But I dont know about your 

trouble." 

"He told me I could get something. He told me I could get it at the 
drugstore." 

"Did he tell you the name of it?" I says. "You better go back and ask 
him." 

She quit looking at me, kind of turning the handkerchief in her hands. "I 
got to do something," she says. 

"How bad do you want to do something?" I says. She looks at me. "Of 
course, a doctor learns all sorts of things folks dont think he knows. But he 
aint supposed to tell all he knows. It's against the law." 
Up front Jody says, "Skeet." 

"Excuse me a minute," I says. I went up front. "Do you see him?" I says. 

"Aint you done yet?" he says. "Maybe you better come up here and watch and let 

me do that consulting." 

"Maybe you'll lay a egg," I says. I come back. She is looking at me. "Of 
course you realise that I could be put in the penitentiary for doing what you 
want," I says. "I would lose my license and then I'd have to go to work. You 
realise that?" 

"I aint got but ten dollars," she says. "I could bring the rest next 
month, maybe." 

"Pooh," I says, "ten dollars? You see, I cant put no price on my knowledge 

and skill. Certainly not for no little paltry sawbuck." 

She looks at me. She dont even blink. "What you want, then?" 

The clock said four to one. So I decided I better get her out. "You guess 

three times and then I'll show you," I says. 

She dont even blink her eyes. 'I got to do something," she says. She looks 
behind her and around, then she looks toward the front. "Gimme the medicine 
first," she says. 

"You mean, you're ready to right now?" I says. "Here?" 
"Gimme the medicine first," she says. 

So I took a graduated glass and kind of turned my back to her and picked out a 
bottle that looked all right, because a man that would keep poison setting 
around in a unlabelled bottle ought to be in jail, anyway. It smelled like 
turpentine. I poured some into the glass and give it to her. She smelled it, 
looking at me across the glass. 
"Hit smells like turpentine," she says. 

"Sure," I says. "That's just the beginning of the treatment. You come back 
at ten oclock tonight and I'll give you the rest of it and perform the 
operation." 

"Operation?" she says. 

"It wont hurt you. You've had the same operation before. Ever hear about 



the hair of the dog?" 

She looks at me. "Will it work?" she says. 
"Sure it'll work. If you come back and get it." 

So she drunk whatever it was without batting a eye, and went out. I went 
up front. 

"Didn't you get it?" Jody says. 
"Get what?" I says. 

"Ah, come on," he says. "I aint going to try to beat your time." 

"Oh, her," I says. "She just wanted a little medicine. She's got a bad 

case of dysentery and she's a little ashamed about mentioning it with a stranger 

there." 

It was my night, anyway, so I helped the old bastard check up and I got 

his hat on him and got him out of the store by eight-thirty. I went as far as 

the corner with him and watched him until he passed under two street lamps and 

went on out of sight. Then I come back to the store and waited until nine-thirty 

and turned out the front lights and locked the door and left just one light 

burning at the back, and I went back and put some talcum powder into six 

capsules and land of cleared up the cellar and then I was all ready. 

She come in just at ten, before the clock had done striking. I let her in 

and she come in, walking fast. I looked out the door, but there wasn't nobody 

but a boy in overalls sitting on the curb. "You want something?" I says. He 

never said nothing, just looking at me. I locked the door and turned off the 

light and went on back. She was waiting. She didn't look at me now. 

"Where is it?" she said. 

I gave her the box of capsules. She held the box in her hand, looking at 
the capsules. 

"Are you sure it'll work?" she says. 

"Sure," I says. "When you take the rest of the treatment." 

"Where do I take it?" she says. 

"Down in the cellar," I says. 



Vardaman 

Now it is wider and lighter, but the stores are dark because they have all gone 
home. The stores are dark, but the lights pass on the windows when we pass. The 
lights are in the trees around the courthouse. They roost in the trees, but the 
courthouse is dark. The clock on it looks four ways, because it is not dark. The 
moon is not dark too. Not very dark. Darl he went to Jackson is my brother Darl 
is my brother Only it was over that way, shining on the track. 
"Let's go that way, Dewey Dell," I say. 

"What for?" Dewey Dell says. The track went shining around the window, it 
red on the track. But she said he would not sell it to the town boys. "But it 
will be there Christmas," Dewey Dell says. "You'll have to wait till then, when 
he brings it back." 

Darl went to Jackson. Lots of people didn't go to Jackson. Darl is my 
brother. My brother is going to Jackson 

While we walk the lights go around, roosting in the trees. On all sides it 
is the same. They go around the courthouse and then you cannot see them. But you 
can see them in the black windows beyond. They have all gone home to bed except 
me and Dewey Dell. 

Going on the train to Jackson. My brother 

There is a light in the store, far back. In the window are two big glasses 



of soda water, red and green. Two men could not drink them. Two mules could not. 
Two cows could not. Darl 

A man comes to the door. He looks at Dewey Dell. 

"You wait out here," Dewey Dell says. 

"Why cant I come in?" I say. "I want to come in, too." 

"You wait out here," she says. 

"All right," I say. 

Dewey Dell goes in. 

Darl is my brother. Darl went crazy 

The walk is harder than sitting on the ground. He is in the open door. He 

looks at me. "You want something?" he says. His head is slick. Jewel's head is 

slick sometimes. Cash's head is not slick. Darl he went to Jackson my brother 

Darl In the street he ate a banana. Wouldn't you rather have bananas? Dewey 

Dell said. You wait till Christmas. It'll be there then. Then you can see it. 

So we are going to have some bananas. We are going to have a bag full, me and 

Dewey Dell. He locks the door. Dewey Dell is inside. Then the light winks out. 

He went to Jackson. He went crazy and went to Jackson both. Lots of 

people didn't go crazy. Pa and Cash and Jewel and Dewey Dell and me didn't go 

crazy. We never did go crazy. We didn't go to Jackson either. Darl 

I hear the cow a long time, clopping on the street. Then she comes 

into the square. She goes across the square, her head down clopping . She 

lows. There was nothing in the square before she lowed, but it wasn't empty. Now 

it is empty after she lowed. She goes on, clopping . She lows. My brother 

is Darl. He went to Jackson on the train. He didn't go on the train to go 

crazy. He went crazy in our wagon. Darl She has been in there a long time. And 

the cow is gone too. A long time. She has been in there longer than the cow was. 

But not as long as empty. Darl is my brother. My brother Darl 

Dewey Dell comes out. She looks at me. 

"Let's go around that way now," I say. 

She looks at me. "It aint going to work," she says. "That son of a bitch." 
"What aint going to work, Dewey Dell?" 

"I just know it wont," she says. She is not looking at anything. "I just 
know it." 

"Let's go that way," I say. 

"We got to go back to the hotel. It's late. We got to slip back in." 

"Cant we go by and see, anyway?" 

"Hadn't you rather have bananas? Hadn't you rather?" 

"All right." My brother he went crazy and he went to Jackson too. Jackson 

is further away than crazy 

"It wont work," Dewey Dell says. "I just know it wont." 
"What wont work?" I say. He had to get on the train to go to Jackson. I 
have not been on the train, but Darl has been on the train. Darl. Darl is my 
brother. Darl. Darl 



Darl 

Darl has gone to Jackson. They put him on the train, laughing, down the long car 
laughing, the heads turning like the heads of owls when he passed. "What are you 
laughing at?" I said. 
"Yes yes yes yes yes." 

Two men put him on the train. They wore mismatched coats, bulging behind 
over their right hip pockets. Their necks were shaved to a hairline, as though 



the recent and simultaneous barbers had had a chalk-line like Cash's. "Is it the 
pistols you're laughing at?" I said. "Why do you laugh?" I said. "Is it because 
you hate the sound of laughing?" 

They pulled two seats together so Darl could sit by the window to laugh. 
One of them sat beside him, the other sat on the seat facing him, riding 
backward. One of them had to ride backward because the state's money has a face 
to each backside and a backside to each face, and they are riding on the state's 
money which is incest. A nickel has a woman on one side and a buffalo on the 
other; two faces and no back. I dont know what that is. Darl had a little spyglass 
he got in France at the war. In it it had a woman and a pig with two backs 
and no face. I know what that is. "Is that why you are laughing, Darl?" 
"Yes yes yes yes yes yes." 

The wagon stands on the square, hitched, the mules motionless, the reins wrapped 
about the seat-spring, the back of the wagon toward the courthouse. It looks no 
different from a hundred other wagons there; Jewel standing beside it and 
looking up the street like any other man in town that day, yet there is 
something different, distinctive. There is about it that un-mistakable air of 
definite and imminent departure that trains have, perhaps due to the fact that 
Dewey Dell and Vardaman on the seat and Cash on a pallet in the wagon bed are 
eating bananas from a paper bag. "Is that why you are laughing, Darl?" 
Darl is our brother, our brother Darl. Our brother Darl in a cage in 
Jackson where, his grimed hands lying light in the quiet interstices, looking 
out he foams. 

"Yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes." 



Dewey Dell 

When he saw the money I said, "It's not my money, it doesn't belong to me." 
"Whose is it, then?" 

"It's Cora Tull's money. It's Mrs Tull's. I sold the cakes for it." 
"Ten dollars for two cakes?" 
"Dont you touch it. It's not mine." 

"You never had them cakes. It's a lie. It was them Sunday clothes you had 
in that package." 

"Dont you touch it! If you take it you are a thief." 

"My own daughter accuses me of being a thief. My own daughter." 

"Pa. Pa." 

"I have fed you and sheltered you. I give you love and care, yet my own 
daughter, the daughter of nay dead wife, calls me a thief over her mother's 
grave." 

"It's not mine, I tell you. If it was, God knows you could have it." 
"Where did you get ten dollars?" 
"Pa. Pa." 

"You wont tell me. Did you come by it so shameful you dare not?" 
"It's not mine, I tell you. Cant you understand it's not mine?" 
"It's not like I wouldn't pay it back. But she calls her own father a 
thief." 

"I cant, I tell you. I tell you it's not my money. God knows you could 
have it." 

"I wouldn't take it. My own born daughter that has et my food for 
seventeen years, begrudges me the loan of ten dollars." 
"It's not mine. I cant." 



"Whose is it, then?" 

"It was give to me. To buy something with." 
"To buy what with?" 
"Pa. Pa." 

"It's just a loan. God knows, I hate for my blooden children to reproach 

me. But I give them what was mine without stint. Cheerful I give them, without 

stint. And now they deny me. Addie. It was lucky for you you died, Addie." 

"Pa. Pa." 

"God knows it is." 

He took the money and went out. 



Cash 

So when we stopped there to borrow the shovels we heard the graphophone playing 
in the house, and so when we got done with the shovels pa says, "I reckon I 
better take them back." 

So we went back to the house. "We better take Cash on to Peabody's," Jewel 
said. 

"It wont take but a minute," pa said. He got down from the wagon. The 
music was not playing now. 

"Let Vardaman do it," Jewel said. "He can do it in half the time you can. 
Or here, you let me--" 

"I reckon I better do it," pa says. "Long as it was me that borrowed 
them." 

So we set in the wagon, but the music wasn't playing now. I reckon it's a 
good thing we aint got ere a one of them. I reckon I wouldn't never get no work 
done a-tall for listening to it. I dont know if a little music aint about the 
nicest thing a fellow can have. Seems like when he comes in tired of a night, it 
aint nothing could rest him like having a little music played and him resting. I 
have see them that shuts up like a hand-grip, with a handle and all, so a fellow 
can carry it with him wherever he wants. 

"What you reckon he's doing?" Jewel says. "I could a toted them shovels 
back and forth ten times by now." 

"Let him take his time," I said. "He aint as spry as you, remember." 
"Why didn't he let me take them back, then? We got to get your leg fixed 
up so we can start home tomorrow." 

"We got plenty of time," I said. "I wonder what them machines costs on the 
installment." 

"Installment of what?" Jewel said. "What you got to buy it with?" 
"A fellow cant tell," I said. "I could a bought that one from Suratt for 
five dollars, I believe." 

And so pa come back and we went to Peabody's. While we was there pa said 

he was going to the barbershop and get a shave. And so that night he said he had 

some business to tend to, kind of looking away from us while he said it, with 

his hair combed wet and slick and smelling sweet with perfume, but I said leave 

him be; I wouldn't mind hearing a little more of that music myself. 

And so next morning he was gone again, then he come back and told us to 

get hitched up and ready to take out and he would meet us and when they was gone 

he said, 

"I dont reckon you got no more money." 

"Peabody just give me enough to pay the hotel with," I said. "We dont need 
nothing else, do we?" 



"No," pa said; "no. We dont need nothing." He stood there, not looking at 
me. 

"If it is something we got to have, I reckon maybe Peabody," I said. 
"No," he said; "it aint nothing else. You all wait for me at the corner." 
So Jewel got the team and come for me and they fixed me a pallet in the 
wagon and we drove across the square to the corner where pa said, and we was 
waiting there in the wagon, with Dewey Dell and Vardaman eating bananas, when we 
see them coming up the street. Pa was coming along with that kind of daresome 
and hangdog look all at once like when he has been up to something he knows ma 
aint going to like, carrying a grip in his hand, and Jewel says, 
"Who's that?" 

Then we see it wasn't the grip that made him look different; it was his face, 
and Jewel says, "He got them teeth." 

It was a fact. It made him look a foot taller, kind of holding his head 
up, hangdog and proud too, and then we see her behind him, carrying the other 
grip--a kind of duck-shaped woman all dressed up, with them kind of hard-looking 
pop eyes like she was daring ere a man to say nothing. And there we set watching 
them, with Dewey Dell's and Vardaman's mouth half open and half-et bananas in 
their hands and her coming around from behind pa, looking at us like she dared 
ere a man. And then I see that the grip she was carrying was one of them little 
graphophones. It was for a fact, all shut up as pretty as a picture, and everytime 
a new record would come from the mail order and us setting in the house in 
the winter, listening to it, I would think what a shame Darl couldn't be to 
enjoy it too. But it is better so for him. This world is not his world; this 
life his life. 

"It's Cash and Jewel and Vardaman and Dewey Dell," pa says, kind of 
hangdog and proud too, with his teeth and all, even if he wouldn't look at us. 
"Meet Mrs Bundren," he says. 

 APRIL SEVENTH, 1928


Through the fence, between the curling flower spaces, I could see them
hitting. They were coming toward where the flag was and I went along the
fence. Luster was hunting in the grass by the flower tree. They took the
flag out, and they were hitting. Then they put the flag back and they
went to the table, and he hit and the other hit. Then they went on, and
I went along the fence. Luster came away from the flower tree and we
went along the fence and they stopped and we stopped and I looked
through the fence while Luster was hunting in the grass.

Here, caddie. He hit. They went away across the pasture. I held to the
fence and watched them going away.

Listen at you, now. Luster said. Aint you something, thirty-three
years old, going on that way. After I done went all the way to town to
buy you that cake. Hush up that moaning. Aint you going to help me find
that quarter so I can go to the show tonight.

They were hitting little, across the pasture. I went back along the
fence to where the flag was. It flapped on the bright grass and the
trees.

Come on. Luster said. We done looked there. They aint no more coming
right now. Lets go down to the branch and find that quarter before them
niggers finds it.

It was red, flapping on the pasture. Then there was a bird slanting and
tilting on it. Luster threw. The flag flapped on the bright grass and
the trees. I held to the fence.

Shut up that moaning, Luster said. I cant make them come if they aint
coming, can I. If you dont hush up, mammy aint going to have no birthday
for you. If you dont hush, you know what I going to do. I going to eat
that cake all up. Eat them candles, too. Eat all them thirty-three
candles. Come on, lets go down to the branch. I got to find my quarter.
Maybe we can find one of they balls. Here. Here they is. Way over
yonder. See. He came to the fence and pointed his arm. See them. They
aint coming back here no more. Come on.

We went along the fence and came to the garden fence, where our shadows
were. My shadow was higher than Lusters on the fence. We came to the
broken place and went through it.

Wait a minute. Luster said. You snagged on that nail again. Cant you
never crawl through here without snagging on that nail.

_Caddy uncaught me and we crawled through. Uncle Maury said to not let
anybody see us, so we better stoop over, Caddy said. Stoop over, Benjy.
Like this, see. We stooped over and crossed the garden, where the
flowers rasped and rattled against us. The ground was hard. We climbed
the fence, where the pigs were grunting and snuffing. I expect theyre
sorry because one of them got killed today, Caddy said. The ground was
hard, churned and knotted._

_Keep your hands in your pockets, Caddy said. Or theyll get froze. You
dont want your hands froze on Christmas, do you._

Its too cold out there. Versh said. You dont want to go out doors.

What is it now. Mother said.

He want to go out doors. Versh said.

Let him go. Uncle Maury said.

Its too cold. Mother said. Hed better stay in. Benjamin. Stop that,
now.

It wont hurt him. Uncle Maury said.

You, Benjamin. Mother said. If you dont be good, youll have to go to
the kitchen.

Mammy say keep him out the kitchen today. Versh said. She say she got
all that cooking to get done.

Let him go, Caroline. Uncle Maury said. Youll worry yourself sick
over him.

I know it. Mother said. Its a judgment on me. I sometimes wonder

I know, I know. Uncle Maury said. You must keep your strength up.
Ill make you a toddy.

It just upsets me that much more. Mother said. Dont you know it
does.

Youll feel better. Uncle Maury said. Wrap him up good, boy, and take
him out for a while.

Uncle Maury went away. Versh went away.

Please hush. Mother said. Were trying to get you out as fast as we
can. I dont want you to get sick.

Versh put my overshoes and overcoat on and we took my cap and went out.
Uncle Maury was putting the bottle away in the sideboard in the
dining-room.

Keep him out about half an hour, boy. Uncle Maury said. Keep him in
the yard, now.

Yes, sir. Versh said. We dont never let him get off the place.

We went out doors. The sun was cold and bright.

Where you heading for. Versh said. You dont think you going to town,
does you. We went through the rattling leaves. The gate was cold. You
better keep them hands in your pockets. Versh said, You get them froze
onto that gate, then what you do. Whynt you wait for them in the
house. He put my hands into my pockets. I could hear him rattling in
the leaves. I could smell the cold. The gate was cold.

Here some hickeynuts. Whooey. Git up that tree. Look here at this
squirl, Benjy.

I couldnt feel the gate at all, but I could smell the bright cold.

You better put them hands back in your pockets.

Caddy was walking. Then she was running, her book-satchel swinging and
jouncing behind her.

Hello, Benjy. Caddy said. She opened the gate and came in and stooped
down. Caddy smelled like leaves. Did you come to meet me. she said.
Did you come to meet Caddy. What did you let him get his hands so cold
for, Versh.

I told him to keep them in his pockets. Versh said. Holding onto that
ahun gate.

Did you come to meet Caddy. she said, rubbing my hands. What is it.
What are you trying to tell Caddy. Caddy smelled like trees and like
when she says we were asleep.

_What are you moaning about, Luster said. You can watch them again when
we get to the branch. Here. Heres you a jimson weed. He gave me the
flower. We went through the fence, into the lot._

What is it. Caddy said. What are you trying to tell Caddy. Did they
send him out, Versh.

Couldnt keep him in. Versh said. He kept on until they let him go
and he come right straight down here, looking through the gate.

What is it. Caddy said. Did you think it would be Christmas when I
came home from school. Is that what you thought. Christmas is the day
after tomorrow. Santy Claus, Benjy. Santy Claus. Come on, lets run to
the house and get warm. She took my hand and we ran through the bright
rustling leaves. We ran up the steps and out of the bright cold, into
the dark cold. Uncle Maury was putting the bottle back in the sideboard.
He called Caddy. Caddy said,

Take him in to the fire, Versh. Go with Versh. she said. Ill come in
a minute.

We went to the fire. Mother said,

Is he cold, Versh.

Nome. Versh said.

Take his overcoat and overshoes off. Mother said. How many times do I
have to tell you not to bring him into the house with his overshoes on.

Yessum. Versh said. Hold still, now. He took my overshoes off and
unbuttoned my coat. Caddy said,

Wait, Versh. Cant he go out again, Mother. I want him to go with me.

Youd better leave him here. Uncle Maury said. Hes been out enough
today.

I think youd both better stay in. Mother said. Its getting colder,
Dilsey says.

Oh, Mother. Caddy said.

Nonsense. Uncle Maury said. Shes been in school all day. She needs
the fresh air. Run along, Candace.

Let him go, Mother. Caddy said. Please. You know hell cry.

Then why did you mention it before him. Mother said. Why did you come
in here. To give him some excuse to worry me again. Youve been out
enough today. I think youd better sit down here and play with him.

Let them go, Caroline. Uncle Maury said. A little cold wont hurt
them. Remember, youve got to keep your strength up.

I know. Mother said. Nobody knows how I dread Christmas. Nobody
knows. I am not one of those women who can stand things. I wish for
Jasons and the childrens sakes I was stronger.

You must do the best you can and not let them worry you. Uncle Maury
said. Run along, you two. But dont stay out long, now. Your mother will
worry.

Yes, sir. Caddy said. Come on, Benjy. Were going out doors again.
She buttoned my coat and we went toward the door.

Are you going to take that baby out without his overshoes. Mother
said. Do you want to make him sick, with the house full of company.

I forgot. Caddy said. I thought he had them on.

We went back. You must think. Mother said. _Hold still now_ Versh
said. He put my overshoes on. Someday Ill be gone, and youll have to
think for him. _Now stomp_ Versh said. Come here and kiss Mother,
Benjamin.

Caddy took me to Mothers chair and Mother took my face in her hands and
then she held me against her.

My poor baby. she said. She let me go. You and Versh take good care
of him, honey.

Yessum. Caddy said. We went out. Caddy said,

You neednt go, Versh. Ill keep him for a while.

All right. Versh said. I aint going out in that cold for no fun. He
went on and we stopped in the hall and Caddy knelt and put her arms
around me and her cold bright face against mine. She smelled like trees.

Youre not a poor baby. Are you. Youve got your Caddy. Havent you got
your Caddy.

_Cant you shut up that moaning and slobbering, Luster said. Aint_ _you
shamed of yourself, making all this racket. We passed the carriage
house, where the carriage was. It had a new wheel._

Git in, now, and set still until your maw come. Dilsey said. She
shoved me into the carriage. T. P. held the reins. Clare I dont see
how come Jason wont get a new surrey. Dilsey said. This thing going to
fall to pieces under you all some day. Look at them wheels.

Mother came out, pulling her veil down. She had some flowers.

Wheres Roskus. she said.

Roskus cant lift his arms, today. Dilsey said. T. P. can drive all
right.

Im afraid to. Mother said. It seems to me you all could furnish me
with a driver for the carriage once a week. Its little enough I ask,
Lord knows.

You know just as well as me that Roskus got the rheumatism too bad to
do more than he have to, Miss Cahline. Dilsey said. You come on and
get in, now. T. P. can drive you just as good as Roskus.

Im afraid to. Mother said. With the baby.

Dilsey went up the steps. You calling that thing a baby, she said. She
took Mothers arms. A man big as T. P. Come on, now, if you going.

Im afraid to. Mother said. They came down the steps and Dilsey helped
Mother in. Perhaps itll be the best thing, for all of us. Mother
said.

Aint you shamed, talking that way. Dilsey said. Dont you know itll
take more than a eighteen year old nigger to make Queenie run away. She
older than him and Benjy put together. And dont you start no projecking
with Queenie, you hear me, T. P. If you dont drive to suit Miss Cahline,
I going to put Roskus on you. He aint too tied up to do that.

Yessum. T. P. said.

I just know something will happen. Mother said. Stop, Benjamin.

Give him a flower to hold. Dilsey said, That what he wanting. She
reached her hand in.

No, no. Mother said. Youll have them all scattered.

You hold them. Dilsey said. Ill get him one out. She gave me a
flower and her hand went away.

Go on now, fore Quentin see you and have to go too. Dilsey said.

Where is she. Mother said.

She down to the house playing with Luster. Dilsey said. Go on, T. P.
Drive that surrey like Roskus told you, now.

Yessum. T. P. said. Hum up, Queenie.

Quentin. Mother said. Dont let

Course I is. Dilsey said.

The carriage jolted and crunched on the drive. Im afraid to go and
leave Quentin. Mother said. Id better not go. T. P. We went through
the gate, where it didnt jolt anymore. T. P. hit Queenie with the whip.

You, T. P. Mother said.

Got to get her going. T. P. said. Keep her wake up till we get back
to the barn.

Turn around. Mother said. Im afraid to go and leave Quentin.

Cant turn here. T. P. said. Then it was broader.

Cant you turn here. Mother said.

All right. T. P. said. We began to turn.

You, T. P. Mother said, clutching me.

I got to turn around somehow. T. P. said. Whoa, Queenie. We stopped.

Youll turn us over. Mother said.

What you want to do, then. T. P. said.

Im afraid for you to try to turn around. Mother said.

Get up, Queenie. T. P. said. We went on.

I just know Dilsey will let something happen to Quentin while Im
gone. Mother said. We must hurry back.

Hum up, there. T. P. said. He hit Queenie with the whip.

You, T. P. Mother said, clutching me. I could hear Queenies feet and
the bright shapes went smooth and steady on both sides, the shadows of
them flowing across Queenies back. They went on like the bright tops of
wheels. Then those on one side stopped at the tall white post where the
soldier was. But on the other side they went on smooth and steady, but a
little slower.

What do you want. Jason said. He had his hands in his pockets and a
pencil behind his ear.

Were going to the cemetery. Mother said.

All right. Jason said. I dont aim to stop you, do I. Was that all you
wanted with me, just to tell me that.

I know you wont come. Mother said. Id feel safer if you would.

Safe from what. Jason said. Father and Quentin cant hurt you.

Mother put her handkerchief under her veil. Stop it, Mother. Jason
said. Do you want to get that damn loony to bawling in the middle of
the square. Drive on, T. P.

Hum up, Queenie. T. P. said.

Its a judgment on me. Mother said. But Ill be gone too, soon.

Here. Jason said.

Whoa. T. P. said. Jason said,

Uncle Maurys drawing on you for fifty. What do you want to do about
it.

Why ask me. Mother said. I dont have any say so. I try not to worry
you and Dilsey. Ill be gone soon, and then you

Go on, T. P. Jason said.

Hum up, Queenie. T. P. said. The shapes flowed on. The ones on the
other side began again, bright and fast and smooth, like when Caddy says
we are going to sleep.

_Cry baby, Luster said. Aint you shamed. We went through the barn. The
stalls were all open. You aint got no spotted pony to ride now, Luster
said. The floor was dry and dusty. The roof was falling. The slanting
holes were full of spinning yellow. What do you want to go that way for.
You want to get your head knocked off with one of them balls._

Keep your hands in your pockets. Caddy said, Or theyll be froze. You
dont want your hands froze on Christmas, do you.

We went around the barn. The big cow and the little one were standing in
the door, and we could hear Prince and Queenie and Fancy stomping inside
the barn. If it wasnt so cold, wed ride Fancy. Caddy said, But its
too cold to hold on today. Then we could see the branch, where the
smoke was blowing. Thats where they are killing the pig. Caddy said.
We can come back by there and see them. We went down the hill.

You want to carry the letter. Caddy said. You can carry it. She took
the letter out of her pocket and put it in mine. Its a Christmas
present. Caddy said. Uncle Maury is going to surprise Mrs Patterson
with it. We got to give it to her without letting anybody see it. Keep
your hands in your pockets good, now. We came to the branch.

Its froze. Caddy said, Look. She broke the top of the water and
held a piece of it against my face. Ice. That means how cold it is.
She helped me across and we went up the hill. We cant even tell Mother
and Father. You know what I think it is. I think its a surprise for
Mother and Father and Mr Patterson both, because Mr Patterson sent you
some candy. Do you remember when Mr Patterson sent you some candy last
summer.

There was a fence. The vine was dry, and the wind rattled in it.

Only I dont see why Uncle Maury didnt send Versh. Caddy said. Versh
wont tell. Mrs Patterson was looking out the window. You wait here.
Caddy said. Wait right here, now. Ill be back in a minute. Give me the
letter. She took the letter out of my pocket. Keep your hands in your
pockets. She climbed the fence with the letter in her hand and went
through the brown, rattling flowers. Mrs Patterson came to the door and
opened it and stood there.

_Mr Patterson was chopping in the green flowers. He stopped chopping and
looked at me. Mrs Patterson came across the garden, running. When I saw
her eyes I began to cry. You idiot, Mrs Patterson said, I told him never
to send you alone again. Give it to me. Quick. Mr Patterson came fast,
with the hoe. Mrs Patterson leaned across the fence, reaching her hand.
She was trying to climb the fence. Give it to me, she said, Give it to
me. Mr Patterson climbed the fence. He took the letter. Mrs Pattersons
dress was caught on the fence. I saw her eyes again and I ran down the
hill._

They aint nothing over yonder but houses. Luster said. We going down
to the branch.

They were washing down at the branch. One of them was singing. I could
smell the clothes flapping, and the smoke blowing across the branch.

You stay down here. Luster said. You aint got no business up yonder.
Them folks hit you, sho.

What he want to do.

He dont know what he want to do. Luster said. He think he want to go
up yonder where they knocking that ball. You sit down here and play with
your jimson weed. Look at them chillen playing in the branch, if you got
to look at something. How come you cant behave yourself like folks. I
sat down on the bank, where they were washing, and the smoke blowing
blue.

Is you all seen anything of a quarter down here. Luster said.

What quarter.

The one I had here this morning. Luster said. I lost it somewhere. It
fell through this here hole in my pocket. If I dont find it I cant go to
the show tonight.

Whered you get a quarter, boy. Find it in white folks pocket while
they aint looking.

Got it at the getting place. Luster said. Plenty more where that one
come from. Only I got to find that one. Is you all found it yet.

I aint studying no quarter. I got my own business to tend to.

Come on here. Luster said. Help me look for it.

He wouldnt know a quarter if he was to see it, would he.

He can help look just the same. Luster said. You all going to the
show tonight.

Dont talk to me about no show. Time I get done over this here tub I be
too tired to lift my hand to do nothing.

I bet you be there. Luster said. I bet you was there last night. I
bet you all be right there when that tent open.

Be enough niggers there without me. Was last night.

Niggers money good as white folks, I reckon.

White folks gives nigger money because know first white man comes along
with a band going to get it all back, so nigger can go to work for some
more.

Aint nobody going make you go to that show.

Aint yet. Aint thought of it, I reckon.

What you got against white folks.

Aint got nothing against them. I goes my way and lets white folks go
theirs. I aint studying that show.

Got a man in it can play a tune on a saw. Play it like a banjo.

You go last night. Luster said. I going tonight. If I can find where
I lost that quarter.

You going take him with you, I reckon.

Me. Luster said. You reckon I be found anywhere with him, time he
start bellering.

What does you do when he start bellering.

I whips him. Luster said. He sat down and rolled up his overalls. They
played in the branch.

You all found any balls yet. Luster said.

Aint you talking biggity. I bet you better not let your grandmammy hear
you talking like that.

Luster got into the branch, where they were playing. He hunted in the
water, along the bank.

I had it when we was down here this morning. Luster said.

Where bouts you lose it.

Right out this here hole in my pocket. Luster said. They hunted in the
branch. Then they all stood up quick and stopped, then they splashed and
fought in the branch. Luster got it and they squatted in the water,
looking up the hill through the bushes.

Where is they. Luster said.

Aint in sight yet.

Luster put it in his pocket. They came down the hill.

Did a ball come down here.

It ought to be in the water. Didnt any of you boys see it or hear it.

Aint heard nothing come down here. Luster said. Heard something hit
that tree up yonder. Dont know which way it went.

They looked in the branch.

Hell. Look along the branch. It came down here. I saw it.

They looked along the branch. Then they went back up the hill.

Have you got that ball. the boy said.

What I want with it. Luster said. I aint seen no ball.

The boy got in the water. He went on. He turned and looked at Luster
again. He went on down the branch.

The man said Caddie up the hill. The boy got out of the water and went
up the hill.

Now, just listen at you. Luster said. Hush up.

What he moaning about now.

Lawd knows. Luster said. He just starts like that. He been at it all
morning. Cause it his birthday, I reckon.

How old he.

He thirty-three. Luster said. Thirty-three this morning.

You mean, he been three years old thirty years.

I going by what mammy say. Luster said. I dont know. We going to have
thirty-three candles on a cake, anyway. Little cake. Wont hardly hold
them. Hush up. Come on back here. He came and caught my arm. You old
loony. he said. You want me to whip you.

I bet you will.

I is done it. Hush, now. Luster said. Aint I told you you cant go up
there. Theyll knock your head clean off with one of them balls. Come
on, here. He pulled me back. Sit down. I sat down and he took off my
shoes and rolled up my trousers. Now, git in that water and play and
see can you stop that slobbering and moaning.

I hushed and got in the water _and Roskus came and said to come to
supper and Caddy said_,

_Its not supper time yet. Im not going._

She was wet. We were playing in the branch and Caddy squatted down and
got her dress wet and Versh said,

Your mommer going to whip you for getting your dress wet.

Shes not going to do any such thing. Caddy said.

How do you know. Quentin said.

Thats all right how I know. Caddy said. How do you know.

She said she was. Quentin said. Besides, Im older than you.

Im seven years old. Caddy said, I guess I know.

Im older than that. Quentin said. I go to school. Dont I, Versh.

Im going to school next year. Caddy said, When it comes. Aint I,
Versh.

You know she whip you when you get your dress wet. Versh said.

Its not wet. Caddy said. She stood up in the water and looked at her
dress. Ill take it off. she said. Then itll dry.

I bet you wont. Quentin said.

I bet I will. Caddy said.

I bet you better not. Quentin said.

Caddy came to Versh and me and turned her back.

Unbutton it, Versh. she said.

Dont you do it, Versh. Quentin said.

Taint none of my dress. Versh said.

You unbutton it, Versh. Caddy said, Or Ill tell Dilsey what you did
yesterday. So Versh unbuttoned it.

You just take your dress off. Quentin said. Caddy took her dress off
and threw it on the bank. Then she didnt have on anything but her
bodice and drawers, and Quentin slapped her and she slipped and fell
down in the water. When she got up she began to splash water on Quentin,
and Quentin splashed water on Caddy. Some of it splashed on Versh and me
and Versh picked me up and put me on the bank. He said he was going to
tell on Caddy and Quentin, and then Quentin and Caddy began to splash
water at Versh. He got behind a bush.

Im going to tell mammy on you all. Versh said.

Quentin climbed up the bank and tried to catch Versh, but Versh ran away
and Quentin couldnt. When Quentin came back Versh stopped and hollered
that he was going to tell. Caddy told him that if he wouldnt tell,
theyd let him come back. So Versh said he wouldnt, and they let him.

Now I guess youre satisfied. Quentin said, Well both get whipped
now.

I dont care. Caddy said. Ill run away.

Yes you will. Quentin said.

Ill run away and never come back. Caddy said. I began to cry. Caddy
turned around and said Hush. So I hushed. Then they played in the
branch. Jason was playing too. He was by himself further down the
branch. Versh came around the bush and lifted me down into the water
again. Caddy was all wet and muddy behind, and I started to cry and she
came and squatted in the water.

Hush now. she said. Im not going to run away. So I hushed. Caddy
smelled like trees in the rain.

_What is the matter with you, Luster said. Cant you get done with that
moaning and play in the branch like folks._

_Whynt you take him on home. Didnt they told you not to take him off
the place._

_He still think they own this pasture, Luster said. Cant nobody see down
here from the house, noways._

_We can. And folks dont like to look at a loony. Taint no luck in it._

Roskus came and said to come to supper and Caddy said it wasnt supper
time yet.

Yes tis. Roskus said. Dilsey say for you all to come on to the house.
Bring them on, Versh. He went up the hill, where the cow was lowing.

Maybe well be dry by the time we get to the house. Quentin said.

It was all your fault. Caddy said. I hope we do get whipped. She put
her dress on and Versh buttoned it.

They wont know you got wet. Versh said. It dont show on you. Less me
and Jason tells.

Are you going to tell, Jason. Caddy said.

Tell on who. Jason said.

He wont tell. Quentin said. Will you, Jason.

I bet he does tell. Caddy said. Hell tell Damuddy.

He cant tell her. Quentin said. Shes sick. If we walk slow itll be
too dark for them to see.

I dont care whether they see or not. Caddy said. Im going to tell,
myself. You carry him up the hill, Versh.

Jason wont tell. Quentin said. You remember that bow and arrow I made
you, Jason.

Its broke now. Jason said.

Let him tell. Caddy said. I dont give a cuss. Carry Maury up the
hill, Versh. Versh squatted and I got on his back.

_See you all at the show tonight, Luster said. Come on, here. We got to
find that quarter._

If we go slow, itll be dark when we get there. Quentin said.

Im not going slow. Caddy said. We went up the hill, but Quentin
didnt come. He was down at the branch when we got to where we could
smell the pigs. They were grunting and snuffing in the trough in the
corner. Jason came behind us, with his hands in his pockets. Roskus was
milking the cow in the barn door.

_The cows came jumping out of the barn._

Go on. T. P. said. Holler again. I going to holler myself. Whooey.
Quentin kicked T. P. again. He kicked T. P. into the trough where the
pigs ate and T. P. lay there. Hot dogs. T. P. said, Didnt he get me
then. You see that white man kick me that time. Whooey.

I wasnt crying, but I couldnt stop. I wasnt crying, but the ground
wasnt still, and then I was crying. The ground kept sloping up and the
cows ran up the hill. T. P. tried to get up. He fell down again and the
cows ran down the hill. Quentin held my arm and we went toward the barn.
Then the barn wasnt there and we had to wait until it came back. I
didnt see it come back. It came behind us and Quentin set me down in
the trough where the cows ate. I held on to it. It was going away too,
and I held to it. The cows ran down the hill again, across the door. I
couldnt stop. Quentin and T. P. came up the hill, fighting. T. P. was
falling down the hill and Quentin dragged him up the hill. Quentin hit
T. P. I couldnt stop.

Stand up. Quentin said, You stay right here. Dont you go away until I
get back.

Me and Benjy going back to the wedding. T. P. said. Whooey.

Quentin hit T. P. again. Then he began to thump T. P. against the wall.
T. P. was laughing. Every time Quentin thumped him against the wall he
tried to say Whooey, but he couldnt say it for laughing. I quit crying,
but I couldnt stop. T. P. fell on me and the barn door went away. It
went down the hill and T. P. was fighting by himself and he fell down
again. He was still laughing, and I couldnt stop, and I tried to get up
and I fell down, and I couldnt stop. Versh said,

You sho done it now. Ill declare if you aint. Shut up that yelling.

T. P. was still laughing. He flopped on the door and laughed. Whooey.
he said, Me and Benjy going back to the wedding. Sassprilluh. T. P.
said.

Hush. Versh said. Where you get it.

Out the cellar. T. P. said. Whooey.

Hush up. Versh said, Wherebouts in the cellar.

Anywhere. T. P. said. He laughed some more. Moren a hundred bottles
left. Moren a million. Look out, nigger, I going to holler.

Quentin said, Lift him up.

Versh lifted me up.

Drink this, Benjy. Quentin said. The glass was hot. Hush, now.
Quentin said. Drink it.

Sassprilluh. T. P. said. Lemme drink it, Mr Quentin.

You shut your mouth. Versh said, Mr Quentin wear you out.

Hold him, Versh. Quentin said.

They held me. It was hot on my chin and on my shirt. Drink. Quentin
said. They held my head. It was hot inside me, and I began again. I was
crying now, and something was happening inside me and I cried more, and
they held me until it stopped happening. Then I hushed. It was still
going around, and then the shapes began. Open the crib, Versh. They
were going slow. Spread those empty sacks on the floor. They were
going faster, almost fast enough. Now. Pick up his feet. They went on,
smooth and bright. I could hear T. P. laughing. I went on with them, up
the bright hill.

_At the top of the hill Versh put me down._ Come on here, Quentin. he
called, looking back down the hill. Quentin was still standing there by
the branch. He was chunking into the shadows where the branch was.

Let the old skizzard stay there. Caddy said. She took my hand and we
went on past the barn and through the gate. There was a frog on the
brick walk, squatting in the middle of it. Caddy stepped over it and
pulled me on.

Come on, Maury. she said. It still squatted there until Jason poked at
it with his toe.

Hell make a wart on you. Versh said. The frog hopped away.

Come on, Maury. Caddy said.

They got company tonight. Versh said.

How do you know. Caddy said.

With all them lights on. Versh said, Light in every window.

I reckon we can turn all the lights on without company, if we want to.
Caddy said.

I bet its company. Versh said. You all better go in the back and
slip upstairs.

I dont care. Caddy said. Ill walk right in the parlor where they
are.

I bet your pappy whip you if you do. Versh said.

I dont care. Caddy said. Ill walk right in the parlor. Ill walk
right in the dining room and eat supper.

Where you sit. Versh said.

Id sit in Damuddys chair. Caddy said. She eats in bed.

Im hungry. Jason said. He passed us and ran on up the walk. He had
his hands in his pockets and he fell down. Versh went and picked him up.

If you keep them hands out your pockets, you could stay on your feet.
Versh said. You cant never get them out in time to catch yourself, fat
as you is.

Father was standing by the kitchen steps.

Wheres Quentin. he said.

He coming up the walk. Versh said. Quentin was coming slow. His shirt
was a white blur.

Oh. Father said. Light fell down the steps, on him.

Caddy and Quentin threw water on each other. Jason said.

We waited.

They did. Father said. Quentin came, and Father said, You can eat
supper in the kitchen tonight. He stopped and took me up, and the light
came tumbling down the steps on me too, and I could look down at Caddy
and Jason and Quentin and Versh. Father turned toward the steps. You
must be quiet, though. he said.

Why must we be quiet, Father. Caddy said. Have we got company.

Yes. Father said.

I told you they was company. Versh said.

You did not. Caddy said, I was the one that said there was. I said I
would

Hush. Father said. They hushed and Father opened the door and we
crossed the back porch and went in to the kitchen. Dilsey was there, and
Father put me in the chair and closed the apron down and pushed it to
the table, where supper was. It was steaming up.

You mind Dilsey, now. Father said. Dont let them make any more noise
than they can help, Dilsey.

Yes, sir. Dilsey said. Father went away.

Remember to mind Dilsey, now. he said behind us. I leaned my face over
where the supper was. It steamed up on my face.

Let them mind me tonight, Father. Caddy said.

I wont. Jason said. Im going to mind Dilsey.

Youll have to, if Father says so. Caddy said. Let them mind me,
Father.

I wont. Jason said, I wont mind you.

Hush. Father said. You all mind Caddy, then. When they are done,
bring them up the back stairs, Dilsey.

Yes, sir. Dilsey said.

There. Caddy said, Now I guess youll mind me.

You all hush, now. Dilsey said. You got to be quiet tonight.

Why do we have to be quiet tonight. Caddy whispered.

Never you mind. Dilsey said, Youll know in the Lawds own time. She
brought my bowl. The steam from it came and tickled my face. Come here,
Versh. Dilsey said.

When is the Lawds own time, Dilsey. Caddy said.

Its Sunday. Quentin said. Dont you know anything.

Shhhhhh. Dilsey said. Didnt Mr Jason say for you all to be quiet.
Eat your supper, now. Here, Versh. Git his spoon. Vershs hand came
with the spoon, into the bowl. The spoon came up to my mouth. The steam
tickled into my mouth. Then we quit eating and we looked at each other
and we were quiet, and then we heard it again and I began to cry.

What was that. Caddy said. She put her hand on my hand.

That was Mother. Quentin said. The spoon came up and I ate, then I
cried again.

Hush. Caddy said. But I didnt hush and she came and put her arms
around me. Dilsey went and closed both the doors and then we couldnt
hear it.

Hush, now. Caddy said. I hushed and ate. Quentin wasnt eating, but
Jason was.

That was Mother. Quentin said. He got up.

You set right down. Dilsey said. They got company in there, and you
in them muddy clothes. You set down too, Caddy, and get done eating.

She was crying. Quentin said.

It was somebody singing. Caddy said. Wasnt it, Dilsey.

You all eat your supper, now, like Mr Jason said. Dilsey said. Youll
know in the Lawds own time. Caddy went back to her chair.

I told you it was a party. she said.

Versh said, He done et all that.

Bring his bowl here. Dilsey said. The bowl went away.

Dilsey. Caddy said, Quentins not eating his supper. Hasnt he got to
mind me.

Eat your supper, Quentin. Dilsey said, You all got to get done and
get out of my kitchen.

I dont want any more supper. Quentin said.

Youve got to eat if I say you have. Caddy said. Hasnt he, Dilsey.

The bowl steamed up to my face, and Vershs hand dipped the spoon in it
and the steam tickled into my mouth.

I dont want any more. Quentin said. How can they have a party when
Damuddys sick.

Theyll have it down stairs. Caddy said. She can come to the landing
and see it. Thats what Im going to do when I get my nightie on.

Mother was crying. Quentin said. Wasnt she crying, Dilsey.

Dont you come pestering at me, boy. Dilsey said. I got to get supper
for all them folks soon as you all get done eating.

After a while even Jason was through eating, and he began to cry.

Now you got to tune up. Dilsey said.

He does it every night since Damuddy was sick and he cant sleep with
her. Caddy said. Cry baby.

Im going to tell on you. Jason said.

He was crying. Youve already told. Caddy said. Theres not anything
else you can tell, now.

You all needs to go to bed. Dilsey said. She came and lifted me down
and wiped my face and hands with a warm cloth. Versh, can you get them
up the back stairs quiet. You, Jason, shut up that crying.

Its too early to go to bed now. Caddy said. We dont ever have to go
to bed this early.

You is tonight. Dilsey said. Your pa say for you to come right on up
stairs when you et supper. You heard him.

He said to mind me. Caddy said.

Im not going to mind you. Jason said.

You have to. Caddy said. Come on, now. You have to do like I say.

Make them be quiet, Versh. Dilsey said. You all going to be quiet,
aint you.

What do we have to be so quiet for, tonight. Caddy said.

Your mommer aint feeling well. Dilsey said. You all go on with Versh,
now.

I told you Mother was crying. Quentin said. Versh took me up and
opened the door onto the back porch. We went out and Versh closed the
door black. I could smell Versh and feel him. You all be quiet, now.
Were not going up stairs yet. Mr Jason said for you to come right up
stairs. He said to mind me. Im not going to mind you. But he said for
all of us to. Didnt he, Quentin. I could feel Vershs head. I could
hear us. Didnt he, Versh. Yes, thats right. Then I say for us to go
out doors a while. Come on. Versh opened the door and we went out.

We went down the steps.

I expect wed better go down to Vershs house, so well be quiet.
Caddy said. Versh put me down and Caddy took my hand and we went down
the brick walk.

Come on. Caddy said, That frogs gone. Hes hopped way over to the
garden, by now. Maybe well see another one. Roskus came with the milk
buckets. He went on. Quentin wasnt coming with us. He was sitting on
the kitchen steps. We went down to Vershs house. I liked to smell
Vershs house. _There was a fire in it and T. P. squatting in his shirt
tail in front of it, chunking it into a blaze._

Then I got up and T. P. dressed me and we went to the kitchen and ate.
Dilsey was singing and I began to cry and she stopped.

Keep him away from the house, now. Dilsey said.

We cant go that way. T. P. said.

We played in the branch.

We cant go around yonder. T. P. said. Dont you know mammy say we
cant.

Dilsey was singing in the kitchen and I began to cry.

Hush. T. P. said. Come on. Lets go down to the barn.

Roskus was milking at the barn. He was milking with one hand, and
groaning. Some birds sat on the barn door and watched him. One of them
came down and ate with the cows. I watched Roskus milk while T. P. was
feeding Queenie and Prince. The calf was in the pig pen. It nuzzled at
the wire, bawling.

T. P. Roskus said. T. P. said Sir, in the barn. Fancy held her head
over the door, because T. P. hadnt fed her yet. Git done there.
Roskus said. You got to do this milking. I cant use my right hand no
more.

T. P. came and milked.

Whynt you get the doctor. T. P. said.

Doctor cant do no good. Roskus said. Not on this place.

What wrong with this place. T. P. said.

Taint no luck on this place. Roskus said. Turn that calf in if you
done.

_Taint no luck on this place, Roskus said. The fire rose and fell behind
him and Versh, sliding on his and Vershs face. Dilsey finished putting
me to bed. The bed smelled like T. P. I liked it._

What you know about it. Dilsey said. What trance you been in.

Dont need no trance. Roskus said. Aint the sign of it laying right
there on that bed. Aint the sign of it been here for folks to see
fifteen years now.

Spose it is. Dilsey said. It aint hurt none of you and yourn, is it.
Versh working and Frony married off your hands and T. P. getting big
enough to take your place when rheumatism finish getting you.

They been two, now. Roskus said. Going to be one more. I seen the
sign, and you is too.

I heard a squinch owl that night. T. P. said. Dan wouldnt come and
get his supper, neither. Wouldnt come no closer than the barn. Begun
howling right after dark. Versh heard him.

Going to be more than one more. Dilsey said. Show me the man what
aint going to die, bless Jesus.

Dying aint all. Roskus said.

I knows what you thinking. Dilsey said. And they aint going to be no
luck in saying that name, lessen you going to set up with him while he
cries.

They aint no luck on this place. Roskus said. I seen it at first but
when they changed his name I knowed it.

Hush your mouth. Dilsey said. She pulled the covers up. It smelled
like T. P. You all shut up now, till he get to sleep.

I seen the sign. Roskus said.

Sign T. P. got to do all your work for you. Dilsey said. _Take him and
Quentin down to the house and let them play with Luster, where Frony can
watch them, T. P., and go and help your pa._

We finished eating. T. P. took Quentin up and we went down to T. P.s
house. Luster was playing in the dirt. T. P. put Quentin down and she
played in the dirt too. Luster had some spools and he and Quentin fought
and Quentin had the spools. Luster cried and Frony came and gave Luster
a tin can to play with, and then I had the spools and Quentin fought me
and I cried.

Hush. Frony said, Aint you shamed of yourself. Taking a babys play
pretty. She took the spools from me and gave them back to Quentin.

Hush, now. Frony said, Hush, I tell you.

Hush up. Frony said. You needs whipping, thats what you needs. She
took Luster and Quentin up. Come on here. she said. We went to the
barn. T. P. was milking the cow. Roskus was sitting on the box.

Whats the matter with him now. Roskus said.

You have to keep him down here. Frony said. He fighting these babies
again. Taking they play things. Stay here with T. P. now, and see can
you hush a while.

Clean that udder good now. Roskus said. You milked that young cow dry
last winter. If you milk this one dry, they aint going to be no more
milk.

Dilsey was singing.

Not around yonder. T. P. said. Dont you know mammy say you cant go
around there.

They were singing.

Come on. T. P. said. Lets go play with Quentin and Luster. Come on.

Quentin and Luster were playing in the dirt in front of T. P.s house.
There was a fire in the house, rising and falling, with Roskus sitting
black against it.

Thats three, thank the Lawd. Roskus said. I told you two years ago.
They aint no luck on this place.

Whynt you get out, then. Dilsey said. She was undressing me. Your
bad luck talk got them Memphis notions into Versh. That ought to satisfy
you.

If that all the bad luck Versh have. Roskus said.

Frony came in.

You all done. Dilsey said.

T. P. finishing up. Frony said. Miss Cahline want you to put Quentin
to bed.

Im coming just as fast as I can. Dilsey said. She ought to know by
this time I aint got no wings.

Thats what I tell you. Roskus said. They aint no luck going be on no
place where one of they own chillens name aint never spoke.

Hush. Dilsey said. Do you want to get him started

Raising a child not to know its own mammys name. Roskus said.

Dont you bother your head about her. Dilsey said. I raised all of
them and I reckon I can raise one more. Hush now. Let him get to sleep
if he will.

Saying a name. Frony said. He dont know nobodys name.

You just say it and see if he dont. Dilsey said. You say it to him
while he sleeping and I bet he hear you.

He know lot more than folks thinks. Roskus said. He knowed they time
was coming, like that pointer done. He could tell you when hisn coming,
if he could talk. Or yours. Or mine.

You take Luster outen that bed, mammy. Frony said. That boy conjure
him.

Hush your mouth. Dilsey said, Aint you got no better sense than that.
What you want to listen to Roskus for, anyway. Get in, Benjy.

Dilsey pushed me and I got in the bed, where Luster already was. He was
asleep. Dilsey took a long piece of wood and laid it between Luster and
me. Stay on your side now. Dilsey said Luster little, and you dont
want to hurt him.

_You cant go yet, T. P. said. Wait._

We looked around the corner of the house and watched the carriages go
away.

Now. T. P. said. He took Quentin up and we ran down to the corner of
the fence and watched them pass. There he go, T. P. said. See that
one with the glass in it. Look at him. He laying in there. See him.

_Come on, Luster said, I going to take this here ball down home, where I
wont lose it. Naw, sir, you cant have it. If them men sees you with it,
theyll say you stole it. Hush up, now. You cant have it. What business
you got with it. You cant play no ball._

Frony and T. P. were playing in the dirt by the door. T. P. had
lightning bugs in a bottle.

How did you all get back out. Frony said.

Weve got company. Caddy said. Father said for us to mind me tonight.
I expect you and T. P. will have to mind me too.

Im not going to mind you. Jason said. Frony and T. P. dont have to
either.

They will if I say so. Caddy said. Maybe I wont say for them to.

T. P. dont mind nobody. Frony said. Is they started the funeral yet.

Whats a funeral. Jason said.

Didnt mammy tell you not to tell them. Versh said.

Where they moans. Frony said. They moaned two days on Sis Beulah
Clay.

_They moaned at Dilseys house. Dilsey was moaning. When Dilsey moaned
Luster said, Hush, and we hushed, and then I began to cry and Blue
howled under the kitchen steps. Then Dilsey stopped and we stopped._

Oh. Caddy said, Thats niggers. White folks dont have funerals.

Mammy said us not to tell them, Frony. Versh said.

Tell them what. Caddy said.

_Dilsey moaned, and when it got to the place I began to cry and Blue
howled under the steps. Luster, Frony said in the window, Take them down
to the barn. I cant get no cooking done with all that racket. That hound
too. Get them outen here._

_I aint going down there, Luster said. I might meet pappy down there. I
seen him last night, waving his arms in the barn._

I like to know why not. Frony said. White folks dies too. Your
grandmammy dead as any nigger can get, I reckon.

Dogs are dead. Caddy said, And when Nancy fell in the ditch and
Roskus shot her and the buzzards came and undressed her.

The bones rounded out of the ditch, where the dark vines were in the
black ditch, into the moonlight, like some of the shapes had stopped.
Then they all stopped and it was dark, and when I stopped to start again
I could hear Mother, and feet walking fast away, and I could smell it.
Then the room came, but my eyes went shut. I didnt stop. I could smell
it. T. P. unpinned the bed clothes.

Hush. he said, Shhhhhhhh.

But I could smell it. T. P. pulled me up and he put on my clothes fast.

Hush, Benjy. he said. We going down to our house. You want to go down
to our house, where Frony is. Hush. Shhhhh.

He laced my shoes and put my cap on and we went out. There was a light
in the hall. Across the hall we could hear Mother.

Shhhhhh, Benjy. T. P. said, Well be out in a minute.

A door opened and I could smell it more than ever, and a head came out.
It wasnt Father. Father was sick there.

Can you take him out of the house.

Thats where we going. T. P. said. Dilsey came up the stairs.

Hush. she said, Hush. Take him down home, T. P. Frony fixing him a
bed. You all look after him, now. Hush, Benjy. Go on with T. P.

She went where we could hear Mother.

Better keep him there. It wasnt Father. He shut the door, but I could
still smell it.

We went down stairs. The stairs went down into the dark and T. P. took
my hand, and we went out the door, out of the dark. Dan was sitting in
the back yard, howling.

He smell it. T. P. said. Is that the way you found it out.

We went down the steps, where our shadows were.

I forgot your coat. T. P. said. You ought to had it. But I aint going
back.

Dan howled.

Hush now. T. P. said. Our shadows moved, but Dans shadow didnt move
except to howl when he did.

I cant take you down home, bellering like you is. T. P. said. You was
bad enough before you got that bullfrog voice. Come on.

We went along the brick walk, with our shadows. The pig pen smelled like
pigs. The cow stood in the lot, chewing at us. Dan howled.

You going to wake the whole town up. T. P. said. Cant you hush.

We saw Fancy, eating by the branch. The moon shone on the water when we
got there.

Naw, sir. T. P. said, This too close. We cant stop here. Come on.
Now, just look at you. Got your whole leg wet. Come on, here. Dan
howled.

The ditch came up out of the buzzing grass. The bones rounded out of the
black vines.

Now. T. P. said. Beller your head off if you want to. You got the
whole night and a twenty acre pasture to beller in.

T. P. lay down in the ditch and I sat down, watching the bones where the
buzzards ate Nancy, flapping black and slow and heavy out of the ditch.

_I had it when we was down here before, Luster said. I showed it to you.
Didnt you see it. I took it out of my pocket right here and showed it
to you._

Do you think buzzards are going to undress Damuddy. Caddy said.
Youre crazy.

Youre a skizzard. Jason said. He began to cry.

Youre a knobnot. Caddy said. Jason cried. His hands were in his
pockets.

Jason going to be rich man. Versh said. He holding his money all the
time.

Jason cried.

Now youve got him started. Caddy said. Hush up, Jason. How can
buzzards get in where Damuddy is. Father wouldnt let them. Would you
let a buzzard undress you. Hush up, now.

Jason hushed. Frony said it was a funeral. he said.

Well its not. Caddy said. Its a party. Frony dont know anything
about it. He wants your lightning bugs, T. P. Let him hold it a while.

T. P. gave me the bottle of lightning bugs.

I bet if we go around to the parlor window we can see something. Caddy
said. Then youll believe me.

I already knows. Frony said. I dont need to see.

You better hush your mouth, Frony. Versh said. Mammy going whip you.

What is it. Caddy said.

I knows what I knows. Frony said.

Come on. Caddy said, Lets go around to the front.

We started to go.

T. P. wants his lightning bugs. Frony said.

Let him hold it a while longer, T. P. Caddy said. Well bring it
back.

You all never caught them. Frony said.

If I say you and T. P. can come too, will you let him hold it. Caddy
said.

Aint nobody said me and T. P. got to mind you. Frony said.

If I say you dont have to, will you let him hold it. Caddy said.

All right. Frony said. Let him hold it, T. P. We going to watch them
moaning.

They aint moaning. Caddy said. I tell you its a party. Are they
moaning, Versh.

We aint going to know what they doing, standing here. Versh said.

Come on. Caddy said. Frony and T. P. dont have to mind me. But the
rest of us do. You better carry him, Versh. Its getting dark.

Versh took me up and we went on around the kitchen.

_When we looked around the corner we could see the lights coming up the
drive. T. P. went back to the cellar door and opened it._

_You know whats down there, T. P. said. Soda water. I seen Mr Jason
come up with both hands full of them. Wait here a minute._

_T. P. went and looked in the kitchen door. Dilsey said, What are you
peeping in here for. Wheres Benjy._

_He out here, T. P. said._

_Go on and watch him, Dilsey said. Keep him out the house now._

_Yessum, T. P. said. Is they started yet._

_You go on and keep that boy out of sight, Dilsey said. I got all I can
tend to._

A snake crawled out from under the house. Jason said he wasnt afraid of
snakes and Caddy said he was but she wasnt and Versh said they both
were and Caddy said to be quiet, like father said.

_You aint got to start bellering now, T. P. said. You want some this
sassprilluh._

_It tickled my nose and eyes._

_If you aint going to drink it, let me get to it, T. P. said. All right,
here tis. We better get another bottle while aint nobody bothering us.
You be quiet, now._

We stopped under the tree by the parlor window. Versh set me down in the
wet grass. It was cold. There were lights in all the windows.

Thats where Damuddy is. Caddy said. Shes sick every day now. When
she gets well were going to have a picnic.

I knows what I knows. Frony said.

The trees were buzzing, and the grass.

The one next to it is where we have the measles. Caddy said. Where do
you and T. P. have the measles, Frony.

Has them just wherever we is, I reckon. Frony said.

They havent started yet. Caddy said.

_They getting ready to start, T. P. said. You stand right here now while
I get that box so we can see in the window. Here, les finish drinking
this here sassprilluh. It make me feel just like a squinch owl inside._

We drank the sassprilluh and T. P. pushed the bottle through the
lattice, under the house, and went away. I could hear them in the parlor
and I clawed my hands against the wall. T. P. dragged the box. He fell
down, and he began to laugh. He lay there, laughing into the grass. He
got up and dragged the box under the window, trying not to laugh.

I skeered I going to holler. T. P. said. Git on the box and see is
they started.

They havent started because the band hasnt come yet. Caddy said.

They aint going to have no band. Frony said.

How do you know. Caddy said.

I knows what I knows. Frony said.

You dont know anything. Caddy said. She went to the tree. Push me up,
Versh.

Your paw told you to stay out that tree. Versh said.

That was a long time ago. Caddy said. I expect hes forgotten about
it. Besides, he said to mind me tonight. Didnt he say to mind me
tonight.

Im not going to mind you. Jason said. Frony and T. P. are not going
to either.

Push me up, Versh. Caddy said.

All right. Versh said. You the one going to get whipped. I aint. He
went and pushed Caddy up into the tree to the first limb. We watched the
muddy bottom of her drawers. Then we couldnt see her. We could hear the
tree thrashing.

Mr Jason said if you break that tree he whip you. Versh said.

Im going to tell on her too. Jason said.

The tree quit thrashing. We looked up into the still branches.

What you seeing. Frony whispered.

_I saw them. Then I saw Caddy, with flowers in her hair, and a long veil
like shining wind. Caddy Caddy_

Hush. T. P. said, They going to hear you. Get down quick. He pulled
me. Caddy. I clawed my hands against the wall Caddy. T. P. pulled me.

Hush. he said, Hush. Come on here quick. He pulled me on. Caddy
Hush up, Benjy. You want them to hear you. Come on, les drink some more
sassprilluh, then we can come back if you hush. We better get one more
bottle or we both be hollering. We can say Dan drunk it. Mr Quentin
always saying he so smart, we can say he sassprilluh dog, too.

The moonlight came down the cellar stairs. We drank some more
sassprilluh.

You know what I wish. T. P. said. I wish a bear would walk in that
cellar door. You know what I do. I walk right up to him and spit in he
eye. Gimme that bottle to stop my mouth before I holler.

T. P. fell down. He began to laugh, and the cellar door and the
moonlight jumped away and something hit me.

Hush up. T. P. said, trying not to laugh, Lawd, theyll all hear us.
Get up. T. P. said, Get up, Benjy, quick. He was thrashing about and
laughing and I tried to get up. The cellar steps ran up the hill in the
moonlight and T. P. fell up the hill, into the moonlight, and I ran
against the fence and T. P. ran behind me saying Hush up hush up Then
he fell into the flowers, laughing, and I ran into the box. But when I
tried to climb onto it it jumped away and hit me on the back of the head
and my throat made a sound. It made the sound again and I stopped trying
to get up, and it made the sound again and I began to cry. But my throat
kept on making the sound while T. P. was pulling me. It kept on making
it and I couldnt tell if I was crying or not, and T. P. fell down on
top of me, laughing, and it kept on making the sound and Quentin kicked
T. P. and Caddy put her arms around me, and her shining veil, and I
couldnt smell trees anymore and I began to cry.

_Benjy, Caddy said, Benjy. She put her arms around me again, but I went
away._ What is it, Benjy. she said, Is it this hat. She took her hat
off and came again, and I went away.

Benjy. she said, What is it, Benjy. What has Caddy done.

He dont like that prissy dress. Jason said. You think youre grown
up, dont you. You think youre better than anybody else, dont you.
Prissy.

You shut your mouth. Caddy said, You dirty little beast. Benjy.

Just because you are fourteen, you think youre grown up, dont you.
Jason said. You think youre something. Dont you.

Hush, Benjy. Caddy said. Youll disturb Mother. Hush.

But I didnt hush, and when she went away I followed, and she stopped on
the stairs and waited and I stopped too.

What is it, Benjy. Caddy said, Tell Caddy. Shell do it. Try.

Candace. Mother said.

Yessum. Caddy said.

Why are you teasing him. Mother said. Bring him here.

We went to Mothers room, where she was lying with the sickness on a
cloth on her head.

What is the matter now. Mother said. Benjamin.

Benjy. Caddy said. She came again, but I went away.

You must have done something to him. Mother said. Why wont you let
him alone, so I can have some peace. Give him the box and please go on
and let him alone.

Caddy got the box and set it on the floor and opened it. It was full of
stars. When I was still, they were still. When I moved, they glinted and
sparkled. I hushed.

Then I heard Caddy walking and I began again.

Benjamin. Mother said, Come here. I went to the door. You,
Benjamin. Mother said.

What is it now. Father said, Where are you going.

Take him downstairs and get someone to watch him, Jason. Mother said.
You know Im ill, yet you

Father shut the door behind us.

T. P. he said.

Sir. T. P. said downstairs.

Benjys coming down. Father said. Go with T. P.

I went to the bathroom door. I could hear the water.

Benjy. T. P. said downstairs.

I could hear the water. I listened to it.

Benjy. T. P. said downstairs.

I listened to the water.

I couldnt hear the water, and Caddy opened the door.

Why, Benjy. she said. She looked at me and I went and she put her arms
around me. Did you find Caddy again. she said. Did you think Caddy
had run away. Caddy smelled like trees.

We went to Caddys room. She sat down at the mirror. She stopped her
hands and looked at me.

Why, Benjy. What is it. she said. You mustnt cry. Caddys not going
away. See here. she said. She took up the bottle and took the stopper
out and held it to my nose. Sweet. Smell. Good.

I went away and I didnt hush, and she held the bottle in her hand,
looking at me.

Oh. she said. She put the bottle down and came and put her arms around
me. So that was it. And you were trying to tell Caddy and you couldnt
tell her. You wanted to, but you couldnt, could you. Of course Caddy
wont. Of course Caddy wont. Just wait till I dress.

Caddy dressed and took up the bottle again and we went down to the
kitchen.

Dilsey. Caddy said, Benjys got a present for you. She stooped down
and put the bottle in my hand. Hold it out to Dilsey, now. Caddy held
my hand out and Dilsey took the bottle.

Well Ill declare. Dilsey said, If my baby aint give Dilsey a bottle
of perfume. Just look here, Roskus.

Caddy smelled like trees. We dont like perfume ourselves. Caddy said.

_She smelled like trees._

Come on, now. Dilsey said, You too big to sleep with folks. You a big
boy now. Thirteen years old. Big enough to sleep by yourself in Uncle
Maurys room. Dilsey said.

Uncle Maury was sick. His eye was sick, and his mouth. Versh took his
supper up to him on the tray.

Maury says hes going to shoot the scoundrel. Father said. I told him
hed better not mention it to Patterson before hand. He drank.

Jason. Mother said.

Shoot who, Father. Quentin said. Whats Uncle Maury going to shoot
him for.

Because he couldnt take a little joke. Father said.

Jason. Mother said, How can you. Youd sit right there and see Maury
shot down in ambush, and laugh.

Then Mauryd better stay out of ambush. Father said.

Shoot who, Father. Quentin said, Whos Uncle Maury going to shoot.

Nobody. Father said. I dont own a pistol.

Mother began to cry. If you begrudge Maury your food, why arent you
man enough to say so to his face. To ridicule him before the children,
behind his back.

Of course I dont. Father said, I admire Maury. He is invaluable to my
own sense of racial superiority. I wouldnt swap Maury for a matched
team. And do you know why, Quentin.

No, sir. Quentin said.

_Et ego in arcadia_ I have forgotten the latin for hay. Father said.
There, there. he said, I was just joking. He drank and set the glass
down and went and put his hand on Mothers shoulder.

Its no joke. Mother said. My people are every bit as well born as
yours. Just because Maurys health is bad.

Of course. Father said. Bad health is the primary reason for all
life. Created by disease, within putrefaction, into decay. Versh.

Sir. Versh said behind my chair.

Take the decanter and fill it.

And tell Dilsey to come and take Benjamin up to bed. Mother said.

You a big boy. Dilsey said, Caddy tired sleeping with you. Hush now,
so you can go to sleep. The room went away, but I didnt hush, and the
room came back and Dilsey came and sat on the bed, looking at me.

Aint you going to be a good boy and hush. Dilsey said. You aint, is
you. See can you wait a minute, then.

She went away. There wasnt anything in the door. Then Caddy was in it.

Hush. Caddy said. Im coming.

I hushed and Dilsey turned back the spread and Caddy got in between the
spread and the blanket. She didnt take off her bathrobe.

Now. she said, Here I am. Dilsey came with a blanket and spread it
over her and tucked it around her.

He be gone in a minute. Dilsey said. I leave the light on in your
room.

All right. Caddy said. She snuggled her head beside mine on the
pillow. Goodnight, Dilsey.

Goodnight, honey. Dilsey said. The room went black. _Caddy smelled
like trees._

We looked up into the tree where she was.

What she seeing, Versh. Frony whispered.

Shhhhhhh. Caddy said in the tree. Dilsey said,

You come on here. She came around the corner of the house. Whynt you
all go on up stairs, like your paw said, stead of slipping out behind my
back. Wheres Caddy and Quentin.

I told her not to climb up that tree. Jason said. Im going to tell
on her.

Who in what tree. Dilsey said. She came and looked up into the tree.
Caddy. Dilsey said. The branches began to shake again.

You, Satan. Dilsey said. Come down from there.

Hush. Caddy said, Dont you know Father said to be quiet. Her legs
came in sight and Dilsey reached up and lifted her out of the tree.

Aint you got any better sense than to let them come around here.
Dilsey said.

I couldnt do nothing with her. Versh said.

What you all doing here. Dilsey said. Who told you to come up to the
house.

She did. Frony said. She told us to come.

Who told you you got to do what she say. Dilsey said. Get on home,
now. Frony and T. P. went on. We couldnt see them when they were still
going away.

Out here in the middle of the night. Dilsey said. She took me up and
we went to the kitchen.

Slipping out behind my back. Dilsey said. When you knowed its past
your bedtime.

Shhhh, Dilsey. Caddy said. Dont talk so loud. Weve got to be quiet.

You hush your mouth and get quiet, then. Dilsey said. Wheres
Quentin.

Quentins mad because he had to mind me tonight. Caddy said. Hes
still got T. P.s bottle of lightning bugs.

I reckon T. P. can get along without it. Dilsey said. You go and find
Quentin, Versh. Roskus say he seen him going towards the barn. Versh
went on. We couldnt see him.

Theyre not doing anything in there. Caddy said. Just sitting in
chairs and looking.

They dont need no help from you all to do that. Dilsey said. We went
around the kitchen.

_Where you want to go now, Luster said. You going back to watch them
knocking ball again. We done looked for it over there. Here. Wait a
minute. You wait right here while I go back and get that ball. I done
thought of something._

The kitchen was dark. The trees were black on the sky. Dan came waddling
out from under the steps and chewed my ankle. I went around the kitchen,
where the moon was. Dan came scuffling along, into the moon.

Benjy. T. P. said in the house.

The flower tree by the parlor window wasnt dark, but the thick trees
were. The grass was buzzing in the moonlight where my shadow walked on
the grass.

You, Benjy. T. P. said in the house. Where you hiding. You slipping
off. I knows it.

_Luster came back. Wait, he said. Here. Dont go over there. Miss Quentin
and her beau in the swing yonder. You come on this way. Come back here,
Benjy._

It was dark under the trees. Dan wouldnt come. He stayed in the
moonlight. Then I could see the swing and I began to cry.

_Come away from there, Benjy, Luster said. You know Miss Quentin going
to get mad._

It was two now, and then one in the swing. Caddy came fast, white in the
darkness.

Benjy, she said. How did you slip out. Wheres Versh.

She put her arms around me and I hushed and held to her dress and tried
to pull her away.

Why, Benjy. she said. What is it. T. P. she called.

The one in the swing got up and came, and I cried and pulled Caddys
dress.

Benjy. Caddy said. Its just Charlie. Dont you know Charlie.

Wheres his nigger. Charlie said. What do they let him run around
loose for.

Hush, Benjy. Caddy said. Go away, Charlie. He doesnt like you.
Charlie went away and I hushed. I pulled at Caddys dress.

Why, Benjy. Caddy said. Arent you going to let me stay here and talk
to Charlie awhile.

Call that nigger. Charlie said. He came back. I cried louder and
pulled at Caddys dress.

Go away, Charlie. Caddy said. Charlie came and put his hands on Caddy
and I cried more. I cried loud.

No, no. Caddy said. No. No.

He cant talk. Charlie said. Caddy.

Are you crazy. Caddy said. She began to breathe fast. He can see.
Dont. Dont. Caddy fought. They both breathed fast. Please. Please.
Caddy whispered.

Send him away. Charlie said.

I will. Caddy said. Let me go.

Will you send him away. Charlie said.

Yes. Caddy said. Let me go. Charlie went away. Hush. Caddy said.
Hes gone. I hushed. I could hear her and feel her chest going.

Ill have to take him to the house. she said. She took my hand. Im
coming. she whispered.

Wait. Charlie said. Call the nigger.

No. Caddy said. Ill come back. Come on, Benjy.

Caddy. Charlie whispered, loud. We went on. You better come back. Are
you coming back. Caddy and I were running. Caddy. Charlie said. We
ran out into the moonlight, toward the kitchen.

Caddy. Charlie said.

Caddy and I ran. We ran up the kitchen steps, onto the porch, and Caddy
knelt down in the dark and held me. I could hear her and feel her chest.
I wont. she said. I wont anymore, ever. Benjy. Benjy. Then she was
crying, and I cried, and we held each other. Hush. she said. Hush. I
wont anymore. So I hushed and Caddy got up and we went into the kitchen
and turned the light on and Caddy took the kitchen soap and washed her
mouth at the sink, hard. Caddy smelled like trees.

_I kept a telling you to stay away from there, Luster said. They sat up
in the swing, quick. Quentin had her hands on her hair. He had a red
tie._

_You old crazy loon, Quentin said. Im going to tell Dilsey about the
way you let him follow everywhere I go. Im going to make her whip you
good._

I couldnt stop him. Luster said. Come on here, Benjy.

Yes you could. Quentin said. You didnt try. You were both snooping
around after me. Did Grandmother send you all out here to spy on me.
She jumped out of the swing. If you dont take him right away this
minute and keep him away, Im going to make Jason whip you.

I cant do nothing with him. Luster said. You try it if you think you
can.

Shut your mouth. Quentin said. Are you going to get him away.

Ah, let him stay. he said. He had a red tie. The sun was red on it.
Look here, Jack. He struck a match and put it in his mouth. Then he
took the match out of his mouth. It was still burning. Want to try it.
he said. I went over there. Open your mouth. he said. I opened my
mouth. Quentin hit the match with her hand and it went away.

Goddamn you. Quentin said. Do you want to get him started. Dont you
know hell beller all day. Im going to tell Dilsey on you. She went
away running.

Here, kid. he said. Hey. Come on back. I aint going to fool with
him.

Quentin ran on to the house. She went around the kitchen.

You played hell then, Jack. he said. Aint you.

He cant tell what you saying. Luster said. He deef and dumb.

Is. he said. How longs he been that way.

Been that way thirty-three years today. Luster said. Born looney. Is
you one of them show folks.

Why. he said.

I dont ricklick seeing you around here before. Luster said.

Well, what about it. he said.

Nothing. Luster said. I going tonight.

He looked at me.

You aint the one can play a tune on that saw, is you. Luster said.

Itll cost you a quarter to find that out. he said. He looked at me.
Why dont they lock him up. he said. Whatd you bring him out here
for.

You aint talking to me. Luster said. I cant do nothing with him. I
just come over here looking for a quarter I lost so I can go to the show
tonight. Look like now I aint going to get to go. Luster looked on the
ground. You aint got no extra quarter, is you. Luster said.

No. he said. I aint.

I reckon I just have to find that other one, then. Luster said. He put
his hand in his pocket. You dont want to buy no golf ball neither, does
you. Luster said.

What kind of ball. he said.

Golf ball. Luster said. I dont want but a quarter.

What for. he said. What do I want with it.

I didnt think you did. Luster said. Come on here, mulehead. he
said. Come on here and watch them knocking that ball. Here. Here
something you can play with along with that jimson weed. Luster picked
it up and gave it to me. It was bright.

Whered you get that. he said. His tie was red in the sun, walking.

Found it under this here bush. Luster said. I thought for a minute it
was that quarter I lost.

He came and took it.

Hush. Luster said. He going to give it back when he done looking at
it.

Agnes Mabel Becky. he said. He looked toward the house.

Hush. Luster said. He fixing to give it back.

He gave it to me and I hushed.

Who come to see her last night. he said.

I dont know. Luster said. They comes every night she can climb down
that tree. I dont keep no track of them.

Damn if one of them didnt leave a track. he said. He looked at the
house. Then he went and lay down in the swing. Go away. he said. Dont
bother me.

Come on here. Luster said. You done played hell now. Time Miss
Quentin get done telling on you.

We went to the fence and looked through the curling flower spaces.
Luster hunted in the grass.

I had it right here. he said. I saw the flag flapping, and the sun
slanting on the broad grass.

Theyll be some along soon. Luster said. There some now, but they
going away. Come on and help me look for it.

We went along the fence.

Hush. Luster said. How can I make them come over here, if they aint
coming. Wait. Theyll be some in a minute. Look yonder. Here they come.

I went along the fence, to the gate, where the girls passed with their
booksatchels. You, Benjy. Luster said. Come back here.

_You cant do no good looking through the gate, T. P. said. Miss Caddy
done gone long ways away. Done got married and left you. You cant do no
good, holding to the gate and crying. She cant hear you._

_What is it he wants, T. P. Mother said. Cant you play with him and keep
him quiet._

_He want to go down yonder and look through the gate, T. P. said._

_Well, he cannot do it, Mother said. Its raining. You will just have to
play with him and keep him quiet. You, Benjamin._

_Aint nothing going to quiet him, T. P. said. He think if he down to the
gate, Miss Caddy come back._

_Nonsense, Mother said._

I could hear them talking. I went out the door and I couldnt hear them,
and I went down to the gate, where the girls passed with their
booksatchels. They looked at me, walking fast, with their heads turned.
I tried to say, but they went on, and I went along the fence, trying to
say, and they went faster. Then they were running and I came to the
corner of the fence and I couldnt go any further, and I held to the
fence, looking after them and trying to say.

You, Benjy. T. P. said. What you doing, slipping out. Dont you know
Dilsey whip you.

You cant do no good, moaning and slobbering through the fence. T. P.
said. You done skeered them chillen. Look at them, walking on the other
side of the street.

_How did he get out, Father said. Did you leave the gate unlatched when
you came in, Jason._

_Of course not, Jason said. Dont you know Ive got better sense than to
do that. Do you think I wanted anything like this to happen. This family
is bad enough, God knows. I could have told you, all the time. I reckon
youll send him to Jackson, now. If Mrs Burgess dont shoot him first._

_Hush, Father said._

_I could have told you, all the time, Jason said._

It was open when I touched it, and I held to it in the twilight. I
wasnt crying, and I tried to stop, watching the girls coming along in
the twilight. I wasnt crying.

There he is.

They stopped.

He cant get out. He wont hurt anybody, anyway. Come on.

Im scared to. Im scared. Im going to cross the street.

He cant get out.

I wasnt crying.

Dont be a fraid cat. Come on.

They came on in the twilight. I wasnt crying, and I held to the gate.
They came slow.

Im scared.

He wont hurt you. I pass here every day. He just runs along the fence.

They came on. I opened the gate and they stopped, turning. I was trying
to say, and I caught her, trying to say, and she screamed and I was
trying to say and trying and the bright shapes began to stop and I tried
to get out. I tried to get it off of my face, but the bright shapes were
going again. They were going up the hill to where it fell away and I
tried to cry. But when I breathed in, I couldnt breathe out again to
cry, and I tried to keep from falling off the hill and I fell off the
hill into the bright, whirling shapes.

_Here, loony, Luster said. Here come some. Hush your slobbering and
moaning, now._

They came to the flag. He took it out and they hit, then he put the flag
back.

Mister. Luster said.

He looked around. What. he said.

Want to buy a golf ball. Luster said.

Lets see it. he said. He came to the fence and Luster reached the
ball through.

Whered you get it. he said.

Found it. Luster said.

I know that. he said. Where. In somebodys golf bag.

I found it laying over here in the yard. Luster said. Ill take a
quarter for it.

What makes you think its yours. he said.

I found it. Luster said.

Then find yourself another one. he said. He put it in his pocket and
went away.

I got to go to that show tonight. Luster said.

That so. he said. He went to the table. Fore, caddie. he said. He
hit.

Ill declare. Luster said. You fusses when you dont see them and you
fusses when you does. Why cant you hush. Dont you reckon folks gets
tired of listening to you all the time. Here. You dropped your jimson
weed. He picked it up and gave it back to me. You needs a new one. You
bout wore that one out. We stood at the fence and watched them.

That white man hard to get along with. Luster said. You see him take
my ball. They went on. We went on along the fence. We came to the
garden and we couldnt go any further. I held to the fence and looked
through the flower spaces. They went away.

Now you aint got nothing to moan about. Luster said. Hush up. I the
one got something to moan over, you aint. Here. Whynt you hold on to
that weed. You be bellering about it next. He gave me the flower.
Where you heading now.

Our shadows were on the grass. They got to the trees before we did. Mine
got there first. Then we got there, and then the shadows were gone.
There was a flower in the bottle. I put the other flower in it.

Aint you a grown man, now. Luster said. Playing with two weeds in a
bottle. You know what they going to do with you when Miss Cahline die.
They going to send you to Jackson, where you belong. Mr Jason say so.
Where you can hold the bars all day long with the rest of the looneys
and slobber. How you like that.

Luster knocked the flowers over with his hand. Thats what theyll do
to you at Jackson when you starts bellering.

I tried to pick up the flowers. Luster picked them up, and they went
away. I began to cry.

Beller. Luster said. Beller. You want something to beller about. All
right, then. Caddy. he whispered. Caddy. Beller now. Caddy.

Luster. Dilsey said from the kitchen.

The flowers came back.

Hush. Luster said. Here they is. Look. Its fixed back just like it
was at first. Hush, now.

You, Luster. Dilsey said.

Yessum. Luster said. We coming. You done played hell. Get up. He
jerked my arm and I got up. We went out of the trees. Our shadows were
gone.

Hush. Luster said. Look at all them folks watching you. Hush.

You bring him on here. Dilsey said. She came down the steps.

What you done to him now. she said.

Aint done nothing to him. Luster said. He just started bellering.

Yes you is. Dilsey said. You done something to him. Where you been.

Over yonder under them cedars. Luster said.

Getting Quentin all riled up. Dilsey said. Why cant you keep him away
from her. Dont you know she dont like him where she at.

Got as much time for him as I is. Luster said. He aint none of my
uncle.

Dont you sass me, nigger boy. Dilsey said.

I aint done nothing to him. Luster said. He was playing there, and
all of a sudden he started bellering.

Is you been projecking with his graveyard. Dilsey said.

I aint touched his graveyard. Luster said.

Dont lie to me, boy. Dilsey said. We went up the steps and into the
kitchen. Dilsey opened the firedoor and drew a chair up in front of it
and I sat down. I hushed.

_What you want to get her started for, Dilsey said. Whynt you keep him
out of there._

_He was just looking at the fire, Caddy said. Mother was telling him his
new name. We didnt mean to get her started._

_I knows you didnt, Dilsey said. Him at one end of the house and her at
the other. You let my things alone, now. Dont you touch nothing till I
get back._

Aint you shamed of yourself. Dilsey said. Teasing him. She set the
cake on the table.

I aint been teasing him. Luster said. He was playing with that bottle
full of dogfennel and all of a sudden he started up bellering. You heard
him.

You aint done nothing to his flowers. Dilsey said.

I aint touched his graveyard. Luster said. What I want with his
truck. I was just hunting for that quarter.

You lost it, did you. Dilsey said. She lit the candles on the cake.
Some of them were little ones. Some were big ones cut into little
pieces. I told you to go put it away. Now I reckon you want me to get
you another one from Frony.

I got to go to that show, Benjy or no Benjy. Luster said. I aint
going to follow him around day and night both.

You going to do just what he want you to, nigger boy. Dilsey said.
You hear me.

Aint I always done it. Luster said. Dont I always does what he wants.
Dont I, Benjy.

Then you keep it up. Dilsey said. Bringing him in here, bawling and
getting her started too. You all go ahead and eat this cake, now, before
Jason come. I dont want him jumping on me about a cake I bought with my
own money. Me baking a cake here, with him counting every egg that comes
into this kitchen. See can you let him alone now, less you dont want to
go to that show tonight.

Dilsey went away.

You cant blow out no candles. Luster said. Watch me blow them out.
He leaned down and puffed his face. The candles went away. I began to
cry. Hush. Luster said. Here. Look at the fire whiles I cuts this
cake.

_I could hear the clock, and I could hear Caddy standing behind me, and
I could hear the roof. Its still raining, Caddy said. I hate rain. I
hate everything. And then her head came into my lap and she was crying,
holding me, and I began to cry. Then I looked at the fire again and the
bright, smooth shapes went again. I could hear the clock and the roof
and Caddy._

I ate some cake. Lusters hand came and took another piece. I could hear
him eating. I looked at the fire.

A long piece of wire came across my shoulder. It went to the door, and
then the fire went away. I began to cry.

What you howling for now. Luster said. Look there. The fire was
there. I hushed. Cant you set and look at the fire and be quiet like
mammy told you. Luster said. You ought to be ashamed of yourself.
Here. Heres you some more cake.

What you done to him now. Dilsey said. Cant you never let him alone.

I was just trying to get him to hush up and not sturb Miss Cahline.
Luster said. Something got him started again.

And I know what that something name. Dilsey said. Im going to get
Versh to take a stick to you when he comes home. You just trying
yourself. You been doing it all day. Did you take him down to the
branch.

Nome. Luster said. We been right here in this yard all day, like you
said.

His hand came for another piece of cake. Dilsey hit his hand. Reach it
again, and I chop it right off with this here butcher knife. Dilsey
said. I bet he aint had one piece of it.

Yes he is. Luster said. He already had twice as much as me. Ask him
if he aint.

Reach hit one more time. Dilsey said. Just reach it.

_Thats right, Dilsey said. I reckon itll be my time to cry next.
Reckon Maury going to let me cry on him a while, too._

_His names Benjy now, Caddy said._

_How come it is, Dilsey said. He aint wore out the name he was born with
yet, is he._

_Benjamin came out of the bible, Caddy said. Its a better name for him
than Maury was._

_How come it is, Dilsey said._

_Mother says it is, Caddy said._

_Huh, Dilsey said. Name aint going to help him. Hurt him, neither. Folks
dont have no luck, changing names. My name been Dilsey since fore I
could remember and it be Dilsey when theys long forgot me._

_How will they know its Dilsey, when its long forgot, Dilsey, Caddy
said._

_Itll be in the Book, honey, Dilsey said. Writ out._

_Can you read it, Caddy said._

_Wont have to, Dilsey said. Theyll read it for me. All I got to do is
say Ise here._

The long wire came across my shoulder, and the fire went away. I began
to cry.

Dilsey and Luster fought.

I seen you. Dilsey said. Oho, I seen you. She dragged Luster out of
the corner, shaking him. Wasnt nothing bothering him, was they. You
just wait till your pappy come home. I wish I was young like I use to
be, Id tear them years right off your head. I good mind to lock you up
in that cellar and not let you go to that show tonight, I sho is.

Ow, mammy. Luster said. Ow, mammy.

I put my hand out to where the fire had been.

Catch him. Dilsey said. Catch him back.

My hand jerked back and I put it in my mouth and Dilsey caught me. I
could still hear the clock between my voice. Dilsey reached back and hit
Luster on the head. My voice was going loud every time.

Get that soda. Dilsey said. She took my hand out of my mouth. My voice
went louder then and my hand tried to go back to my mouth, but Dilsey
held it. My voice went loud. She sprinkled soda on my hand.

Look in the pantry and tear a piece off of that rag hanging on the
nail. she said. Hush, now. You dont want to make your ma sick again,
does you. Here, look at the fire. Dilsey make your hand stop hurting in
just a minute. Look at the fire. She opened the fire door. I looked at
the fire, but my hand didnt stop and I didnt stop. My hand was trying
to go to my mouth but Dilsey held it.

She wrapped the cloth around it. Mother said,

What is it now. Cant I even be sick in peace. Do I have to get up out
of bed to come down to him, with two grown negroes to take care of him.

He all right now. Dilsey said. He going to quit. He just burnt his
hand a little.

With two grown negroes, you must bring him into the house, bawling.
Mother said. You got him started on purpose, because you know Im
sick. She came and stood by me. Hush. she said. Right this minute.
Did you give him this cake.

I bought it. Dilsey said. It never come out of Jasons pantry. I
fixed him some birthday.

Do you want to poison him with that cheap store cake. Mother said. Is
that what you are trying to do. Am I never to have one minutes peace.

You go on back up stairs and lay down. Dilsey said. Itll quit
smarting him in a minute now, and hell hush. Come on, now.

And leave him down here for you all to do something else to. Mother
said. How can I lie there, with him bawling down here. Benjamin. Hush
this minute.

They aint nowhere else to take him. Dilsey said. We aint got the room
we use to have. He cant stay out in the yard, crying where all the
neighbors can see him.

I know, I know. Mother said. Its all my fault. Ill be gone soon,
and you and Jason will both get along better. She began to cry.

You hush that, now. Dilsey said. Youll get yourself down again. You
come on back up stairs. Luster going to take him to the liberry and play
with him till I get his supper done.

Dilsey and Mother went out.

Hush up. Luster said. You hush up. You want me to burn your other
hand for you. You aint hurt. Hush up.

Here. Dilsey said. Stop crying, now. She gave me the slipper, and I
hushed. Take him to the liberry. she said. And if I hear him again, I
going to whip you myself.

We went to the library. Luster turned on the light. The windows went
black, and the dark tall place on the wall came and I went and touched
it. It was like a door, only it wasnt a door.

The fire came behind me and I went to the fire and sat on the floor,
holding the slipper. The fire went higher. It went onto the cushion in
Mothers chair.

Hush up. Luster said. Cant you never get done for a while. Here I
done built you a fire, and you wont even look at it.

_Your name is Benjy. Caddy said. Do you hear. Benjy. Benjy._

_Dont tell him that, Mother said. Bring him here._

_Caddy lifted me under the arms._

_Get up, MauI mean Benjy, she said._

_Dont try to carry him, Mother said. Cant you lead him over here. Is
that too much for you to think of._

_I can carry him_, Caddy said. Let me carry him up, Dilsey.

Go on, Minute. Dilsey said. You aint big enough to tote a flea. You
go on and be quiet, like Mr. Jason said.

There was a light at the top of the stairs. Father was there, in his
shirt sleeves. The way he looked said Hush. Caddy whispered,

Is Mother sick.

_Versh set me down and we went into Mothers room. There was a fire. It
was rising and falling on the walls. There was another fire in the
mirror. I could smell the sickness. It was a cloth folded on Mothers
head. Her hair was on the pillow. The fire didnt reach it, but it shone
on her hand, where her rings were jumping._

Come and tell Mother goodnight. Caddy said. We went to the bed. The
fire went out of the mirror. Father got up from the bed and lifted me up
and Mother put her hand on my head.

What time is it. Mother said. Her eyes were closed.

Ten minutes to seven. Father said.

Its too early for him to go to bed. Mother said. Hell wake up at
daybreak, and I simply cannot bear another day like today.

There, there. Father said. He touched Mothers face.

I know Im nothing but a burden to you. Mother said. But Ill be gone
soon. Then you will be rid of my bothering.

Hush. Father said. Ill take him downstairs awhile. He took me up.
Come on, old fellow. Lets go downstairs awhile. Well have to be quiet
while Quentin is studying, now.

Caddy went and leaned her face over the bed and Mothers hand came into
the firelight. Her rings jumped on Caddys back.

_Mothers sick, Father said. Dilsey will put you to bed. Wheres
Quentin._

_Versh getting him, Dilsey said._

Father stood and watched us go past. We could hear Mother in her room.
Caddy said Hush. Jason was still climbing the stairs. He had his hands
in his pockets.

You all must be good tonight. Father said. And be quiet, so you wont
disturb Mother.

Well be quiet. Caddy said. You must be quiet now, Jason. she said.
We tiptoed.

_We could hear the roof. I could see the fire in the mirror too. Caddy
lifted me again._

Come on, now. she said. Then you can come back to the fire. Hush,
now.

Candace. Mother said.

Hush, Benjy. Caddy said. Mother wants you a minute. Like a good boy.
Then you can come back. Benjy.

Caddy let me down, and I hushed.

Let him stay here, Mother. When hes through looking at the fire, then
you can tell him.

Candace. Mother said. Caddy stooped and lifted me. We staggered.
Candace. Mother said.

Hush. Caddy said. You can still see it. Hush.

Bring him here. Mother said. Hes too big for you to carry. You must
stop trying. Youll injure your back. All of our women have prided
themselves on their carriage. Do you want to look like a washer-woman.

Hes not too heavy. Caddy said. I can carry him.

Well, I dont want him carried, then. Mother said. A five year old
child. No, no. Not in my lap. Let him stand up.

If youll hold him, hell stop. Caddy said. Hush. she said. You can
go right back. Here. Heres your cushion. See.

Dont, Candace. Mother said.

Let him look at it and hell be quiet. Caddy said. Hold up just a
minute while I slip it out. There, Benjy. Look.

I looked at it and hushed.

You humour him too much. Mother said. You and your father both. You
dont realise that I am the one who has to pay for it. Damuddy spoiled
Jason that way and it took him two years to outgrow it, and I am not
strong enough to go through the same thing with Benjamin.

You dont need to bother with him. Caddy said. I like to take care of
him. Dont I, Benjy.

Candace. Mother said. I told you not to call him that. It was bad
enough when your father insisted on calling you by that silly nickname,
and I will not have him called by one. Nicknames are vulgar. Only common
people use them. Benjamin. she said.

Look at me. Mother said.

Benjamin. she said. She took my face in her hands and turned it to
hers.

Benjamin. she said. Take that cushion away, Candace.

Hell cry. Caddy said.

Take that cushion away, like I told you. Mother said. He must learn
to mind.

The cushion went away.

Hush, Benjy. Caddy said.

You go over there and sit down. Mother said. Benjamin. She held my
face to hers.

Stop that. she said. Stop it.

But I didnt stop and Mother caught me in her arms and began to cry, and
I cried. Then the cushion came back and Caddy held it above Mothers
head. She drew Mother back in the chair and Mother lay crying against
the red and yellow cushion.

Hush, Mother. Caddy said. You go upstairs and lay down, so you can be
sick. Ill go get Dilsey. She led me to the fire and I looked at the
bright, smooth shapes. I could hear the fire and the roof.

Father took me up. He smelled like rain.

Well, Benjy. he said. Have you been a good boy today.

Caddy and Jason were fighting in the mirror.

You, Caddy. Father said.

They fought. Jason began to cry.

Caddy. Father said. Jason was crying. He wasnt fighting anymore but
we could see Caddy fighting in the mirror and Father put me down and
went into the mirror and fought too. He lifted Caddy up. She fought.
Jason lay on the floor, crying. He had the scissors in his hand. Father
held Caddy.

He cut up all Benjys dolls. Caddy said. Ill slit his gizzle.

Candace. Father said.

I will. Caddy said. I will. She fought. Father held her. She kicked
at Jason. He rolled into the corner, out of the mirror. Father brought
Caddy to the fire. They were all out of the mirror. Only the fire was in
it. Like the fire was in a door.

Stop that. Father said. Do you want to make Mother sick in her room.

Caddy stopped. He cut up all the dolls MauBenjy and I made. Caddy
said. He did it just for meanness.

I didnt. Jason said. He was sitting up, crying. I didnt know they
were his. I just thought they were some old papers.

You couldnt help but know. Caddy said. You did it just.

Hush. Father said. Jason. he said.

Ill make you some more tomorrow. Caddy said. Well make a lot of
them. Here, you can look at the cushion, too.

_Jason came in._

_I kept telling you to hush, Luster said._

_Whats the matter now, Jason said._

He just trying hisself. Luster said. That the way he been going on
all day.

Why dont you let him alone, then. Jason said. If you cant keep him
quiet, youll have to take him out to the kitchen. The rest of us cant
shut ourselves up in a room like Mother does.

Mammy say keep him out the kitchen till she get supper. Luster said.

Then play with him and keep him quiet. Jason said. Do I have to work
all day and then come home to a mad house. He opened the paper and read
it.

_You can look at the fire and the mirror and the cushion too, Caddy
said. You wont have to wait until supper to look at the cushion, now. We
could hear the roof. We could hear Jason too, crying loud beyond the
wall._

Dilsey said, You come, Jason. You letting him alone, is you.

Yessum. Luster said.

Where Quentin. Dilsey said. Supper near bout ready.

I dont knowm. Luster said. I aint seen her.

Dilsey went away. Quentin. she said in the hall. Quentin. Supper
ready.

_We could hear the roof. Quentin smelled like rain, too._

_What did Jason do, he said._

_He cut up all Benjys dolls, Caddy said._

_Mother said to not call him Benjy, Quentin said. He sat on the rug by
us. I wish it wouldnt rain, he said. You cant do anything._

_Youve been in a fight, Caddy said. Havent you._

_It wasnt much, Quentin said._

_You can tell it, Caddy said. Fatherll see it._

_I dont care, Quentin said. I wish it wouldnt rain._

Quentin said, Didnt Dilsey say supper was ready.

Yessum. Luster said. Jason looked at Quentin. Then he read the paper
again. Quentin came in. She say it bout ready. Luster said. Quentin
jumped down in Mothers chair. Luster said,

Mr Jason.

What. Jason said.

Let me have two bits. Luster said.

What for. Jason said.

To go to the show tonight. Luster said.

I thought Dilsey was going to get a quarter from Frony for you. Jason
said.

She did. Luster said. I lost it. Me and Benjy hunted all day for that
quarter. You can ask him.

Then borrow one from him. Jason said. I have to work for mine. He
read the paper. Quentin looked at the fire. The fire was in her eyes and
on her mouth. Her mouth was red.

I tried to keep him away from there. Luster said.

Shut your mouth. Quentin said. Jason looked at her.

What did I tell you I was going to do if I saw you with that show
fellow again. he said. Quentin looked at the fire. Did you hear me.
Jason said.

I heard you. Quentin said. Why dont you do it, then.

Dont you worry. Jason said.

Im not. Quentin said. Jason read the paper again.

_I could hear the roof. Father leaned forward and looked at Quentin._

_Hello, he said. Who won._

Nobody. Quentin said. They stopped us. Teachers.

Who was it. Father said. Will you tell.

It was all right. Quentin said. He was as big as me.

Thats good. Father said. Can you tell what it was about.

It wasnt anything. Quentin said. He said he would put a frog in her
desk and she wouldnt dare to whip him.

Oh. Father said. She. And then what.

Yes, sir. Quentin said. And then I kind of hit him.

We could hear the roof and the fire, and a snuffling outside the door.

Where was he going to get a frog in November. Father said.

I dont know, sir. Quentin said.

We could hear them.

Jason. Father said. We could hear Jason.

Jason. Father said. Come in here and stop that.

We could hear the roof and the fire and Jason.

Stop that, now. Father said. Do you want me to whip you again.
Father lifted Jason up into the chair by him. Jason snuffled. We could
hear the fire and the roof. Jason snuffled a little louder.

One more time. Father said. We could hear the fire and the roof.

_Dilsey said, All right. You all can come on to supper._

_Versh smelled like rain. He smelled like a dog, too. We could hear the
fire and the roof._

We could hear Caddy walking fast. Father and Mother looked at the door.
Caddy passed it, walking fast, She didnt look. She walked fast.

Candace. Mother said. Caddy stopped walking.

Yes, Mother. she said.

Hush, Caroline. Father said.

Come here. Mother said.

Hush, Caroline. Father said. Let her alone.

Caddy came to the door and stood there, looking at Father and Mother.
Her eyes flew at me, and away. I began to cry. It went loud and I got
up. Caddy came in and stood with her back to the wall, looking at me. I
went toward her, crying, and she shrank against the wall and I saw her
eyes and I cried louder and pulled at her dress. She put her hands out
but I pulled at her dress. Her eyes ran.

_Versh said, Your name Benjamin now. You know how come your name
Benjamin now. They making a bluegum out of you. Mammy say in old time
your granpa changed niggers name, and_ _he turn preacher, and when they
look at him, he bluegum too. Didnt use to be bluegum, neither. And when
family woman look him in the eye in the full of the moon, chile born
bluegum. And one evening, when they was about a dozen them bluegum
chillen running round the place, he never come home. Possum hunters
found him in the woods, et clean. And you know who et him. Them bluegum
chillen did._

We were in the hall. Caddy was still looking at me. Her hand was against
her mouth and I saw her eyes and I cried. We went up the stairs. She
stopped again, against the wall, looking at me and I cried and she went
on and I came on, crying, and she shrank against the wall, looking at
me. She opened the door to her room, but I pulled at her dress and we
went to the bathroom and she stood against the door, looking at me. Then
she put her arm across her face and I pushed at her, crying.

_What are you doing to him, Jason said. Why cant you let him alone._

_I aint touching him, Luster said. He been doing this way all day long.
He needs whipping._

_He needs to be sent to Jackson, Quentin said. How can anybody live in a
house like this._

_If you dont like it, young lady, youd better get out, Jason said._

_Im going to, Quentin said. Dont you worry._

Versh said, You move back some, so I can dry my legs off. He shoved me
back a little. Dont you start bellering, now. You can still see it.
Thats all you have to do. You aint had to be out in the rain like I is.
Yous born lucky and dont know it. He lay on his back before the fire.

You know how come your name Benjamin now. Versh said. Your mamma too
proud for you. What mammy say.

You be still there and let me dry my legs off. Versh said. Or you
know what Ill do. Ill skin your rinktum.

We could hear the fire and the roof and Versh.

Versh got up quick and jerked his legs back. Father said, All right,
Versh.

Ill feed him tonight. Caddy said. Sometimes he cries when Versh
feeds him.

Take this tray up, Dilsey said. And hurry back and feed Benjy.

Dont you want Caddy to feed you. Caddy said.

_Has he got to keep that old dirty slipper on the table, Quentin said.
Why dont you feed him in the kitchen. Its like eating with a pig._

_If you dont like the way we eat, youd better not come to the table,
Jason said._

Steam came off of Roskus. He was sitting in front of the stove. The oven
door was open and Roskus had his feet in it. Steam came off the bowl.
Caddy put the spoon into my mouth easy. There was a black spot on the
inside of the bowl.

_Now, now, Dilsey said. He aint going to bother you no more._

It got down below the mark. Then the bowl was empty. It went away. Hes
hungry tonight. Caddy said. The bowl came back. I couldnt see the
spot. Then I could. Hes starved, tonight. Caddy said. Look how much
hes eaten.

_Yes he will, Quentin said. You all send him out to spy on me. I hate
this house. Im going to run away._

Roskus said, It going to rain all night.

_Youve been running a long time, not to ve got any further off than
mealtime, Jason said._

_See if I dont, Quentin said._

Then I dont know what I going to do. Dilsey said. It caught me in the
hip so bad now I cant scarcely move. Climbing them stairs all evening.

_Oh, I wouldnt be surprised, Jason said. I wouldnt be surprised at
anything youd do._

_Quentin threw her napkin on the table._

_Hush your mouth, Jason, Dilsey said. She went and put her arm around
Quentin. Sit down, honey, Dilsey said. He ought to be shamed of hisself,
throwing what aint your fault up to you._

She sulling again, is she. Roskus said.

Hush your mouth. Dilsey said.

_Quentin pushed Dilsey away. She looked at Jason. Her mouth was red. She
picked up her glass of water and swung her arm back, looking at Jason.
Dilsey caught her arm. They fought. The glass_ _broke on the table, and
the water ran into the table. Quentin was running._

Mothers sick again. Caddy said.

Sho she is. Dilsey said. Weather like this make anybody sick. When
you going to get done eating, boy.

_Goddamn you, Quentin said. Goddamn you. We could hear her running on
the stairs. We went to the library._

Caddy gave me the cushion, and I could look at the cushion and the
mirror and the fire.

We must be quiet while Quentins studying. Father said. What are you
doing, Jason.

Nothing. Jason said.

Suppose you come over here to do it, then. Father said.

Jason came out of the corner.

What are you chewing. Father said.

Nothing. Jason said.

Hes chewing paper again. Caddy said.

Come here, Jason. Father said.

Jason threw into the fire. It hissed, uncurled, turning black. Then it
was gray. Then it was gone. Caddy and Father and Jason were in Mothers
chair. Jasons eyes were puffed shut and his mouth moved, like tasting.
Caddys head was on Fathers shoulder. Her hair was like fire, and
little points of fire were in her eyes, and I went and Father lifted me
into the chair too, and Caddy held me. She smelled like trees.

_She smelled like trees. In the corner it was dark, but I could see the
window. I squatted there, holding the slipper. I couldnt see it, but my
hands saw it, and I could hear it getting night, and my hands saw the
slipper but I couldnt see myself, but my hands could see the slipper,
and I squatted there, hearing it getting dark._

_Here you is, Luster said. Look what I got. He showed it to me. You know
where I got it. Miss Quentin gave it to me. I knowed they couldnt keep
me out. What you doing, off in here. I thought you done slipped back out
doors. Aint you done enough moaning and slobbering today, without hiding
off in this here empty room, mumbling and taking on. Come on here to
bed, so I can get up there before it starts. I cant fool with you all
night tonight. Just let them horns toot the first toot and I done gone._

We didnt go to our room.

This is where we have the measles. Caddy said. Why do we have to
sleep in here tonight.

What you care where you sleep. Dilsey said. She shut the door and sat
down and began to undress me. Jason began to cry. Hush. Dilsey said.

I want to sleep with Damuddy. Jason said.

Shes sick. Caddy said. You can sleep with her when she gets well.
Cant he, Dilsey.

Hush, now. Dilsey said. Jason hushed.

Our nighties are here, and everything. Caddy said. Its like moving.

And you better get into them. Dilsey said. You be unbuttoning Jason.

Caddy unbuttoned Jason. He began to cry.

You want to get whipped. Dilsey said. Jason hushed.

_Quentin, Mother said in the hall._

_What, Quentin said beyond the wall. We heard Mother lock the door. She
looked in our door and came in and stooped over the bed and kissed me on
the forehead._

_When you get him to bed, go and ask Dilsey if she objects to my having
a hot water bottle, Mother said. Tell her that if she does, Ill try to
get along without it. Tell her I just want to know._

_Yessum, Luster said. Come on. Get your pants off._

Quentin and Versh came in. Quentin had his face turned away. What are
you crying for. Caddy said.

Hush. Dilsey said. You all get undressed, now. You can go on home,
Versh.

_I got undressed and I looked at myself, and I began to cry. Hush,
Luster said. Looking for them aint going to do no good. Theyre gone.
You keep on like this, and we aint going have you no more birthday. He
put my gown on. I hushed, and then Luster stopped, his head toward the
window. Then he went to the window and looked out. He came back and took
my arm. Here she come, he said. Be quiet, now. We went to the window and
looked out. It came out of Quentins window and climbed across into the
tree. We watched the tree shaking. The shaking went down the tree, than_
_it came out and we watched it go away across the grass. Then we
couldnt see it. Come on, Luster said. There now. Hear them horns. You
get in that bed while my foots behaves._

There were two beds. Quentin got in the other one. He turned his face to
the wall. Dilsey put Jason in with him. Caddy took her dress off.

Just look at your drawers. Dilsey said. You better be glad your ma
aint seen you.

I already told on her. Jason said.

I bound you would. Dilsey said.

And see what you got by it. Caddy said. Tattletale.

What did I get by it. Jason said.

Whynt you get your nightie on. Dilsey said. She went and helped Caddy
take off her bodice and drawers. Just look at you. Dilsey said. She
wadded the drawers and scrubbed Caddy behind with them. It done soaked
clean through onto you. she said. But you wont get no bath this night.
Here. She put Caddys nightie on her and Caddy climbed into the bed and
Dilsey went to the door and stood with her hand on the light. You all
be quiet now, you hear. she said.

All right. Caddy said. Mothers not coming in tonight. she said. So
we still have to mind me.

Yes. Dilsey said. Go to sleep, now.

Mothers sick. Caddy said. She and Damuddy are both sick.

Hush. Dilsey said. You go to sleep.

The room went black, except the door. Then the door went black. Caddy
said, Hush, Maury, putting her hand on me. So I stayed hushed. We
could hear us. We could hear the dark.

It went away, and Father looked at us. He looked at Quentin and Jason,
then he came and kissed Caddy and put his hand on my head.

Is Mother very sick. Caddy said.

No. Father said. Are you going to take good care of Maury.

Yes. Caddy said.

Father went to the door and looked at us again. Then the dark came back,
and he stood black in the door, and then the door turned black again.
Caddy held me and I could hear us all, and the darkness, and something I
could smell. And then I could see the windows, where the trees were
buzzing. Then the dark began to go in smooth, bright shapes, like it
always does, even when Caddy says that I have been asleep.




                           JUNE SECOND, 1910


When the shadow of the sash appeared on the curtains it was between
seven and eight oclock and then I was in time again, hearing the watch.
It was Grandfathers and when Father gave it to me he said, Quentin, I
give you the mausoleum of all hope and desire; its rather
excrutiating-ly apt that you will use it to gain the reducto absurdum of
all human experience which can fit your individual needs no better than
it fitted his or his fathers. I give it to you not that you may
remember time, but that you might forget it now and then for a moment
and not spend all your breath trying to conquer it. Because no battle is
ever won he said. They are not even fought. The field only reveals to
man his own folly and despair, and victory is an illusion of
philosophers and fools.

It was propped against the collar box and I lay listening to it. Hearing
it, that is. I dont suppose anybody ever deliberately listens to a watch
or a clock. You dont have to. You can be oblivious to the sound for a
long while, then in a second of ticking it can create in the mind
unbroken the long diminishing parade of time you didnt hear. Like
Father said down the long and lonely light-rays you might see Jesus
walking, like. And the good Saint Francis that said Little Sister Death,
that never had a sister.

Through the wall I heard Shreves bed-springs and then his slippers on
the floor hishing. I got up and went to the dresser and slid my hand
along it and touched the watch and turned it face-down and went back to
bed. But the shadow of the sash was still there and I had learned to
tell almost to the minute, so Id have to turn my back to it, feeling
the eyes animals used to have in the back of their heads when it was on
top, itching. Its always the idle habits you acquire which you will
regret. Father said that. That Christ was not crucified: he was worn
away by a minute clicking of little wheels. That had no sister.

And so as soon as I knew I couldnt see it, I began to wonder what time
it was. Father said that constant speculation regarding the position of
mechanical hands on an arbitrary dial which is a symptom of
mind-function. Excrement Father said like sweating. And I saying All
right. Wonder. Go on and wonder.

If it had been cloudy I could have looked at the window, thinking what
he said about idle habits. Thinking it would be nice for them down at
New London if the weather held up like this. Why shouldnt it? The month
of brides, the voice that breathed _She ran right out of the mirror, out
of the banked scent. Roses. Roses. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson
announce the marriage of._ Roses. Not virgins like dogwood, milkweed. I
said I have committed incest, Father I said. Roses. Cunning and serene.
If you attend Harvard one year, but dont see the boat-race, there should
be a refund. Let Jason have it. Give Jason a year at Harvard.

Shreve stood in the door, putting his collar on, his glasses glinting
rosily, as though he had washed them with his face. You taking a cut
this morning?

Is it that late?

He looked at his watch. Bell in two minutes.

I didnt know it was that late. He was still looking at the watch, his
mouth shaping. Ill have to hustle. I cant stand another cut. The dean
told me last week He put the watch back into his pocket. Then I quit
talking.

Youd better slip on your pants and run, he said. He went out.

I got up and moved about, listening to him through the wall. He entered
the sitting-room, toward the door.

Arent you ready yet?

Not yet. Run along. Ill make it.

He went out. The door closed. His feet went down the corridor. Then I
could hear the watch again. I quit moving around and went to the window
and drew the curtains aside and watched them running for chapel, the
same ones fighting the same heaving coat-sleeves, the same books and
flapping collars flushing past like debris on a flood, and Spoade.
Calling Shreve my husband. Ah let him alone, Shreve said, if hes got
better sense than to chase after the little dirty sluts, whose business.
In the South you are ashamed of being a virgin. Boys. Men. They lie
about it. Because it means less to women, Father said. He said it was
men invented virginity not women. Father said its like death, only a
state in which the others are left and I said, But to believe it doesnt
matter and he said, Thats whats so sad about anything: not only
virginity, and I said, Why couldnt it have been me and not her who is
unvirgin and he said, Thats why thats sad too; nothing is even worth
the changing of it, and Shreve said if hes got better sense than to
chase after the little dirty sluts and I said Did you ever have a
sister? Did you? Did you?

Spoade was in the middle of them like a terrapin in a street full of
scuttering dead leaves, his collar about his ears, moving at his
customary unhurried walk. He was from South Carolina, a senior. It was
his clubs boast that he never ran for chapel and had never got there on
time and had never been absent in four years and had never made either
chapel or first lecture with a shirt on his back and socks on his feet.
About ten oclock hed come in Thompsons, get two cups of coffee, sit
down and take his socks out of his pocket and remove his shoes and put
them on while the coffee cooled. About noon youd see him with a shirt
and collar on, like anybody else. The others passed him running, but he
never increased his pace at all. After a while the quad was empty.

A sparrow slanted across the sunlight, onto the window ledge, and cocked
his head at me. His eye was round and bright. First hed watch me with
one eye, then flick! and it would be the other one, his throat pumping
faster than any pulse. The hour began to strike. The sparrow quit
swapping eyes and watched me steadily with the same one until the chimes
ceased, as if he were listening too. Then he flicked off the ledge and
was gone.

It was a while before the last stroke ceased vibrating. It stayed in the
air, more felt than heard, for a long time. Like all the bells that ever
rang still ringing in the long dying light-rays and Jesus and Saint
Francis talking about his sister. Because if it were just to hell; if
that were all of it. Finished. If things just finished themselves.
Nobody else there but her and me. If we could just have done something
so dreadful that they would have fled hell except us. _I have committed
incest I said Father it was I it was not Dalton Ames_ And when he put
Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. When he put the pistol in my hand
I didnt. Thats why I didnt. He would be there and she would and I
would. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. If we could have just done
something so dreadful and Father said Thats sad too, people cannot do
anything that dreadful they cannot do anything very dreadful at all they
cannot even remember tomorrow what seemed dreadful today and I said, You
can shirk all things and he said, Ah can you. And I will look down and
see my murmuring bones and the deep water like wind, like a roof of
wind, and after a long time they cannot distinguish even bones upon the
lonely and inviolate sand. Until on the Day when He says Rise only the
flat-iron would come floating up. Its not when you realise that nothing
can help youreligion, pride, anythingits when you realise that you
dont need any aid. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. If I could
have been his mother lying with open body lifted laughing, holding his
father with my hand refraining, seeing, watching him die before he
lived. _One minute she was standing in the door_

I went to the dresser and took up the watch, with the face still down. I
tapped the crystal on the corner of the dresser and caught the fragments
of glass in my hand and put them into the ashtray and twisted the hands
off and put them in the tray. The watch ticked on. I turned the face up,
the blank dial with little wheels clicking and clicking behind it, not
knowing any better. Jesus walking on Galilee and Washington not telling
lies. Father brought back a watch-charm from the Saint Louis Fair to
Jason: a tiny opera glass into which you squinted with one eye and saw a
skyscraper, a ferris wheel all spidery, Niagara Falls on a pinhead.
There was a red smear on the dial. When I saw it my thumb began to
smart. I put the watch down and went into Shreves room and got the
iodine and painted the cut. I cleaned the rest of the glass out of the
rim with the towel.

I laid out two suits of underwear, with socks, shirts, collars and ties,
and packed my trunk. I put in everything except my new suit and an old
one and two pairs of shoes and two hats, and my books. I carried the
books into the sitting-room and stacked them on the table, the ones I
had brought from home and the ones _Father said it used to be a
gentleman was known by his books; nowadays he is known by the ones he
has not returned_ and locked the trunk and addressed it. The quarter
hour sounded. I stopped and listened to it until the chimes ceased.

I bathed and shaved. The water made my finger smart a little, so I
painted it again. I put on my new suit and put my watch on and packed
the other suit and the accessories and my razor and brushes in my hand
bag, and wrapped the trunk key into a sheet of paper and put it in an
envelope and addressed it to Father, and wrote the two notes and sealed
them.

The shadow hadnt quite cleared the stoop. I stopped inside the door,
watching the shadow move. It moved almost perceptibly, creeping back
inside the door, driving the shadow back into the door. _Only she was
running already when I heard it. In the mirror she was running before I
knew what it was. That quick, her train caught up over her arm she ran
out of the mirror like a cloud, her veil swirling in long glints her
heels brittle and fast clutching her dress onto her shoulder with the
other hand, running out of the mirror the smells roses roses the voice
that breathed oer Eden. Then she was across the porch I couldnt hear
her heels then in the moonlight like a cloud, the floating shadow of the
veil running across the grass, into the bellowing. She ran out of her
dress, clutching her bridal, running into the bellowing where T. P. in
the dew Whooey Sassprilluh Benjy under the box bellowing. Father had a
V-shaped silver cuirass on his running chest_

Shreve said, Well, you didnt. . . . Is it a wedding or a wake?

I couldnt make it, I said.

Not with all that primping. Whats the matter? You think this was
Sunday?

I reckon the police wont get me for wearing my new suit one time, I
said.

I was thinking about the Square students. Have you got too proud to
attend classes too?

Im going to eat first. The shadow on the stoop was gone. I stepped
into sunlight, finding my shadow again. I walked down the steps just
ahead of it. The half hour went. Then the chimes ceased and died away.

Deacon wasnt at the postoffice either. I stamped the two envelopes and
mailed the one to Father and put Shreves in my inside pocket, and then
I remembered where I had last seen the Deacon. It was on Decoration Day,
in a G. A. R. uniform, in the middle of the parade. If you waited long
enough on any corner you would see him in whatever parade came along.
The one before was on Columbus or Garibaldis or somebodys birthday.
He was in the Street Sweepers section, in a stovepipe hat, carrying a
two inch Italian flag, smoking a cigar among the brooms and scoops. But
the last time was the G. A. R. one, because Shreve said:

There now. Just look at what your grandpa did to that poor old nigger.

Yes, I said, Now he can spend day after day marching in parades. If
it hadnt been for my grandfather, hed have to work like whitefolks.

I didnt see him anywhere. But I never knew even a working nigger that
you could find when you wanted him, let alone one that lived off the fat
of the land. A car came along. I went over to town and went to Parkers
and had a good breakfast. While I was eating I heard a clock strike the
hour. But then I suppose it takes at least one hour to lose time in, who
has been longer than history getting into the mechanical progression of
it.

When I finished breakfast I bought a cigar. The girl said a fifty cent
one was the best, so I took one and lit it and went out to the street. I
stood there and took a couple of puffs, then I held it in my hand and
went on toward the corner. I passed a jewellers window, but I looked
away in time. At the corner two bootblacks caught me, one on either
side, shrill and raucous, like blackbirds. I gave the cigar to one of
them, and the other one a nickel. Then they let me alone. The one with
the cigar was trying to sell it to the other for the nickel.

There was a clock, high up in the sun, and I thought about how, when you
dont want to do a thing, your body will try to trick you into doing it,
sort of unawares. I could feel the muscles in the back of my neck, and
then I could hear my watch ticking away in my pocket and after a while I
had all the other sounds shut away, leaving only the watch in my pocket.
I turned back up the street, to the window. He was working at the table
behind the window. He was going bald. There was a glass in his eyea
metal tube screwed into his face. I went in.

The place was full of ticking, like crickets in September grass, and I
could hear a big clock on the wall above his head. He looked up, his eye
big and blurred and rushing beyond the glass. I took mine out and handed
it to him.

I broke my watch.

He flipped it over in his hand. I should say you have. You must have
stepped on it.

Yes, sir. I knocked it off the dresser and stepped on it in the dark.
Its still running though.

He pried the back open and squinted into it. Seems to be all right. I
cant tell until I go over it, though. Ill go into it this afternoon.

Ill bring it back later, I said. Would you mind telling me if any of
those watches in the window are right?

He held my watch on his palm and looked up at me with his blurred
rushing eye.

I made a bet with a fellow, I said, And I forgot my glasses this
morning.

Why, all right, he said. He laid the watch down and half rose on his
stool and looked over the barrier. Then he glanced up at the wall. Its
twen

Dont tell me, I said, please sir. Just tell me if any of them are
right.

He looked at me again. He sat back on the stool and pushed the glass up
onto his forehead. It left a red circle around his eye and when it was
gone his whole face looked naked. Whatre you celebrating today? he
said. That boat race aint until next week, is it?

No, sir. This is just a private celebration. Birthday. Are any of them
right?

No. But they havent been regulated and set yet. If youre thinking of
buying one of them

No, sir. I dont need a watch. We have a clock in our sitting room. Ill
have this one fixed when I do. I reached my hand.

Better leave it now.

Ill bring it back later. He gave me the watch. I put it in my pocket.
I couldnt hear it now, above all the others. Im much obliged to you.
I hope I havent taken up your time.

Thats all right. Bring it in when you are ready. And you better put
off this celebration until after we win that boat race.

Yes, sir. I reckon I had.

I went out, shutting the door upon the ticking. I looked back into the
window. He was watching me across the barrier. There were about a dozen
watches in the window, a dozen different hours and each with the same
assertive and contradictory assurance that mine had, without any hands
at all. Contradicting one another. I could hear mine, ticking away
inside my pocket, even though nobody could see it, even though it could
tell nothing if anyone could.

And so I told myself to take that one. Because Father said clocks slay
time. He said time is dead as long as it is being clicked off by little
wheels; only when the clock stops does time come to life. The hands were
extended, slightly off the horizontal at a faint angle, like a gull
tilting into the wind. Holding all I used to be sorry about like the new
moon holding water, niggers say. The jeweler was working again, bent
over his bench, the tube tunnelled into his face. His hair was parted in
the center. The part ran up into the bald spot, like a drained marsh in
December.

I saw the hardware store from across the street. I didnt know you
bought flat-irons by the pound.

The clerk said, These weigh ten pounds. Only they were bigger than I
thought. So I got two six-pound little ones, because they would look
like a pair of shoes wrapped up. They felt heavy enough together, but I
thought again how Father had said about the reducto absurdum of human
experience, thinking how the only opportunity I seemed to have for the
application of Harvard. Maybe by next year; thinking maybe it takes two
years in school to learn to do that properly.

But they felt heavy enough in the air. A street car came. I got on. I
didnt see the placard on the front. It was full, mostly prosperous
looking people reading newspapers. The only vacant seat was beside a
nigger. He wore a derby and shined shoes and he was holding a dead cigar
stub. I used to think that a Southerner had to be always conscious of
niggers. I thought that Northerners would expect him to. When I first
came East I kept thinking Youve got to remember to think of them as
coloured people not niggers, and if it hadnt happened that I wasnt
thrown with many of them, Id have wasted a lot of time and trouble
before I learned that the best way to take all people, black or white,
is to take them for what they think they are, then leave them alone.
That was when I realised that a nigger is not a person so much as a form
of behaviour; a sort of obverse reflection of the white people he lives
among. But I thought at first that I ought to miss having a lot of them
around me because I thought that Northerners thought I did, but I didnt
know that I really had missed Roskus and Dilsey and them until that
morning in Virginia. The train was stopped when I waked and I raised the
shade and looked out. The car was blocking a road crossing, where two
white fences came down a hill and then sprayed outward and downward like
part of the skeleton of a horn, and there was a nigger on a mule in the
middle of the stiff ruts, waiting for the train to move. How long he had
been there I didnt know, but he sat straddle of the mule, his head
wrapped in a piece of blanket, as if they had been built there with the
fence and the road, or with the hill, carved out of the hill itself,
like a sign put there saying You are home again. He didnt have a saddle
and his feet dangled almost to the ground. The mule looked like a
rabbit. I raised the window.

Hey, Uncle, I said, Is this the way?

Suh? He looked at me, then he loosened the blanket and lifted it away
from his ear.

Christmas gift! I said.

Sho comin, boss. You done caught me, aint you?

Ill let you off this time. I dragged my pants out of the little
hammock and got a quarter out. But look out next time. Ill be coming
back through here two days after New Year, and look out then. I threw
the quarter out the window. Buy yourself some Santy Claus.

Yes, suh, he said. He got down and picked up the quarter and rubbed it
on his leg. Thanky, young marster. Thanky. Then the train began to
move. I leaned out the window, into the cold air, looking back. He stood
there beside the gaunt rabbit of a mule, the two of them shabby and
motionless and unimpatient. The train swung around the curve, the engine
puffing with short, heavy blasts, and they passed smoothly from sight
that way, with that quality about them of shabby and timeless patience,
of static serenity: that blending of childlike and ready incompetence
and paradoxical reliability that tends and protects them it loves out of
all reason and robs them steadily and evades responsibility and
obligations by means too barefaced to be called subterfuge even and is
taken in theft or evasion with only that frank and spontaneous
admiration for the victor which a gentleman feels for anyone who beats
him in a fair contest, and withal a fond and unflagging tolerance for
whitefolks vagaries like that of a grandparent for unpredictable and
troublesome children, which I had forgotten. And all that day, while the
train wound through rushing gaps and along ledges where movement was
only a labouring sound of the exhaust and groaning wheels and the
eternal mountains stood fading into the thick sky, I thought of home, of
the bleak station and the mud and the niggers and country folks
thronging slowly about the square, with toy monkeys and wagons and candy
in sacks and roman candles sticking out, and my insides would move like
they used to do in school when the bell rang.

I wouldnt begin counting until the clock struck three. Then I would
begin, counting to sixty and folding down one finger and thinking of the
other fourteen fingers waiting to be folded down, or thirteen or twelve
or eight or seven, until all of a sudden Id realise silence and the
unwinking minds, and Id say Maam? Your name is Quentin, isnt it?
Miss Laura said. Then more silence and the cruel unwinking minds and
hands jerking into the silence. Tell Quentin who discovered the
Mississippi River, Henry. DeSoto. Then the minds would go away, and
after a while Id be afraid I had gotten behind and Id count fast and
fold down another finger, then Id be afraid I was going too fast and
Id slow up, then Id get afraid and count fast again. So I never could
come out even with the bell, and the released surging of feet moving
already, feeling earth in the scuffed floor, and the day like a pane of
glass struck a light, sharp blow, and my insides would move, sitting
still. _Moving sitting still. One minute she was standing in the door.
Benjy. Bellowing. Benjamin the child of mine old age bellowing. Caddy!
Caddy!_

_Im going to run away. He began to cry she went and touched him. Hush.
Im not going to. Hush. He hushed. Dilsey._

_He smell what you tell him when he want to. Dont have to listen nor
talk._

_Can he smell that new name they give him? Can he smell bad luck?_

_What he want to worry about luck for? Luck cant do him no hurt._

_What they change his name for then if aint trying to help his luck?_

The street car stopped, started, stopped again. Below the window I
watched the crowns of peoples heads passing beneath new straw hats not
yet unbleached. There were women in the car now, with market baskets,
and men in work-clothes were beginning to outnumber the shined shoes and
collars.

The nigger touched my knee. Pardon me, he said. I swung my legs out
and let him pass. We were going beside a blank wall, the sound
clattering back into the car, at the women with market baskets on their
knees and a man in a stained hat with a pipe stuck in the band. I could
smell water, and in a break in the wall I saw a glint of water and two
masts, and a gull motionless in midair, like on an invisible wire
between the masts, and I raised my hand and through my coat touched the
letters I had written. When the car stopped I got off.

The bridge was open to let a schooner through. She was in tow, the tug
nudging along under her quarter, trailing smoke, but the ship herself
was like she was moving without visible means. A man naked to the waist
was coiling down a line on the focsle head. His body was burned the
colour of leaf tobacco. Another man in a straw hat without any crown was
at the wheel. The ship went through the bridge, moving under bare poles
like a ghost in broad day, with three gulls hovering above the stern
like toys on invisible wires.

When it closed I crossed to the other side and leaned on the rail above
the boathouses. The float was empty and the doors were closed. The crew
just pulled in the late afternoon now, resting up before. The shadow of
the bridge, the tiers of railing, my shadow leaning flat upon the water,
so easily had I tricked it that would not quit me. At least fifty feet
it was, and if I only had something to blot it into the water, holding
it until it was drowned, the shadow of the package like two shoes
wrapped up lying on the water. Niggers say a drowned mans shadow was
watching for him in the water all the time. It twinkled and glinted,
like breathing, the float slow like breathing too, and debris half
submerged, healing out to the sea and the caverns and the grottoes of
the sea. The displacement of water is equal to the something of
something. Reducto absurdum of all human experience, and two six-pound
flat-irons weigh more than one tailors goose. What a sinful waste
Dilsey would say. Benjy knew it when Damuddy died. He cried. _He smell
hit. He smell hit._

The tug came back downstream, the water shearing in long rolling
cylinders, rocking the float at last with the echo of passage, the float
lurching onto the rolling cylinder with a plopping sound and a long
jarring noise as the door rolled back and two men emerged, carrying a
shell. They set it in the water and a moment later Bland came out, with
the sculls. He wore flannels, a grey jacket and a stiff straw hat.
Either he or his mother had read somewhere that Oxford students pulled
in flannels and stiff hats, so early one March they bought Gerald a one
pair shell and in his flannels and stiff hat he went on the river. The
folks at the boathouses threatened to call a policeman, but he went
anyway. His mother came down in a hired auto, in a fur suit like an
arctic explorers, and saw him off in a twenty-five mile wind and a
steady drove of ice floes like dirty sheep. Ever since then I have
believed that God is not only a gentleman and a sport; He is a
Kentuckian too. When he sailed away she made a detour and came down to
the river again and drove along parallel with him, the car in low gear.
They said you couldnt have told theyd ever seen one another before,
like a King and Queen, not even looking at one another, just moving side
by side across Massachusetts on parallel courses like a couple of
planets.

He got in and pulled away. He pulled pretty well now. He ought to. They
said his mother tried to make him give rowing up and do something else
the rest of his class couldnt or wouldnt do, but for once he was
stubborn. If you could call it stubbornness, sitting in his attitudes of
princely boredom, with his curly yellow hair and his violet eyes and his
eyelashes and his New York clothes, while his mamma was telling us about
Geralds horses and Geralds niggers and Geralds women. Husbands and
fathers in Kentucky must have been awful glad when she carried Gerald
off to Cambridge. She had an apartment over in town, and Gerald had one
there too, besides his rooms in college. She approved of Gerald
associating with me because I at least revealed a blundering sense of
noblesse oblige by getting myself born below Mason and Dixon, and a few
others whose geography met the requirements (minimum) Forgave, at least.
Or condoned. But since she met Spoade coming out of chapel one He said
she couldnt be a lady no lady would be out at that hour of the night
she never had been able to forgive him for having five names, including
that of a present English ducal house. Im sure she solaced herself by
being convinced that some misfit Maingault or Mortemar had got mixed up
with the lodge-keepers daughter. Which was quite probable, whether she
invented it or not. Spoade was the worlds champion sitter-around, no
holds barred and gouging discretionary.

The shell was a speck now, the oars catching the sun in spaced glints,
as if the hull were winking itself along. _Did you ever have a sister?
No but theyre all bitches. Did you ever have a sister? One minute she
was. Bitches. Not bitch one minute she stood in the door_ Dalton Ames.
Dalton Ames. Dalton Shirts. I thought all the time they were khaki, army
issue khaki, until I saw they were of heavy Chinese silk or finest
flannel because they made his face so brown his eyes so blue. Dalton
Ames. It just missed gentility. Theatrical fixture. Just papier-mache,
then touch. Oh. Asbestos. Not quite bronze. _But wont see him at the
house._

_Caddys a woman too, remember. She must do things for womens reasons,
too._

_Why wont you bring him to the house, Caddy? Why must you do like nigger
women do in the pasture the ditches the dark woods hot hidden furious in
the dark woods._

And after a while I had been hearing my watch for some time and I could
feel the letters crackle through my coat, against the railing, and I
leaned on the railing, watching my shadow, how I had tricked it. I moved
along the rail, but my suit was dark too and I could wipe my hands,
watching my shadow, how I had tricked it. I walked it into the shadow of
the quai. Then I went east.

_Harvard my Harvard boy Harvard harvard_ That pimple-faced infant she
met at the field-meet with coloured ribbons. Skulking along the fence
trying to whistle her out like a puppy. Because they couldnt cajole him
into the diningroom Mother believed he had some sort of spell he was
going to cast on her when he got her alone. Yet any blackguard _He was
lying beside the box under the window bellowing_ that could drive up in
a limousine with a flower in his buttonhole. _Harvard. Quentin this is
Herbert. My Harvard boy. Herbert will be a big brother has already
promised Jason a position in the bank._

Hearty, celluloid like a drummer. Face full of teeth white but not
smiling. _Ive heard of him up there._ All teeth but not smiling. _You
going to drive?_

_Get in Quentin._

_You going to drive._

_Its her car arent you proud of your little sister owns first auto in
town Herbert his present. Louis has been giving her lessons every
morning didnt you get my letter_ Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson
announce the marriage of their daughter Candace to Mr Sydney Herbert
Head on the twenty-fifth of April one thousand nine hundred and ten at
Jefferson Mississippi. At home after the first of August number
Something Something Avenue South Bend Indiana. Shreve said Arent you
even going to open it? _Three days. Times. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond
Compson_ Young Lochinvar rode out of the west a little too soon, didnt
he?

Im from the south. Youre funny, arent you.

O yes I knew it was somewhere in the country.

Youre funny, arent you. You ought to join the circus.

I did. Thats how I ruined my eyes watering the elephants fleas. _Three
times_ These country girls. You cant even tell about them, can you.
Well, anyway Byron never had his wish, thank God. _But not hit a man in
glasses._ Arent you even going to open it? _It lay on the table a
candle burning at each corner upon the envelope tied in a soiled pink
garter two artificial flowers. Not hit a man in glasses._

Country people poor things they never saw an auto before lots of them
honk the horn Candace so _She wouldnt look at me_ theyll get out of
the way _wouldnt look at me_ your father wouldnt like it if you were
to injure one of them Ill declare your father will simply have to get
an auto now Im almost sorry you brought it down Herbert Ive enjoyed it
so much of course theres the carriage but so often when Id like to go
out Mr Compson has the darkies doing something it would be worth my head
to interrupt he insists that Roskus is at my call all the time but I
know what that means I know how often people make promises just to
satisfy their consciences are you going to treat my little baby girl
that way Herbert but I know you wont Herbert has spoiled us all to death
Quentin did I write you that he is going to take Jason into his bank
when Jason finishes high school Jason will make a splendid banker he is
the only one of my children with any practical sense you can thank me
for that he takes after my people the others are all Compson _Jason
furnished the flour. They made kites on the back porch and sold them for
a nickle a piece, he and the Patterson boy. Jason was treasurer._

There was no nigger in this street car, and the hats unbleached as yet
flowing past under the window. Going to Harvard. We have sold Benjys
_He lay on the ground under the window, bellowing. We have sold Benjys
pasture so that Quentin may go to Harvard_ a brother to you. Your little
brother.

You should have a car its done you no end of good dont you think so
Quentin I call him Quentin at once you see I have heard so much about
him from Candace.

Why shouldnt you I want my boys to be more than friends yes Candace and
Quentin more than friends _Father I have committed_ what a pity you had
no brother or sister _No sister no sister had no sister_ Dont ask
Quentin he and Mr Compson both feel a little insulted when I am strong
enough to come down to the table I am going on nerve now Ill pay for it
after its all over and you have taken my little daughter away from me
_My little sister had no. If I could say Mother. Mother_

Unless I do what I am tempted to and take you instead I dont think Mr
Compson could overtake the car.

Ah Herbert Candace do you hear that _She wouldnt look at me soft
stubborn jaw-angle not back-looking_ You neednt be jealous though its
just an old woman hes flattering a grown married daughter I cant
believe it.

Nonsense you look like a girl you are lots younger than Candace colour
in your cheeks like a girl _A face reproachful tearful an odour of
camphor and of tears a voice weeping steadily and softly beyond the
twilit door the twilight-coloured smell of honeysuckle. Bringing empty
trunks down the attic stairs they sounded like coffins French Lick.
Found not death at the salt lick_

Hats not unbleached and not hats. In three years I can not wear a hat. I
could not. Was. Will there be hats then since I was not and not Harvard
then. Where the best of thought Father said clings like dead ivy vines
upon old dead brick. Not Harvard then. Not to me, anyway. Again. Sadder
than was. Again. Saddest of all. Again.

Spoade had a shirt on; then it must be. When I can see my shadow again
if not careful that I tricked into the water shall tread again upon my
impervious shadow. But no sister. I wouldnt have done it. _I wont have
my daughter spied on_ I wouldnt have.

_How can I control any of them when you have always taught them to have
no respect for me and my wishes I know you look down on my people but is
that any reason for teaching my children my own children I suffered for
to have no respect_ Trampling my shadows bones into the concrete with
hard heels and then I was hearing the watch, and I touched the letters
through my coat.

_I will not have my daughter spied on by you or Quentin or anybody no
matter what you think she has done_

_At least you agree there is reason for having her watched_

I wouldnt have I wouldnt have. _I know you wouldnt I didnt mean to
speak so sharply but women have no respect for each other for
themselves_

_But why did she_ The chimes began as I stepped on my shadow, but it was
the quarter hour. The Deacon wasnt in sight anywhere. _think I would
have could have_

_She didnt mean that thats the way women do things its because she
loves Caddy_

_The street lamps would go down the hill then rise toward town_ I walked
upon the belly of my shadow. I could extend my hand beyond it. _feeling
Father behind me beyond the rasping darkness of summer and August the
street lamps_ Father and I protect women from one another from
themselves our women _Women are like that they dont acquire knowledge of
people we are for that they are just born with a practical fertility of
suspicion that makes a crop every so often and usually right they have
an affinity for evil for supplying whatever the evil lacks in itself for
drawing it about them instinctively as you do bedclothing in slumber
fertilising the mind for it until the evil has served its purpose
whether it ever existed or no_ He was coming along between a couple of
freshmen. He hadnt quite recovered from the parade, for he gave me a
salute, a very superior-officerish kind.

I want to see you a minute, I said, stopping.

See me? All right. See you again, fellows, he said, stopping and
turning back; glad to have chatted with you. That was the Deacon, all
over. Talk about your natural psychologists. They said he hadnt missed
a train at the beginning of school in forty years, and that he could
pick out a Southerner with one glance. He never missed, and once he had
heard you speak, he could name your state. He had a regular uniform he
met trains in, a sort of Uncle Toms cabin outfit, patches and all.

Yes, suh. Right dis way, young marster, hyer we is, taking your bags.
Hyer, boy, come hyer and git dese grips. Whereupon a moving mountain
of luggage would edge up, revealing a white boy of about fifteen, and
the Deacon would hang another bag on him somehow and drive him off.
Now, den, dont you drap hit. Yes, suh, young marster, jes give de old
nigger yo room number, and hitll be done got cold dar when you
arrives.

From then on until he had you completely subjugated he was always in or
out of your room, ubiquitous and garrulous, though his manner gradually
moved northward as his raiment improved, until at last when he had bled
you until you began to learn better he was calling you Quentin or
whatever, and when you saw him next hed be wearing a cast-off Brooks
suit and a hat with a Princeton club I forget which band that someone
had given him and which he was pleasantly and unshakably convinced was a
part of Abe Lincolns military sash. Someone spread the story years ago,
when he first appeared around college from wherever he came from, that
he was a graduate of the divinity school. And when he came to understand
what it meant he was so taken with it that he began to retail the story
himself, until at last he must come to believe he really had. Anyway he
related long pointless anecdotes of his undergraduate days, speaking
familiarly of dead and departed professors by their first names, usually
incorrect ones. But he had been guide mentor and friend to unnumbered
crops of innocent and lonely freshmen, and I suppose that with all his
petty chicanery and hypocrisy he stank no higher in heavens nostrils
than any other.

Havent seen you in three-four days, he said, staring at me from his
still military aura. You been sick?

No. Ive been all right. Working, I reckon. Ive seen you, though.

Yes?

In the parade the other day.

Oh, that. Yes, I was there. I dont care nothing about that sort of
thing, you understand, but the boys likes to have me with them, the
vetruns does. Ladies wants all the old vetruns to turn out, you know.
So I has to oblige them.

And on that Wop holiday too, I said. You were obliging the W. C. T.
U. then, I reckon.

That? I was doing that for my son-in-law. He aims to get a job on the
city forces. Street cleaner. I tells him all he wants is a broom to
sleep on. You saw me, did you?

Both times. Yes.

I mean, in uniform. Howd I look?

You looked fine. You looked better than any of them. They ought to make
you a general, Deacon.

He touched my arm, lightly, his hand that worn, gentle quality of
niggers hands. Listen. This aint for outside talking. I dont mind
telling you because you and mes the same folks, come long and short.
He leaned a little to me, speaking rapidly, his eyes not looking at me.
Ive got strings out, right now. Wait till next year. Just wait. Then
see where Im marching. I wont need to tell you how Im fixing it; I
say, just wait and see, my boy. He looked at me now and clapped me
lightly on the shoulder and rocked back on his heels, nodding at me.
Yes, sir. I didnt turn Democrat three years ago for nothing. My
son-in-law on the city; meYes, sir. If just turning Democratll make
that son of a bitch go to work. . . . And me: just you stand on that
corner yonder a year from two days ago, and see.

I hope so. You deserve it, Deacon. And while I think about it I took
the letter from my pocket. Take this around to my room tomorrow and
give it to Shreve. Hell have something for you. But not till tomorrow,
mind.

He took the letter and examined it. Its sealed up.

Yes. And its written inside, Not good until tomorrow.

Hm, he said. He looked at the envelope, his mouth pursed. Something
for me, you say?

Yes. A present Im making you.

He was looking at me now, the envelope white in his black hand, in the
sun. His eyes were soft and irisless and brown, and suddenly I saw
Roskus watching me from behind all his white-folks claptrap of uniforms
and politics and Harvard manner, diffident, secret, inarticulate and
sad. You aint playing a joke on the old nigger, is you?

You know Im not. Did any Southerner ever play a joke on you?

Youre right. Theyre fine folks. But you cant live with them.

Did you ever try? I said. But Roskus was gone. Once more he was that
self he had long since taught himself to wear in the worlds eye,
pompous, spurious, not quite gross.

Ill confer to your wishes, my boy.

Not until tomorrow, remember.

Sure, he said; understood, my boy. Well

I hope I said. He looked down at me, benignant, profound. Suddenly I
held out my hand and we shook, he gravely, from the pompous height of
his municipal and military dream. Youre a good fellow, Deacon. I
hope. . . . Youve helped a lot of young fellows, here and there.

Ive tried to treat all folks right, he said. I draw no petty social
lines. A man to me is a man, wherever I find him.

I hope youll always find as many friends as youve made.

Young fellows. I get along with them. They dont forget me, neither, he
said, waving the envelope. He put it into his pocket and buttoned his
coat. Yes, sir, he said, Ive had good friends.

The chimes began again, the half hour. I stood in the belly of my shadow
and listened to the strokes spaced and tranquil along the sunlight,
among the thin, still little leaves. Spaced and peaceful and serene,
with that quality of autumn always in bells even in the month of brides.
_Lying on the ground under the window bellowing_ He took one look at her
and knew. Out of the mouths of babes. _The street lamps_ The chimes
ceased. I went back to the postoffice, treading my shadow into pavement.
_go down the hill then they rise toward town like lanterns hung one
above another on a wall._ Father said because she loves Caddy she loves
people through their shortcomings. Uncle Maury straddling his legs
before the fire must remove one hand long enough to drink Christmas.
Jason ran on, his hands in his pockets fell down and lay there like a
trussed fowl until Versh set him up. _Whynt you keep them hands outen
your pockets when you running you could stand up then_ Rolling his head
in the cradle rolling it flat across the back. Caddy told Jason Versh
said that the reason Uncle Maury didnt work was that he used to roll
his head in the cradle when he was little.

Shreve was coming up the walk, shambling, fatly earnest, his glasses
glinting beneath the running leaves like little pools.

I gave Deacon a note for some things. I may not be in this afternoon,
so dont you let him have anything until tomorrow, will you?

All right. He looked at me. Say, whatre you doing today, anyhow? All
dressed up and mooning around like the prologue to a suttee. Did you go
to Psychology this morning?

Im not doing anything. Not until tomorrow, now.

Whats that you got there?

Nothing. Pair of shoes I had half-soled. Not until tomorrow, you hear?

Sure. All right. Oh, by the way, did you get a letter off the table
this morning?

No.

Its there. From Semiramis. Chauffeur brought it before ten oclock.

All right. Ill get it. Wonder what she wants now.

Another band recital, I guess. Tumpty ta ta Gerald blah. A little
louder on the drum, Quentin. God, Im glad Im not a gentleman. He
went on, nursing a book, a little shapeless, fatly intent. _The street
lamps_ do you think so because one of our forefathers was a governor and
three were generals and Mothers werent

any live man is better than any dead man but no live or dead man is very
much better than any other live or dead man _Done in Mothers mind
though. Finished. Finished. Then we were all poisoned_ you are confusing
sin and morality women dont do that your Mother is thinking of morality
whether it be sin or not has not occurred to her

Jason I must go away you keep the others Ill take Jason and go where
nobody knows us so hell have a chance to grow up and forget all this
the others dont love me they have never loved anything with that streak
of Compson selfishness and false pride Jason was the only one my heart
went out to without dread

nonsense Jason is all right I was thinking that as soon as you feel
better you and Caddy might go up to French Lick

and leave Jason here with nobody but you and the darkies

she will forget him then all the talk will die away _found not death at
the salt licks_

maybe I could find a husband for her _not death at the salt licks_

The car came up and stopped. The bells were still ringing the half hour.
I got on and it went on again, blotting the half hour. No: the three
quarters. Then it would be ten minutes anyway. To leave Harvard _your
Mothers dream for sold Benjys pasture for_

what have I done to have been given children like these Benjamin was
punishment enough and now for her to have no more regard for me her own
mother Ive suffered for her dreamed and planned and sacrificed I went
down into the valley yet never since she opened her eyes has she given
me one unselfish thought at times I look at her I wonder if she can be
my child except Jason he has never given me one moments sorrow since I
first held him in my arms I knew then that he was to be my joy and my
salvation I thought that Benjamin was punishment enough for any sins I
have committed I thought he was my punishment for putting aside my pride
and marrying a man who held himself above me I dont complain I loved him
above all of them because of it because my duty though Jason pulling at
my heart all the while but I see now that I have not suffered enough I
see now that I must pay for your sins as well as mine what have you done
what sins have your high and mighty people visited upon me but youll
take up for them you always have found excuses for your own blood only
Jason can do wrong because he is more Bascomb than Compson while your
own daughter my little daughter my baby girl she is she is no better
than that when I was a girl I was unfortunate I was only a Bascomb I was
taught that there is no halfway ground that a woman is either a lady or
not but I never dreamed when I held her in my arms that any daughter of
mine could let herself dont you know I can look at her eyes and tell you
may think shed tell you but she doesnt tell things she is secretive
you dont know her I know things shes done that Id die before Id have
you know thats it go on criticise Jason accuse me of setting him to
watch her as if it were a crime while your own daughter can I know you
dont love him that you wish to believe faults against him you never have
yes ridicule him as you always have Maury you cannot hurt me any more
than your children already have and then Ill be gone and Jason with no
one to love him shield him from this I look at him every day dreading to
see this Compson blood beginning to show in him at last with his sister
slipping out to see what do you call it then have you ever laid eyes on
him will you even let me try to find out who he is its not for myself I
couldnt bear to see him its for your sake to protect you but who can
fight against bad blood you wont let me try we are to sit back with our
hands folded while she not only drags your name in the dirt but corrupts
the very air your children breathe Jason you must let me go away I
cannot stand it let me have Jason and you keep the others theyre not my
flesh and blood like he is strangers nothing of mine and I am afraid of
them I can take Jason and go where we are not known Ill go down on my
knees and pray for the absolution of my sins that he may escape this
curse try to forget that the others ever were

If that was the three quarters, not over ten minutes now. One car had
just left, and people were already waiting for the next one. I asked,
but he didnt know whether another one would leave before noon or not
because youd think that interurbans. So the first one was another
trolley. I got on. You can feel noon. I wonder if even miners in the
bowels of the earth. Thats why whistles: because people that sweat, and
if just far enough from sweat you wont hear whistles and in eight
minutes you should be that far from sweat in Boston. Father said a man
is the sum of his misfortunes. One day youd think misfortune would get
tired, but then time is your misfortune Father said. A gull on an
invisible wire attached through space dragged. You carry the symbol of
your frustration into eternity. Then the wings are bigger Father said
only who can play a harp.

I could hear my watch whenever the car stopped, but not often they were
already eating  _Who would play a_  Eating the business of eating inside
of you space too space and time confused Stomach saying noon brain
saying eat oclock All right I wonder what time it is what of it. People
were getting out. The trolley didnt stop so often now, emptied by
eating.

Then it was past. I got off and stood in my shadow and after a while a
car came along and I got on and went back to the interurban station.
There was a car ready to leave, and I found a seat next the window and
it started and I watched it sort of frazzle out into slack tide flats,
and then trees. Now and then I saw the river and I thought how nice it
would be for them down at New London if the weather and Geralds shell
going solemnly up the glinting forenoon and I wondered what the old
woman would be wanting now, sending me a note before ten oclock in the
morning. What picture of Gerald I to be one of the _Dalton Ames   oh
asbestos Quentin has shot_   background. Something with girls in it.
Women do have _always his voice above the gabble voice that breathed_ an
affinity for evil, for believing that no woman is to be trusted, but
that some men are too innocent to protect themselves. Plain girls.
Remote cousins and family friends whom mere acquaintanceship invested
with a sort of blood obligation noblesse oblige. And she sitting there
telling us before their faces what a shame it was that Gerald should
have all the family looks because a man didnt need it, was better off
without it but without it a girl was simply lost. Telling us about
Geralds women in a _Quentin has shot Herbert he shot his voice through
the floor of Caddys room_ tone of smug approbation. When he was
seventeen I said to him one day What a shame that you should have a
mouth like that it should be on a girls face and can you imagine _the
curtains leaning in on the twilight upon the odour of the apple tree her
head against the twilight her arms behind her head kimono-winged the
voice that breathed oer eden clothes upon the bed by the nose seen
above the apple_ what he said? just seventeen, mind. Mother he said
it often is. And him sitting there in attitudes regal watching two
or three of them through his eyelashes. They gushed like swallows
swooping his eyelashes. Shreve said he always had _Are you going to look
after Benjy and Father_

_The less you say about Benjy and Father the better when have you ever
considered them Caddy_

_Promise_

_You neednt worry about them youre getting out in good shape_

_Promise Im sick youll have to promise_ wondered who invented that
joke but then he always had considered Mrs Bland a remarkably preserved
woman he said she was grooming Gerald to seduce a duchess sometime. She
called Shreve that fat Canadian youth twice she arranged a new room-mate
for me without consulting me at all, once for me to move out, once for

He opened the door in the twilight. His face looked like a pumpkin pie.

Well, Ill say a fond farewell. Cruel fate may part us, but I will
never love another. Never.

What are you talking about?

Im talking about cruel fate in eight yards of apricot silk and more
metal pound for pound than a galley slave and the sole owner and
proprietor of the unchallenged peripatetic john of the late
Confederacy. Then he told me how she had gone to the proctor to have
him moved out and how the proctor had revealed enough low stubbornness
to insist on consulting Shreve first. Then she suggested that he send
for Shreve right off and do it, and he wouldnt do that, so after that
she was hardly civil to Shreve. I make it a point never to speak
harshly of females, Shreve said, but that woman has got more ways like
a bitch than any lady in these sovereign states and dominions. and now
Letter on the table by hand, command orchid scented coloured If she knew
I had passed almost beneath the window knowing it there without   My
dear Madam I have not yet had an opportunity of receiving your
communication but I beg in advance to be excused today or yesterday and
tomorrow or when As I remember that the next one is to be how Gerald
throws his nigger downstairs and how the nigger plead to be allowed to
matriculate in the divinity school to be near marster marse gerald and
How he ran all the way to the station beside the carriage with tears in
his eyes when marse gerald rid away I will wait until the day for the
one about the sawmill husband came to the kitchen door with a shotgun
Gerald went down and bit the gun in two and handed it back and wiped his
hands on a silk handkerchief threw the handkerchief in the stove Ive
only heard that one twice

_shot him through the_ I saw you come in here so I watched my chance and
came along thought we might get acquainted have a cigar

Thanks I dont smoke

No things must have changed up there since my day mind if I light up

Help yourself

Thanks Ive heard a lot I guess your mother wont mind if I put the match
behind the screen will she a lot about you Candace talked about you all
the time up there at the Licks  I got pretty jealous I says to myself
who is this Quentin anyway I must see what this animal looks like
because I was hit pretty hard see soon as I saw the little girl I dont
mind telling you it never occurred to me it was her brother she kept
talking about she couldnt have talked about you any more if youd been
the only man in the world husband wouldnt have been in it you wont
change your mind and have a smoke

I dont smoke

In that case I wont insist even though it is a pretty fair weed cost me
twenty-five bucks a hundred wholesale friend in Havana yes I guess there
are lots of changes up there I keep promising myself a visit but I never
get around to it been hitting the ball now for ten years I cant get away
from the bank during school fellows habits change things that seem
important to an undergraduate you know tell me about things up there

Im not going to tell Father and Mother if thats what you are getting
at

Not going to tell not going to oh that thats what you are talking about
is it you understand that I dont give a damn whether you tell or not
understand that a thing like that unfortunate but no police crime I
wasnt the first or the last I was just unlucky you might have been
luckier

You lie

Keep your shirt on Im not trying to make you tell anything you dont
want to meant no offense of course a young fellow like you would
consider a thing of that sort a lot more serious than you will in five
years

I dont know but one way to consider cheating I dont think Im likely to
learn different at Harvard

Were better than a play you must have made the Dramat well youre right
no need to tell them well let bygones be bygones eh no reason why you
and I should let a little thing like that come between us I like you
Quentin I like your appearance you dont look like these other hicks Im
glad were going to hit it off like this Ive promised your mother to do
something for Jason but I would like to give you a hand too Jason would
be just as well off here but theres no future in a hole like this for a
young fellow like you

Thanks youd better stick to Jason hed suit you better than I would

Im sorry about that business but a kid like I was then I never had a
mother like yours to teach me the finer points it would just hurt her
unnecessarily to know it yes youre right no need to that includes
Candace of course

I said Mother and Father

Look here take a look at me how long do you think youd last with me

I wont have to last long if you learned to fight up at school too try
and see how long I would

You damned little    what do you think youre getting at

Try and see

My God the cigar what would your mother say if she found a blister on
her mantel just in time too look here Quentin were about to do
something well both regret I like you liked you as soon as I saw you I
says he must be a damned good fellow whoever he is or Candace wouldnt be
so keen on him listen Ive been out in the world now for ten years
things dont matter so much then youll find that out lets you and I get
together on this thing sons of old Harvard and all I guess I wouldnt
know the place now best place for a young fellow in the world Im going
to send my sons there give them a better chance than I had wait dont go
yet lets discuss this thing a young man gets these ideas and Im all
for them does him good while hes in school forms his character good for
tradition the school but when he gets out into the world hell have to
get his the best way he can because hell find that everybody else is
doing the same thing and be damned to here lets shake hands and let
bygones by bygones for your mothers sake remember her health come on
give me your hand here look at it its just out of convent look not a
blemish not even been creased yet see here

To hell with your money

No no come on I belong to the family now see I know how it is with a
young fellow he has lots of private affairs its always pretty hard to
get the old man to stump up for I know havent I been there and not so
long ago either but now Im getting married and all specially up there
come on dont be a fool listen when we get a chance for a real talk I
want to tell you about a little widow over in town

Ive heard that too keep your damned money

Call it a loan then just shut your eyes a minute and youll be fifty

Keep your hands off of me youd better get that cigar off the mantel

Tell and be damned then see what it gets you if you were not a damned
fool youd have seen that Ive got them too tight for any half-baked
Galahad of a brother your mothers told me about your sort with your
head swelled up come in oh come in dear Quentin and I were just getting
acquainted talking about Harvard did you want me cant stay away from the
old man can she

Go out a minute Herbert I want to talk to Quentin

Come in come in lets all have a gabfest and get acquainted I was just
telling Quentin

Go on Herbert go out a while

Well all right then I suppose you and bubber do want to see one another
once more eh

Youd better take that cigar off the mantel

Right as usual my boy then Ill toddle along let them order you around
while they can Quentin after day after tomorrow itll be pretty please
to the old man wont it dear give us a kiss honey

Oh stop that save that for day after tomorrow

Ill want interest then dont let Quentin do anything he cant finish oh
by the way did I tell Quentin the story about the mans parrot and what
happened to it a sad story remind me of that think of it yourself ta-ta
see you in the funnypaper

Well

Well

What are you up to now

Nothing

Youre meddling in my business again didnt you get enough of that last
summer

Caddy youve got fever _Youre sick how are you sick_

_Im just sick. I cant ask._

_Shot his voice through the_

Not that blackguard Caddy

Now and then the river glinted beyond things in sort of swooping glints,
across noon and after. Well after now, though we had passed where he was
still pulling upstream majestical in the face of god gods. Better. Gods.
God would be canaille too in Boston in Massachusetts. Or maybe just not
a husband. The wet oars winking him along in bright winks and female
palms. Adulant. Adulant if not a husband hed ignore God. _That
blackguard, Caddy_ The river glinted away beyond a swooping curve.

_Im sick youll have to promise_

_Sick how are you sick_

_Im just sick I cant ask anybody yet promise you will_

_If they need any looking after its because of you how are you sick_
Under the window we could hear the car leaving for the station, the 8:10
train. To bring back cousins. Heads. Increasing himself head by head but
not barbers. Manicure girls. We had a blood horse once. In the stable
yes, but under leather a cur. _Quentin has shot all of their voices
through the floor of Caddys room_

The car stopped. I got off, into the middle of my shadow. A road crossed
the track. There was a wooden marquee with an old man eating something
out of a paper bag, and then the car was out of hearing too. The road
went into the trees, where it would be shady, but June foliage in New
England not much thicker than April at home in Mississippi. I could see
a smoke stack. I turned my back to it, tramping my shadow into the dust.
_There was something terrible in me sometimes at night I could see it
grinning at me I could see it through them grinning at me through their
faces its gone now and Im sick_

_Caddy_

_Dont touch me just promise_

_If youre sick you cant_

_Yes I can after that itll be all right it wont matter dont let them
send him to Jackson promise_

_I promise Caddy Caddy_

_Dont touch me dont touch me_

_What does it look like Caddy_

_What_

_That that grins at you that thing through them_

I could still see the smoke stack. Thats where the water would be,
heading out to the sea and the peaceful grottoes. Tumbling peacefully
they would, and when He said Rise only the flat irons. When Versh and I
hunted all day we wouldnt take any lunch, and at twelve oclock Id get
hungry. Id stay hungry until about one, then all of a sudden Id even
forget that I wasnt hungry anymore. _The street lamps go down the hill
then heard the car go down the hill. The chair-arm flat cool smooth
under my forehead shaping the chair the apple tree leaning on my hair
above the eden clothes by the nose seen_ Youve got fever I felt it
yesterday its like being near a stove.

Dont touch me.

Caddy you cant do it if you are sick. That blackguard.

Ive got to marry somebody. _Then they told me the bone would have to be
broken again_

At last I couldnt see the smoke stack. The road went beside a wall.
Trees leaned over the wall, sprayed with sunlight. The stone was cool.
Walking near it you could feel the coolness. Only our country was not
like this country. There was something about just walking through it. A
kind of still and violent fecundity that satisfied ever bread-hunger
like. Flowing around you, not brooding and nursing every niggard stone.
Like it were put to makeshift for enough green to go around among the
trees and even the blue of distance not that rich chimaera. _told me the
bone would have to be broken again and inside me it began to say Ah Ah
Ah and I began to sweat. What do I care I know what a broken leg is all
it is it wont be anything Ill just have to stay in the house a little
longer thats all and my jaw-muscles getting numb and my mouth saying
Wait Wait just a minute through the sweat ah ah ah behind my teeth and
Father damn that horse damn that horse. Wait its my fault. He came
along the fence every morning with a basket toward the kitchen dragging
a stick along the fence every morning I dragged myself to the window
cast and all and laid for him with a piece of coal Dilsey said you goin
to ruin yoself aint you got no mo sense than that not fo days since you
bruck hit. Wait Ill get used to it in a minute wait just a minute Ill
get_

Even sound seemed to fail in this air, like the air was worn out with
carrying sounds so long. A dogs voice carries further than a train, in
the darkness anyway. And some peoples. Niggers. Louis Hatcher never
even used his horn carrying it and that old lantern. I said, Louis,
when was the last time you cleaned that lantern?

I cleant hit a little while back. You member when all dat floodwatter
wash dem folks away up yonder? I cleant hit dat vey day. Old woman and
me settin fore de fire dat night and she say Louis, whut you gwine do
ef dat flood git out dis fur? and I say Dats a fack. I reckon I had
better clean dat lantun up. So I cleant hit dat night.

That flood was way up in Pennsylvania, I said. It couldnt even have
got down this far.

Dats whut you says, Louis said. Watter kin git des ez high en wet in
Jefferson ez hit kin in Pennsylvaney, I reckon. Hits de folks dat says
de high watter cant git dis fur dat comes floatin out on de ridge-pole,
too.

Did you and Martha get out that night?

We done jest that. I cleant dat lantun and me and her sot de balance of
de night on top o dat knoll back de graveyard. En ef Id a knowed of
aihy one higher, wed a been on hit instead.

And you havent cleaned that lantern since then.

Whut I want to clean hit when dey aint no need?

You mean, until another flood comes along?

Hit kep us outen dat un.

Oh, come on, Uncle Louis, I said.

Yes, suh. You do you way en I do mine. Ef all I got to do to keep outen
de high watter is to clean dis yere lantun, I wont quoil wid no man.

Unc Louis wouldnt ketch nothin wid a light he could see by, Versh
said.

I wuz huntin possums in dis country when dey was still drowndin nits in
yo pappys head wid coal oil, boy, Louis said. Ketchin um, too.

Dats de troof, Versh said. I reckon Unc Louis done caught mo
possums than aihy man in dis country.

Yes, suh, Louis said, I got plenty light fer possums to see, all
right. I aint heard none o dem complainin. Hush, now. Dar he. Whooey.
Hum awn, dawg. And wed sit in the dry leaves that whispered a little
with the slow respiration of our waiting and with the slow breathing of
the earth and the windless October, the rank smell of the lantern
fouling the brittle air, listening to the dogs and to the echo of Louis
voice dying away. He never raised it, yet on a still night we have heard
it from our front porch. When he called the dogs in he sounded just like
the horn he carried slung on his shoulder and never used, but clearer,
mellower, as though his voice were a part of darkness and silence,
coiling out of it, coiling into it again. WhoOoooo. WhoOoooo.
WhoOooooooooooooooo. _Got to marry somebody_

_Have there been very many Caddy_

_I dont know too many will you look after Benjy and Father_

_You dont know whose it is then does he know_

_Dont touch me will you look after Benjy and Father_

I began to feel the water before I came to the bridge. The bridge was of
grey stone, lichened, dappled with slow moisture where the fungus crept.
Beneath it the water was clear and still in the shadow, whispering and
clucking about the stone in fading swirls of spinning sky. _Caddy that_

_Ive got to marry somebody_ Versh told me about a man mutilated
himself. He went into the woods and did it with a razor, sitting in a
ditch. A broken razor flinging them backward over his shoulder the same
motion complete the jerked skein of blood backward not looping. But
thats not it. Its not not having them. Its never to have had them
then I could say O That Thats Chinese I dont know Chinese. And Father
said its because you are a virgin: dont you see? Women are never
virgins. Purity is a negative state and therefore contrary to nature.
Its nature is hurting you not Caddy and I said Thats just words and he
said So is virginity and I said you dont know. You cant know and he said
Yes. On the instant when we come to realise that tragedy is second-hand.

Where the shadow of the bridge fell I could see down for a long way, but
not as far as the bottom. When you leave a leaf in water a long time
after awhile the tissue will be gone and the delicate fibers waving slow
as the motion of sleep. They dont touch one another, no matter how
knotted up they once were, no matter how close they lay once to the
bones. And maybe when He says Rise the eyes will come floating up too,
out of the deep quiet and the sleep, to look on glory. And after awhile
the flat irons would come floating up. I hid them under the end of the
bridge and went back and leaned on the rail.

I could not see the bottom, but I could see a long way into the motion
of the water before the eye gave out, and then I saw a shadow hanging
like a fat arrow stemming into the current. Mayflies skimmed in and out
of the shadow of the bridge just above the surface. _If it could just be
a hell beyond that: the clean flame the two of us more than dead. Then
you will have only me then only me then the two of us amid the pointing
and the horror beyond the clean flame_ The arrow increased without
motion, then in a quick swirl the trout lipped a fly beneath the surface
with that sort of gigantic delicacy of an elephant picking up a peanut.
The fading vortex drifted away down stream and then I saw the arrow
again, nose into the current, wavering delicately to the motion of the
water above which the May flies slanted and poised. _Only you and me
then amid the pointing and the horror walled by the clean flame_

The trout hung, delicate and motionless among the wavering shadows.
Three boys with fishing poles came onto the bridge and we leaned on the
rail and looked down at the trout. They knew the fish. He was a
neighbourhood character.

Theyve been trying to catch that trout for twenty-five years. Theres
a store in Boston offers a twenty-five dollar fishing rod to anybody
that can catch him.

Why dont you all catch him, then? Wouldnt you like to have a
twenty-five dollar fishing rod?

Yes, they said. They leaned on the rail, looking down at the trout. I
sure would, one said.

I wouldnt take the rod, the second said. Id take the money instead.

Maybe they wouldnt do that, the first said. I bet hed make you take
the rod.

Then Id sell it.

You couldnt get twenty-five dollars for it.

Id take what I could get, then. I can catch just as many fish with
this pole as I could with a twenty-five dollar one. Then they talked
about what they would do with twenty-five dollars. They all talked at
once, their voices insistent and contradictory and impatient, making of
unreality a possibility, then a probability, then an incontrovertible
fact, as people will when their desires become words.

Id buy a horse and wagon, the second said.

Yes you would, the others said.

I would. I know where I can buy one for twenty-five dollars. I know the
man.

Who is it?

Thats all right who it is. I can buy it for twenty-five dollars.

Yah, the others said, He dont know any such thing. Hes just
talking.

Do you think so? the boy said. They continued to jeer at him, but he
said nothing more. He leaned on the rail, looking down at the trout
which he had already spent, and suddenly the acrimony, the conflict, was
gone from their voices, as if to them too it was as though he had
captured the fish and bought his horse and wagon, they too partaking of
that adult trait of being convinced of anything by an assumption of
silent superiority. I suppose that people, using themselves and each
other so much by words, are at least consistent in attributing wisdom to
a still tongue, and for a while I could feel the other two seeking
swiftly for some means by which to cope with him, to rob him of his
horse and wagon.

You couldnt get twenty-five dollars for that pole, the first said. I
bet anything you couldnt.

He hasnt caught that trout yet, the third said suddenly, then they
both cried:

Yah, whad I tell you? Whats the mans name? I dare you to tell. There
aint any such man.

Ah, shut up, the second said. Look, Here he comes again. They leaned
on the rail, motionless, identical, their poles slanting slenderly in
the sunlight, also identical. The trout rose without haste, a shadow in
faint wavering increase; again the little vortex faded slowly
downstream. Gee, the first one murmured.

We dont try to catch him anymore, he said. We just watch Boston folks
that come out and try.

Is he the only fish in this pool?

Yes. He ran all the others out. The best place to fish around here is
down at the Eddy.

No it aint, the second said. Its better at Bigelows Mill two to
one. Then they argued for a while about which was the best fishing and
then left off all of a sudden to watch the trout rise again and the
broken swirl of water suck down a little of the sky. I asked how far it
was to the nearest town. They told me.

But the closest car line is that way, the second said, pointing back
down the road. Where are you going?

Nowhere. Just walking.

You from the college?

Yes. Are there any factories in that town?

Factories? They looked at me.

No, the second said. Not there. They looked at my clothes. You
looking for work?

How about Bigelows Mill? the third said. Thats a factory.

Factory my eye. He means a sure enough factory.

One with a whistle, I said. I havent heard any one oclock whistles
yet.

Oh, the second said. Theres a clock in the Unitarian steeple. You
can find out the time from that. Havent you got a watch on that chain?

I broke it this morning. I showed them my watch. They examined it
gravely.

Its still running, the second said. What does a watch like that
cost?

It was a present, I said. My father gave it to me when I graduated
from high school.

Are you a Canadian? the third said. He had red hair.

Canadian?

He dont talk like them, the second said. Ive heard them talk. He
talks like they do in minstrel shows.

Say, the third said, Aint you afraid hell hit you?

Hit me?

You said he talks like a coloured man.

Ah, dry up, the second said. You can see the steeple when you get
over that hill there.

I thanked them. I hope you have good luck. Only dont catch that old
fellow down there. He deserves to be let alone.

Cant anybody catch that fish, the first said. They leaned on the rail,
looking down into the water, the three poles like three slanting threads
of yellow fire in the sun. I walked upon my shadow, tramping it into the
dappled shade of trees again. The road curved, mounting away from the
water. It crossed the hill, then descended winding, carrying the eye,
the mind on ahead beneath a still green tunnel, and the square cupola
above the trees and the round eye of the clock but far enough. I sat
down at the roadside. The grass was ankle deep, myriad. The shadows on
the road were as still as if they had been put there with a stencil,
with slanting pencils of sunlight. But it was only a train, and after a
while it died away beyond the trees, the long sound, and then I could
hear my watch and the train dying away, as though it were running
through another month or another summer somewhere, rushing away under
the poised gull and all things rushing. Except Gerald. He would be sort
of grand too, pulling in lonely state across the noon, rowing himself
right out of noon, up the long bright air like an apotheosis, mounting
into a drowsing infinity where only he and the gull, the one
terrifically motionless, the other in a steady and measured pull and
recover that partook of inertia itself, the world punily beneath their
shadows on the sun. Caddy that blackguard that blackguard Caddy

Their voices came over the hill, and the three slender poles like
balanced threads of running fire. They looked at me passing, not
slowing.

Well, I said, I dont see him.

We didnt try to catch him, the first said. You cant catch that fish.

Theres the clock, the second said, pointing. You can tell the time
when you get a little closer.

Yes, I said, All right. I got up. You all going to town?

Were going to the Eddy for chub, the first said.

You cant catch anything at the Eddy, the second said.

I guess you want to go to the mill, with a lot of fellows splashing and
scaring all the fish away.

You cant catch any fish at the Eddy.

We wont catch none nowhere if we dont go on, the third said.

I dont see why you keep on talking about the Eddy, the second said.
You cant catch anything there.

You dont have to go, the first said. Youre not tied to me.

Lets go to the mill and go swimming, the third said.

Im going to the Eddy and fish, the first said. You can do as you
please.

Say, how long has it been since you heard of anybody catching a fish at
the Eddy? the second said to the third.

Lets go to the mill and go swimming, the third said. The cupola sank
slowly beyond the trees, with the round face of the clock far enough
yet. We went on in the dappled shade. We came to an orchard, pink and
white. It was full of bees; already we could hear them.

Lets go to the mill and go swimming, the third said. A lane turned
off beside the orchard. The third boy slowed and halted. The first went
on, flecks of sunlight slipping along the pole across his shoulder and
down the back of his shirt. Come on, the third said. The second boy
stopped too. _Why must you marry somebody Caddy_

_Do you want me to say it do you think that if I say it it wont be_

Lets go up to the mill, he said. Come on.

The first boy went on. His bare feet made no sound, falling softer than
leaves in the thin dust. In the orchard the bees sounded like a wind
getting up, a sound caught by a spell just under crescendo and
sustained. The lane went along the wall, arched over, shattered with
bloom, dissolving into trees. Sunlight slanted into it, sparse and
eager. Yellow butterflies flickered along the shade like flecks of sun.

What do you want to go to the Eddy for? the second boy said. You can
fish at the mill if you want to.

Ah, let him go, the third said. They looked after the first boy.
Sunlight slid patchily across his walking shoulders, glinting along the
pole like yellow ants.

Kenny, the second said. _Say it to Father will you I will am my
fathers Progenitive I invented him created I him Say it to him it will
not be for he will say I was not and then you and I since
philoprogenitive_

Ah, come on, the boy said, Theyre already in. They looked after the
first boy. Yah, they said suddenly, go on then, mammas boy. If he
goes swimming hell get his head wet and then hell get a licking. They
turned into the lane and went on, the yellow butterflies slanting about
them along the shade.

_it is because there is nothing else I believe there is something else
but there may not be and then I You will find that even injustice is
scarcely worthy of what you believe yourself to be_   He paid me no
attention, his jaw set in profile, his face turned a little away beneath
his broken hat.

Why dont you go swimming with them? I said. _that blackguard Caddy_

_Were you trying to pick a fight with him were you_

_A liar and a scoundrel Caddy was dropped from his club for cheating at
cards got sent to Coventry caught cheating at midterm exams and
expelled_

_Well what about it Im not going to play cards with_

Do you like fishing better than swimming? I said. The sound of the
bees diminished, sustained yet, as though instead of sinking into
silence, silence merely increased between us, as water rises. The road
curved again and became a street between shady lawns with white houses.
_Caddy that blackguard can you think of Benjy and Father and do it not
of me_

_What else can I think about what else have I thought about_ The boy
turned from the street. He climbed a picket fence without looking back
and crossed the lawn to a tree and laid the pole down and climbed into
the fork of the tree and sat there, his back to the road and the dappled
sun motionless at last upon his white shirt. _Else have I thought about
I cant even cry I died last year I told you I had but I didnt know then
what I meant I didnt know what I was saying_ Some days in late August at
home are like this, the air thin and eager like this, with something in
it sad and nostalgic and familiar. Man the sum of his climatic
experiences Father said. Man the sum of what have you. A problem in
impure properties carried tediously to an unvarying nil: stalemate of
dust and desire. _But now I know Im dead I tell you_

_Then why must you listen we can go away you and Benjy and me where
nobody knows us where_ The buggy was drawn by a white horse, his feet
clopping in the thin dust; spidery wheels chattering thin and dry,
moving uphill beneath a rippling shawl of leaves. Elm. No: ellum. Ellum.

_On what on your school money the money they sold the pasture for so you
could go to Harvard dont you see youve got to finish now if you dont
finish hell have nothing_

_Sold the pasture_ His white shirt was motionless in the fork, in the
flickering shade. The wheels were spidery. Beneath the sag of the buggy
the hooves neatly rapid like the motions of a lady doing embroidery,
diminishing without progress like a figure on a treadmill being drawn
rapidly offstage. The street turned again. I could see the white cupola,
the round stupid assertion of the clock. _Sold the pasture_

_Father will be dead in a year they say if he doesnt stop drinking and
he wont stop he cant stop since I since last summer and then theyll
send Benjy to Jackson I cant cry I cant even cry one minute she was
standing in the door the next minute he was pulling at her dress and
bellowing his voice hammered back and forth between the walls in waves
and she shrinking against the wall getting smaller and smaller with her
white face her eyes like thumbs dug into it until he pushed her out of
the room his voice hammering back and forth as though its own momentum
would not let it stop as though there were no place for it in silence
bellowing_

When you opened the door a bell tinkled, but just once, high and clear
and small in the neat obscurity above the door, as though it were gauged
and tempered to make that single clear small sound so as not to wear the
bell out nor to require the expenditure of too much silence in restoring
it when the door opened upon the recent warm scent of baking; a little
dirty child with eyes like a toy bears and two patent-leather
pig-tails.

Hello, sister. Her face was like a cup of milk dashed with coffee in
the sweet warm emptiness. Anybody here?

But she merely watched me until a door opened and the lady came. Above
the counter where the ranks of crisp shapes behind the glass her neat
grey face her hair tight and sparse from her neat grey skull, spectacles
in neat grey rims riding approaching like something on a wire, like a
cash box in a store. She looked like a librarian. Something among dusty
shelves of ordered certitudes long divorced from reality, desiccating
peacefully, as if a breath of that air which sees injustice done

Two of these, please, maam.

From under the counter she produced a square cut from a newspaper and
laid it on the counter and lifted the two buns out. The little girl
watched them with still and unwinking eyes like two currants floating
motionless in a cup of weak coffee Land of the kike home of the wop.
Watching the bread, the neat grey hands, a broad gold band on the left
forefinger, knuckled there by a blue knuckle.

Do you do your own baking, maam?

Sir? she said. Like that. Sir? Like on the stage. Sir? Five cents.
Was there anything else?

No, maam. Not for me. This lady wants something. She was not tall
enough to see over the case, so she went to the end of the counter and
looked at the little girl.

Did you bring her in here?

No, maam. She was here when I came.

You little wretch, she said. She came out around the counter, but she
didnt touch the little girl. Have you got anything in your pockets?

She hasnt got any pockets, I said. She wasnt doing anything. She was
just standing here, waiting for you.

Why didnt the bell ring, then? She glared at me. She just needed a
bunch of switches, a blackboard behind her 2 X 2 e 5. Shell hide it
under her dress and a bodyd never know it. You, child. Howd you get in
here?

The little girl said nothing. She looked at the woman, then she gave me
a flying black glance and looked at the woman again, Them foreigners,
the woman said. Howd she get in without the bell ringing?

She came in when I opened the door, I said. It rang once for both of
us. She couldnt reach anything from here, anyway. Besides, I dont think
she would. Would you, sister? The little girl looked at me, secretive,
contemplative. What do you want? bread?

She extended her fist. It uncurled upon a nickel, moist and dirty, moist
dirt ridged into her flesh. The coin was damp and warm. I could smell
it, faintly metallic.

Have you got a five cent loaf, please, maam?

From beneath the counter she produced a square cut from a newspaper
sheet and laid it on the counter and wrapped a loaf into it. I laid the
coin and another one on the counter. And another one of those buns,
please, maam.

She took another bun from the case. Give me that parcel, she said. I
gave it to her and she unwrapped it and put the third bun in and wrapped
it and took up the coins and found two coppers in her apron and gave
them to me. I handed them to the little girl. Her fingers closed about
them, damp and hot, like worms.

You going to give her that bun? the woman said.

Yessum, I said. I expect your cooking smells as good to her as it
does to me.

I took up the two packages and gave the bread to the little girl, the
woman all iron-grey behind the counter, watching us with cold certitude.
You wait a minute, she said. She went to the rear. The door opened
again and closed. The little girl watched me, holding the bread against
her dirty dress.

Whats your name? I said. She quit looking at me, but she was still
motionless. She didnt even seem to breathe. The woman returned. She had
a funny looking thing in her hand. She carried it sort of like it might
have been a dead pet rat.

Here, she said. The child looked at her. Take it, the woman said,
jabbing it at the little girl. It just looks peculiar. I calculate you
wont know the difference when you eat it. Here. I cant stand here all
day. The child took it, still watching her. The woman rubbed her hands
on her apron. I got to have that bell fixed, she said. She went to the
door and jerked it open. The little bell tinkled once, faint and clear
and invisible. We moved toward the door and the womans peering back.

Thank you for the cake, I said.

Them foreigners, she said, staring up into the obscurity where the
bell tinkled. Take my advice and stay clear of them, young man.

Yessum, I said. Come on, sister. We went out. Thank you, maam.

She swung the door to, then jerked it open again, making the bell give
forth its single small note. Foreigners, she said, peering up at the
bell.

We went on. Well, I said, How about some ice cream? She was eating
the gnarled cake. Do you like ice cream? She gave me a black still
look, chewing. Come on.

We came to the drugstore and had some ice cream. She wouldnt put the
loaf down. Why not put it down so you can eat better? I said, offering
to take it. But she held to it, chewing the ice cream like it was taffy.
The bitten cake lay on the table. She ate the ice cream steadily, then
she fell to on the cake again, looking about at the showcases. I
finished mine and we went out.

Which way do you live? I said.

A buggy, the one with the white horse it was. Only Doc Peabody is fat.
Three hundred pounds. You ride with him on the uphill side, holding on.
Children. Walking easier than holding uphill. _Seen the doctor yet have
you seen Caddy_

_I dont have to I cant ask now afterward it will be all right it wont
matter_

Because women so delicate so mysterious Father said. Delicate
equilibrium of periodical filth between two moons balanced. Moons he
said full and yellow as harvest moons her hips thighs. Outside outside
of them always but. Yellow. Feet soles with walking like. Then know that
some man that all those mysterious and imperious concealed. With all
that inside of them shapes an outward suavity waiting for a touch to.
Liquid putrefaction like drowned things floating like pale rubber
flabbily filled getting the odour of honeysuckle all mixed up.

Youd better take your bread on home, hadnt you?

She looked at me. She chewed quietly and steadily; at regular intervals
a small distension passed smoothly down her throat. I opened my package
and gave her one of the buns. Goodbye, I said.

I went on. Then I looked back. She was behind me. Do you live down this
way? She said nothing. She walked beside me, under my elbow sort of,
eating. We went on. It was quiet, hardly anyone about _getting the odour
of honeysuckle all mixed She would have told me not to let me sit there
on the steps hearing her door twilight slamming hearing Benjy still
crying Supper she would have to come down then getting honeysuckle all
mixed up in it_   We reached the corner.

Well, Ive got to go down this way, I said, Goodbye. She stopped
too. She swallowed the last of the cake, then she began on the bun,
watching me across it. Goodbye, I said. I turned into the street and
went on, but I went to the next corner before I stopped.

Which way do you live? I said. This way? I pointed down the street.
She just looked at me. Do you live over that way? I bet you live close
to the station, where the trains are. Dont you? She just looked at me,
serene and secret and chewing. The street was empty both ways, with
quiet lawns and houses neat among the trees, but no one at all except
back there. We turned and went back. Two men sat in chairs in front of a
store.

Do you all know this little girl? She sort of took up with me and I
cant find where she lives.

They quit looking at me and looked at her.

Must be one of them new Italian families, one said. He wore a rusty
frock coat. Ive seen her before. Whats your name, little girl? She
looked at them blackly for awhile, her jaws moving steadily. She
swallowed without ceasing to chew.

Maybe she cant speak English, the other said.

They sent her after bread, I said. She must be able to speak
something.

Whats your pas name? the first said. Pete? Joe? name John huh? She
took another bite from the bun.

What must I do with her? I said. She just follows me. Ive got to get
back to Boston.

You from the college?

Yes, sir. And Ive got to get on back.

You might go up the street and turn her over to Anse. Hell be up at
the livery stable. The marshall.

I reckon thats what Ill have to do, I said. Ive got to do
something with her. Much obliged. Come on, sister.

We went up the street, on the shady side, where the shadow of the broken
faade blotted slowly across the road. We came to the livery stable. The
marshall wasnt there. A man sitting in a chair tilted in the broad low
door, where a dark cool breeze smelling of ammonia blew among the ranked
stalls, said to look at the postoffice. He didnt know her either.

Them furriners. I cant tell one from another. You might take her across
the tracks where they live, and maybe somebodyll claim her.

We went to the postoffice. It was back down the street. The man in the
frock coat was opening a newspaper.

Anse just drove out of town, he said. I guess youd better go down
past the station and walk past them houses by the river. Somebody
therell know her.

I guess Ill have to, I said. Come on, sister. She pushed the last
piece of the bun into her mouth and swallowed it. Want another? I
said. She looked at me, chewing, her eyes black and unwinking and
friendly. I took the other two buns out and gave her one and bit into
the other. I asked a man where the station was and he showed me. Come
on, sister.

We reached the station and crossed the tracks, where the river was. A
bridge crossed it, and a street of jumbled frame houses followed the
river, backed onto it. A shabby street, but with an air heterogeneous
and vivid too. In the center of an untrimmed plot enclosed by a fence of
gaping and broken pickets stood an ancient lopsided surrey and a
weathered house from an upper window of which hung a garment of vivid
pink.

Does that look like your house? I said. She looked at me over the bun.
This one? I said, pointing. She just chewed, but it seemed to me that
I discerned something affirmative, acquiescent even if it wasnt eager,
in her air. This one? I said. Come on, then. I entered the broken
gate. I looked back at her. Here? I said. This look like your house?

She nodded her head rapidly, looking at me, gnawing into the damp
halfmoon of the bread. We went on. A walk of broken random flags,
speared by fresh coarse blades of grass, led to the broken stoop. There
was no movement about the house at all, and the pink garment hanging in
no wind from the upper window. There was a bell pull with a porcelain
knob, attached to about six feet of wire when I stopped pulling and
knocked. The little girl had the crust edgeways in her chewing mouth.

A woman opened the door. She looked at me, then she spoke rapidly to the
little girl in Italian, with a rising inflexion, then a pause,
interrogatory. She spoke to her again, the little girl looking at her
across the end of the crust, pushing it into her mouth with a dirty
hand.

She says she lives here, I said. I met her down town. Is this your
bread?

No spika, the woman said. She spoke to the little girl again. The
little girl just looked at her.

No live here? I said. I pointed to the girl, then at her, then at the
door. The woman shook her head. She spoke rapidly. She came to the edge
of the porch and pointed down the road, speaking.

I nodded violently too. You come show? I said. I took her arm, waving
my other hand toward the road. She spoke swiftly, pointing. You come
show, I said, trying to lead her down the steps.

Si, si, she said, holding back, showing me whatever it was. I nodded
again.

Thanks. Thanks. Thanks. I went down the steps and walked toward the
gate, not running, but pretty fast. I reached the gate and stopped and
looked at her for a while. The crust was gone now, and she looked at me
with her black, friendly stare. The woman stood on the stoop, watching
us.

Come on, then, I said. Well have to find the right one sooner or
later.

She moved along just under my elbow. We went on. The houses all seemed
empty. Not a soul in sight. A sort of breathlessness that empty houses
have. Yet they couldnt all be empty. All the different rooms, if you
could just slice the walls away all of a sudden Madam, your daughter, if
you please. No. Madam, for Gods sake, your daughter. She moved along
just under my elbow, her shiny tight pigtails, and then the last house
played out and the road curved out of sight beyond a wall, following the
river. The woman was emerging from the broken gate, with a shawl over
her head and clutched under her chin. The road curved on, empty. I found
a coin and gave it to the little girl. A quarter. Goodbye, sister, I
said. Then I ran.

I ran fast, not looking back. Just before the road curved away I looked
back. She stood in the road, a small figure clasping the loaf of bread
to her filthy little dress, her eyes still and black and unwinking. I
ran on.

A lane turned from the road. I entered it and after a while I slowed to
a fast walk. The lane went between back premisesunpainted houses with
more of those gay and startling coloured garments on lines, a barn
broken-backed, decaying quietly among rank orchard trees, unpruned and
weed-choked, pink and white and murmurous with sunlight and with bees. I
looked back. The entrance to the lane was empty. I slowed still more, my
shadow pacing me, dragging its head through the weeds that hid the
fence.

The lane went back to a barred gate, became defunctive in grass, a mere
path scarred quietly into new grass. I climbed the gate into a woodlot
and crossed it and came to another wall and followed that one, my shadow
behind me now. There were vines and creepers where at home would be
honeysuckle. Coming and coming especially in the dusk when it rained,
getting honeysuckle all mixed up in it as though it were not enough
without that, not unbearable enough. _What did you let him for kiss
kiss_

_I didnt let him I made him watching me getting mad What do you think
of that? Red print of my hand coming up through her face like turning a
light on under your hand her eyes going bright_

_Its not for kissing I slapped you. Girls elbows at fifteen Father
said you swallow like you had a fishbone in your throat whats the
matter with you and Caddy across the table not to look at me. Its for
letting it be some darn town squirt I slapped you you will will you now
I guess you say calf rope. My red hand coming up out of her face. What
do you think of that scouring her head into the. Grass sticks
crisscrossed into the flesh tingling scouring her head. Say calf rope
say it_

_I didnt kiss a dirty girl like Natalie anyway_ The wall went into
shadow, and then my shadow, I had tricked it again. I had forgot about
the river curving along the road. I climbed the wall. And then she
watched me jump down, holding the loaf against her dress.

I stood in the weeds and we looked at one another for a while.

Why didnt you tell me you lived out this way, sister? The loaf was
wearing slowly out of the paper; already it needed a new one. Well,
come on then and show me the house. _not a dirty girl like Natalie. It
was raining we could hear it on the roof, sighing through the high sweet
emptiness of the barn._

_There? touching her_

_Not there_

_There? not raining hard but we couldnt hear anything but the roof and
as if it was my blood or her blood_

_She pushed me down the ladder and ran off and left me Caddy did_

_Was it there it hurt you when Caddy did ran off was it there_

_Oh_ She walked just under my elbow, the top of her patent leather head,
the loaf fraying out of the newspaper.

If you dont get home pretty soon youre going to wear that loaf out.
And then whatll your mamma say? _I bet I can lift you up_

_You cant Im too heavy_

_Did Caddy go away did she go to the house you cant see the barn from
our house did you ever try to see the barn from_

_It was her fault she pushed me she ran away_

_I can lift you up see how I can_

_Oh her blood or my blood Oh_ We went on in the thin dust, our feet
silent as rubber in the thin dust where pencils of sun slanted in the
trees. And I could feel water again running swift and peaceful in the
secret shade.

You live a long way, dont you. Youre mighty smart to go this far to
town by yourself. _Its like dancing sitting down did you ever dance
sitting down? We could hear the rain, a rat in the crib, the empty barn
vacant with horses. How do you hold to dance do you hold like this_

_Oh_

_I used to hold like this you thought I wasnt strong enough didnt you_

_Oh Oh Oh Oh_

_I hold to use like this I mean did you hear what I said I said_

_oh oh oh oh_

The road went on, still and empty, the sun slanting more and more. Her
stiff little pigtails were bound at the tips with bits of crimson cloth.
A corner of the wrapping flapped a little as she walked, the nose of the
loaf naked. I stopped.

Look here. Do you live down this road? We havent passed a house in a
mile, almost.

She looked at me, black and secret and friendly.

Where do you live, sister? Dont you live back there in town?

There was a bird somewhere in the woods, beyond the broken and
infrequent slanting of sunlight.

Your papas going to be worried about you. Dont you reckon youll get a
whipping for not coming straight home with that bread?

The bird whistled again, invisible, a sound meaningless and profound,
inflexionless, ceasing as though cut off with the blow of a knife, and
again, and that sense of water swift and peaceful above secret places,
felt, not seen not heard.

Oh, hell, sister. About half the paper hung limp. Thats not doing
any good now. I tore it off and dropped it beside the road. Come on.
Well have to go back to town. Well go back along the river.

We left the road. Among the moss little pale flowers grew, and the sense
of water mute and unseen. _I hold to use like this I mean I use to hold
She stood in the door looking at us her hands on her hips_

_You pushed me it was your fault it hurt me too_

_We were dancing sitting down I bet Caddy cant dance sitting down_

_Stop that stop that_

_I was just brushing the trash off the back of your dress_

_You keep your nasty old hands off of me it was your fault you pushed me
down Im mad at you_

_I dont care she looked at us stay mad she went away_ We began to hear
the shouts, the splashings; I saw a brown body gleam for an instant.

_Stay mad. My shirt was getting wet and my hair. Across the roof hearing
the roof loud now I could see Natalie going through the garden among the
rain. Get wet I hope you catch pneumonia go on home Cowface. I jumped
hard as I could into the hogwallow the mud yellowed up to my waist
stinking I kept on plunging until I fell down and rolled over in it_
Hear them in swimming, sister? I wouldnt mind doing that myself. If I
had time. When I have time. I could hear my watch. _mud was warmer than
the rain it smelled awful. She had her back turned I went around in
front of her. You know what I was doing? She turned her back I went
around in front of her the rain creeping into the mud flatting her
bodice through her dress it smelled horrible. I was hugging her thats
what I was doing. She turned her back I went around in front of her. I
was hugging her I tell you._

_I dont give a damn what you were doing_

_You dont you dont Ill make you Ill make you give a damn. She hit my
hands away I smeared mud on her with the other hand I couldnt feel the
wet smacking of her hand I wiped mud from my legs smeared it on her wet
hard turning body hearing her fingers going into my face but I couldnt
feel it even when the rain began to taste sweet on my lips_

They saw us from the water first, heads and shoulders. They yelled and
one rose squatting and sprang among them. They looked like beavers, the
water lipping about their chins, yelling.

Take that girl away! What did you want to bring a girl here for? Go on
away!

She wont hurt you. We just want to watch you for a while.

They squatted in the water. Their heads drew into a clump, watching us,
then they broke and rushed toward us, hurling water with their hands. We
moved quick.

Look out, boys; she wont hurt you.

Go on away, Harvard! It was the second boy, the one that thought the
horse and wagon back there at the bridge. Splash them, fellows!

Lets get out and throw them in, another said. I aint afraid of any
girl.

Splash them! Splash them! They rushed toward us, hurling water. We
moved back. Go on away! they yelled. Go on away!

We went away. They huddled just under the bank, their slick heads in a
row against the bright water. We went on. Thats not for us, is it.
The sun slanted through to the moss here and there, leveller. Poor kid,
youre just a girl. Little flowers grew among the moss, littler than I
had ever seen. Youre just a girl. Poor kid. There was a path, curving
along beside the water. Then the water was still again, dark and still
and swift. Nothing but a girl. Poor sister. _We lay in the wet grass
panting the rain like cold shot on my back. Do you care now do you do
you_

_My Lord we sure are in a mess get up. Where the rain touched my
forehead it began to smart my hand came red away streaking off pink in
the rain. Does it hurt_

_Of course it does what do you reckon_

_I tried to scratch your eyes out my Lord we sure do stink we better try
to wash it off in the branch_ Theres town again, sister. Youll have
to go home now. Ive got to get back to school. Look how late its
getting. Youll go home now, wont you? But she just looked at me with
her black, secret, friendly gaze, the half-naked loaf clutched to her
breast. Its wet. I thought we jumped back in time. I took my
handkerchief and tried to wipe the loaf, but the crust began to come
off, so I stopped. Well just have to let it dry itself. Hold it like
this. She held it like that. It looked kind of like rats had been
eating it now. _and the water building and building up the squatting
back the sloughed mud stinking surfaceward pocking the pattering surface
like grease on a hot stove. I told you Id make you_

_I dont give a goddam what you do_

Then we heard the running and we stopped and looked back and saw him
coming up the path running, the level shadows flicking upon his legs.

Hes in a hurry. Wed then I saw another man, an oldish man running
heavily, clutching a stick, and a boy naked from the waist up, clutching
his pants as he ran.

Theres Julio, the little girl said, and then I saw his Italian face
and his eyes as he sprang upon me. We went down. His hands were jabbing
at my face and he was saying something and trying to bite me, I reckon,
and then they hauled him off and held him heaving and thrashing and
yelling and they held his arms and he tried to kick me until they
dragged him back. The little girl was howling, holding the loaf in both
arms. The half-naked boy was darting and jumping up and down, clutching
his trousers and someone pulled me up in time to see another stark naked
figure come around the tranquil bend in the path running and change
direction in midstride and leap into the woods, a couple of garments
rigid as boards behind it. Julio still struggled. The man who had pulled
me up said, Whoa, now. We got you. He wore a vest but no coat. Upon it
was a metal shield. In his other hand he clutched a knotted, polished
stick.

Youre Anse, arent you? I said. I was looking for you. Whats the
matter?

I warn you that anything you say will be used against you, he said.
Youre under arrest.

I killa heem, Julio said. He struggled. Two men held him. The little
girl howled steadily, holding the bread. You steala my seester, Julio
said. Let go, meesters.

Steal his sister? I said. Why, Ive been

Shet up, Anse said. You can tell that to Squire.

Steal his sister? I said. Julio broke from the men and sprang at me
again, but the marshall met him and they struggled until the other two
pinioned his arms again. Anse released him, panting.

You durn furriner, he said, Ive a good mind to take you up too, for
assault and battery. He turned to me again. Will you come peaceable,
or do I handcuff you?

Ill come peaceable, I said. Anything, just so I can find someonedo
something withStole his sister, I said. Stole his

Ive warned you, Anse said, He aims to charge you with meditated
criminal assault. Here, you, make that gal shut up that noise.

Oh, I said. Then I began to laugh. Two more boys with plastered heads
and round eyes came out of the bushes, buttoning shirts that had already
dampened onto their shoulders and arms, and I tried to stop the
laughter, but I couldnt.

Watch him, Anse, hes crazy, I believe.

Ill h-have to qu-quit, I said, Itll stop in a mu-minute. The other
time it said ah ah ah, I said, laughing. Let me sit down a while. I
sat down, they watching me, and the little girl with her streaked face
and the gnawed looking loaf, and the water swift and peaceful below the
path. After a while the laughter ran out. But my throat wouldnt quit
trying to laugh, like retching after your stomach is empty.

Whoa, now, Anse said. Get a grip on yourself.

Yes, I said, tightening my throat. There was another yellow butterfly,
like one of the sunflecks had come loose. After a while I didnt have to
hold my throat so tight. I got up. Im ready. Which way?

We followed the path, the two others watching Julio and the little girl
and the boys somewhere in the rear. The path went along the river to the
bridge. We crossed it and the tracks, people coming to the doors to look
at us and more boys materializing from somewhere until when we turned
into the main street we had quite a procession. Before the drugstore
stood an auto, a big one, but I didnt recognise them until Mrs Bland
said,

Why, Quentin! Quentin Compson! Then I saw Gerald, and Spoade in the
back seat, sitting on the back of his neck. And Shreve. I didnt know the
two girls.

Quentin Compson! Mrs Bland said.

Good afternoon, I said, raising my hat. Im under arrest. Im sorry I
didnt get your note. Did Shreve tell you?

Under arrest? Shreve said. Excuse me, he said. He heaved himself up
and climbed over their feet and got out. He had on a pair of my flannel
pants, like a glove. I didnt remember forgetting them. I didnt remember
how many chins Mrs Bland had, either. The prettiest girl was with Gerald
in front, too. They watched me through veils, with a kind of delicate
horror. Whos under arrest? Shreve said. Whats this, mister?

Gerald, Mrs Bland said, Send these people away. You get in this car,
Quentin.

Gerald got out. Spoade hadnt moved.

Whats he done, Cap? he said. Robbed a hen house?

I warn you, Anse said. Do you know the prisoner?

Know him, Shreve said. Look here

Then you can come along to the squires. Youre obstructing justice.
Come along. He shook my arm.

Well, good afternoon, I said. Im glad to have seen you all. Sorry I
couldnt be with you.

You, Gerald, Mrs Bland said.

Look here, constable, Gerald said.

I warn you youre interfering with an officer of the law, Anse said.
If youve anything to say, you can come to the squires and make
cognizance of the prisoner. We went on. Quite a procession now, Anse
and I leading. I could hear them telling them what it was, and Spoade
asking questions, and then Julio said something violently in Italian and
I looked back and saw the little girl standing at the curb, looking at
me with her friendly, inscrutable regard.

Git on home, Julio shouted at her, I beat hell outa you.

We went down the street and turned into a bit of lawn in which, set back
from the street, stood a one storey building of brick trimmed with
white. We went up the rock path to the door, where Anse halted everyone
except us and made them remain outside. We entered a bare room smelling
of stale tobacco. There was a sheet iron stove in the center of a wooden
frame filled with sand, and a faded map on the wall and the dingy plat
of a township. Behind a scarred littered table a man with a fierce roach
of iron grey hair peered at us over steel spectacles.

Got him, did ye, Anse? he said.

Got him, Squire.

He opened a huge dusty book and drew it to him and dipped a foul pen
into an inkwell filled with what looked like coal dust.

Look here, mister, Shreve said.

The prisoners name, the squire said. I told him. He wrote it slowly
into the book, the pen scratching with excruciating deliberation.

Look here, mister, Shreve said, We know this fellow. We

Order in the court, Anse said.

Shut up, bud, Spoade said. Let him do it his way. Hes going to
anyhow.

Age, the squire said. I told him. He wrote that, his mouth moving as
he wrote. Occupation. I told him. Harvard student, hey? he said. He
looked up at me, bowing his neck a little to see over the spectacles.
His eyes were clear and cold, like a goats. What are you up to, coming
out here kidnapping children?

Theyre crazy, Squire, Shreve said. Whoever says this boys
kidnapping

Julio moved violently. Crazy? he said. Dont I catcha heem, eh? Dont I
see weetha my own eyes

Youre a liar, Shreve said. You never

Order, order, Anse said, raising his voice.

You fellers shet up, the squire said. If they dont stay quiet, turn
em out, Anse. They got quiet. The squire looked at Shreve, then at
Spoade, then at Gerald. You know this young man? he said to Spoade.

Yes, your honour, Spoade said. Hes just a country boy in school up
there. He dont mean any harm. I think the marshallll find its a
mistake. His fathers a congregational minister.

Hm, the squire said. What was you doing, exactly? I told him, he
watching me with his cold, pale eyes. How about it, Anse?

Might have been, Anse said. Them durn furriners.

I American, Julio said. I gotta da pape.

Wheres the gal?

He sent her home, Anse said.

Was she scared or anything?

Not till Julio there jumped on the prisoner. They were just walking
along the river path, towards town. Some boys swimming told us which way
they went.

Its a mistake, Squire, Spoade said. Children and dogs are always
taking up with him like that. He cant help it.

Hm, the squire said. He looked out of the window for a while. We
watched him. I could hear Julio scratching himself. The squire looked
back.

Air you satisfied the gal aint took any hurt, you, there?

No hurt now, Julio said sullenly.

You quit work to hunt for her?

Sure I quit. I run. I run like hell. Looka here, looka there, then man
tella me he seen him giva her she eat. She go weetha.

Hm, the squire said. Well, son, I calculate you owe Julio something
for taking him away from his work.

Yes, sir, I said. How much?

Dollar, I calculate.

I gave Julio a dollar.

Well, Spoade said, If thats allI reckon hes discharged, your
honour?

The squire didnt look at him. How fard you run him, Anse?

Two miles, at least. It was about two hours before we caught him.

Hm, the squire said. He mused a while. We watched him, his stiff
crest, the spectacles riding low on his nose. The yellow shape of the
window grew slowly across the floor, reached the wall, climbing. Dust
motes whirled and slanted. Six dollars.

Six dollars? Shreve said. Whats that for?

Six dollars, the squire said. He looked at Shreve a moment, then at me
again.

Look here, Shreve said.

Shut up, Spoade said. Give it to him, bud, and lets get out of here.
The ladies are waiting for us. You got six dollars?

Yes, I said. I gave him six dollars.

Case dismissed, he said.

You get a receipt, Shreve said. You get a signed receipt for that
money.

The squire looked at Shreve mildly. Case dismissed, he said without
raising his voice.

Ill be damned Shreve said.

Come on here, Spoade said, taking his arm. Good afternoon, Judge.
Much obliged. As we passed out the door Julios voice rose again,
violent, then ceased. Spoade was looking at me, his brown eyes
quizzical, a little cold. Well, bud, I reckon youll do your girl
chasing in Boston after this.

You damned fool, Shreve said, What the hell do you mean anyway,
straggling off here, fooling with these damn wops?

Come on, Spoade said, They must be getting impatient.

Mrs Bland was talking to them. They were Miss Holmes and Miss
Daingerfield and they quit listening to her and looked at me again with
that delicate and curious horror, their veils turned back upon their
little white noses and their eyes fleeing and mysterious beneath the
veils.

Quentin Compson, Mrs Bland said, What would your mother say? A young
man naturally gets into scrapes, but to be arrested on foot by a country
policeman. What did they think hed done, Gerald?

Nothing, Gerald said.

Nonsense. What was it, you, Spoade?

He was trying to kidnap that little dirty girl, but they caught him in
time, Spoade said.

Nonsense, Mrs Bland said, but her voice sort of died away and she
stared at me for a moment, and the girls drew their breaths in with a
soft concerted sound. Fiddlesticks, Mrs Bland said briskly, If that
isnt just like these ignorant lowclass Yankees. Get in, Quentin.

Shreve and I sat on two small collapsible seats. Gerald cranked the car
and got in and we started.

Now, Quentin, you tell me what all this foolishness is about, Mrs
Bland said. I told them, Shreve hunched and furious on his little seat
and Spoade sitting again on the back of his neck beside Miss
Daingerfield.

And the joke is, all the time Quentin had us all fooled, Spoade said.
All the time we thought he was the model youth that anybody could trust
a daughter with, until the police showed him up at his nefarious work.

Hush up, Spoade, Mrs Bland said. We drove down the street and crossed
the bridge and passed the house where the pink garment hung in the
window. Thats what you get for not reading my note. Why didnt you come
and get it? Mr MacKenzie says he told you it was there.

Yessum. I intended to, but I never went back to the room.

Youd have let us sit there waiting I dont know how long, if it hadnt
been for Mr MacKenzie. When he said you hadnt come back, that left an
extra place, so we asked him to come. Were very glad to have you
anyway, Mr MacKenzie. Shreve said nothing. His arms were folded and he
glared straight ahead past Geralds cap. It was a cap for motoring in
England. Mrs Bland said so. We passed that house, and three others, and
another yard where the little girl stood by the gate. She didnt have the
bread now, and her face looked like it had been streaked with coaldust.
I waved my hand, but she made no reply, only her head turned slowly as
the car passed, following us with her unwinking gaze. Then we ran beside
the wall, our shadows running along the wall, and after a while we
passed a piece of torn newspaper lying beside the road and I began to
laugh again. I could feel it in my throat and I looked off into the
trees where the afternoon slanted, thinking of afternoon and of the bird
and the boys in swimming. But still I couldnt stop it and then I knew
that if I tried too hard to stop it Id be crying and I thought about
how Id thought about I could not be a virgin, with so many of them
walking along in the shadows and whispering with their soft girlvoices
lingering in the shadowy places and the words coming out and perfume and
eyes you could feel not see, but if it was that simple to do it wouldnt
be anything and if it wasnt anything, what was I and then Mrs Bland
said, Quentin? Is he sick, Mr MacKenzie? and then Shreves fat hand
touched my knee and Spoade began talking and I quit trying to stop it.

If that hamper is in his way, Mr MacKenzie, move it over on your side.
I brought a hamper of wine because I think young gentlemen should drink
wine, although my father, Geralds grandfather _ever do that Have you
ever done that In the grey darkness a little light her hands locked
about_

They do, when they can get it, Spoade said. Hey, Shreve? _her knees
her face looking at the sky the smell of honeysuckle upon her face and
throat_

Beer, too, Shreve said. His hand touched my knee again. I moved my
knee again. _like a thin wash of lilac coloured paint talking about him
bringing_

Youre not a gentleman, Spoade said.  _him between us until the shape
of her blurred not with dark_

No. Im Canadian, Shreve said.  _talking about him the oar blades
winking him along winking the Cap made for motoring in England and all
time rushing beneath and they two blurred within the other forever more
he had been in the army had killed men_

I adore Canada, Miss Daingerfield said. I think its marvellous.

Did you ever drink perfume? Spoade said.  _with one hand he could lift
her to his shoulder and run with her running Running_

No, Shreve said.  _running the beast with two backs and she blurred in
the winking oars running the swine of Euboeleus running coupled within
how many Caddy_

Neither did I, Spoade said.  _I dont know   too many   there was
something terrible in me terrible in me Father I have committed Have you
ever done that We didnt we didnt do that did we do that_

and Geralds grandfather always picked his own mint before breakfast,
while the dew was still on it. He wouldnt even let old Wilkie touch it
do you remember Gerald but always gathered it himself and made his own
julep. He was as crochety about his julep as an old maid, measuring
everything by a recipe in his head. There was only one man he ever gave
that recipe to; that was _we did how can you not know it if youll just
wait Ill tell you how it was it was a crime we did a terrible crime it
cannot be hid you think it can but wait   Poor Quentin youve never done
that have you  and Ill tell you how it was Ill tell Father then itll
have to be because you love Father then well have to go away amid the
pointing and the horror the clean flame Ill make you say we did Im
stronger than you Ill make you know we did you thought it was them but_
_it was me listen I fooled you all the time it was me you thought I was
in the house where that damn honeysuckle trying not to think the swing
the cedars the secret surges the breathing locked drinking the wild
breath the yes Yes Yes yes_  never be got to drink wine himself, but he
always said that a hamper what book did you read that in the one where
Geralds rowing suit of wine was a necessary part of any gentlemens
picnic basket  _did you love them Caddy did you love them When they
touched me I died_

one minute she was standing there the next he was yelling and pulling at
her dress they went into the hall and up the stairs yelling and shoving
at her up the stairs to the bathroom door and stopped her back against
the door and her arm across her face yelling and trying to shove her
into the bathroom when she came in to supper T. P. was feeding him he
started again just whimpering at first until she touched him then he
yelled she stood there her eyes like cornered rats then I was running in
the grey darkness it smelled of rain and all flower scents the damp warm
air released and crickets sawing away in the grass pacing me with a
small travelling island of silence Fancy watched me across the fence
blotchy like a quilt on a line I thought damn that nigger he forgot to
feed her again I ran down the hill in that vacuum of crickets like a
breath travelling across a mirror she was lying in the water her head on
the sand spit the water flowing about her hips there was a little more
light in the water her skirt half saturated flopped along her flanks to
the waters motion in heavy ripples going nowhere renewed themselves of
their own movement I stood on the bank I could smell the honeysuckle on
the water gap the air seemed to drizzle with honeysuckle and with the
rasping of crickets a substance you could feel on the flesh

is Benjy still crying

I dont know yes I dont know

poor Benjy

I sat down on the bank the grass was damp a little then I found my shoes
wet

get out of that water are you crazy

but she didnt move her face was a white blur framed out of the blur of
the sand by her hair

get out now

she sat up then she rose her skirt flopped against her draining she
climbed the bank her clothes flopping sat down

why dont you wring it out do you want to catch cold

yes

the water sucked and gurgled across the sand spit and on in the dark
among the willows across the shallow the water rippled like a piece of
cloth holding still a little light as water does

hes crossed all the oceans all around the world

then she talked about him clasping her wet knees her face tilted back in
the grey light the smell of honeysuckle there was a light in mothers
room and in Benjys where T. P. was putting him to bed

do you love him

her hand came out I didnt move it fumbled down my arm and she held my
hand flat against her chest her heart thudding

no no

did he make you then he made you do it let him he was stronger than you
and he tomorrow Ill kill him I swear I will father neednt know until
afterward and then you and I nobody need ever know we can take my school
money we can cancel my matriculation Caddy you hate him dont you dont
you

she held my hand against her chest her heart thudding I turned and
caught her arm

Caddy you hate him dont you

she moved my hand up against her throat her heart was hammering there

poor Quentin

her face looked at the sky it was low so low that all smells and sounds
of night seemed to have been crowded down like under a slack tent
especially the honeysuckle it had got into my breathing it was on her
face and throat like paint her blood pounded against my hand I was
leaning on my other arm it began to jerk and jump and I had to pant to
get any air at all out of that thick grey honeysuckle

yes I hate him I would die for him Ive already died for him I die for
him over and over again everytime this goes

when I lifted my hand I could still feel crisscrossed twigs and grass
burning into the palm

poor Quentin

she leaned back on her arms her hands locked about her knees

youve never done that have you

what done what

that what I have what I did

yes yes lots of times with lots of girls

then I was crying her hand touched me again and I was crying against her
damp blouse then she lying on her back looking past my head into the sky
I could see a rim of white under her irises I opened my knife

do you remember the day damuddy died when you sat down in the water in
your drawers

yes

I held the point of the knife at her throat

it wont take but a second just a second then I can do mine I can do mine
then

all right can you do yours by yourself

yes the blades long enough Benjys in bed by now

yes

it wont take but a second Ill try not to hurt

all right

will you close your eyes

no like this youll have to push it harder

touch your hand to it

but she didnt move her eyes were wide open looking past my head at the
sky

Caddy do you remember how Dilsey fussed at you because your drawers were
muddy

dont cry

Im not crying Caddy

push it are you going to

do you want me to

yes push it

touch your hand to it

dont cry poor Quentin

but I couldnt stop she held my head against her damp hard breast I could
hear her heart going firm and slow now not hammering and the water
gurgling among the willows in the dark and waves of honeysuckle coming
up the air my arm and shoulder were twisted under me

what is it what are you doing

her muscles gathered I sat up

its my knife I dropped it

she sat up

what time is it

I dont know

she rose to her feet I fumbled along the ground

Im going let it go

I could feel her standing there I could smell her damp clothes feeling
her there

its right here somewhere

let it go you can find it tomorrow come on

wait a minute Ill find it

are you afraid to

here it is it was right here all the time

was it come on

I got up and followed we went up the hill the crickets hushing before us

its funny how you can sit down and drop something and have to hunt all
around for it

the grey it was grey with dew slanting up into the grey sky then the
trees beyond

damn that honeysuckle I wish it would stop

you used to like it

we crossed the crest and went on toward the trees she walked into me she
gave over a little the ditch was a black scar on the grey grass she
walked into me again she looked at me and gave over we reached the ditch

lets go this way

what for

lets see if you can still see Nancys bones I havent thought to look in a
long time have you

it was matted with vines and briers dark

they were right here you cant tell whether you see them or not can you

stop Quentin

come on

the ditch narrowed closed she turned toward the trees

stop Quentin

Caddy

I got in front of her again

Caddy

stop it

I held her

Im stronger than you

she was motionless hard unyielding but still

I wont fight stop youd better stop

Caddy dont Caddy

it wont do any good dont you know it wont let me go

the honeysuckle drizzled and drizzled I could hear the crickets watching
us in a circle she moved back went around me on toward the trees

you go on back to the house you neednt come

I went on

why dont you go on back to the house

damn that honeysuckle

we reached the fence she crawled through I crawled through when I rose
from stooping he was coming out of the trees into the grey toward us
coming toward us tall and flat and still even moving like he was still
she went to him

this is Quentin Im wet Im wet all over you dont have to if you dont want
to

their shadows one shadow her head rose it was above his on the sky
higher their two heads

you dont have to if you dont want to

then not two heads the darkness smelled of rain of damp grass and leaves
the grey light drizzling like rain the honeysuckle coming up in damp
waves I could see her face a blur against his shoulder he held her in
one arm like she was no bigger than a child he extended his hand

glad to know you

we shook hands then we stood there her shadow high against his shadow
one shadow

whatre you going to do Quentin

walk a while I think Ill go through the woods to the road and come back
through town

I turned away going

goodnight

Quentin

I stopped

what do you want

in the woods the tree frogs were going smelling rain in the air they
sounded like toy music boxes that were hard to turn and the honeysuckle

come here

what do you want

come here Quentin

I went back she touched my shoulder leaning down her shadow the blur of
her face leaning down from his high shadow I drew back

look out

you go on home

Im not sleepy Im going to take a walk

wait for me at the branch

Im going for a walk

Ill be there soon wait for me you wait

no Im going through the woods

I didnt look back the tree frogs didnt pay me any mind the grey light
like moss in the trees drizzling but still it wouldnt rain after a while
I turned went back to the edge of the woods as soon as I got there I
began to smell honeysuckle again I could see the lights on the
courthouse clock and the glare of town the square on the sky and the
dark willows along the branch and the light in mothers windows the light
still on in Benjys room and I stooped through the fence and went across
the pasture running I ran in the grey grass among the crickets the
honeysuckle getting stronger and stronger and the smell of water then I
could see the water the colour of grey honeysuckle I lay down on the
bank with my face close to the ground so I couldnt smell the honeysuckle
I couldnt smell it then and I lay there feeling the earth going through
my clothes listening to the water and after a while I wasnt breathing so
hard and I lay there thinking that if I didnt move my face I wouldnt
have to breathe hard and smell it and then I wasnt thinking about
anything at all she came along the bank and stopped I didnt move

its late you go on home

what

you go on home its late

all right

her clothes rustled I didnt move they stopped rustling

are you going in like I told you

I didnt hear anything

Caddy

yes I will if you want me to I will

I sat up she was sitting on the ground her hands clasped about her knee

go on to the house like I told you

yes Ill do anything you want me to anything yes

she didnt even look at me I caught her shoulder and shook her hard

you shut up

I shook her

you shut up you shut up

yes

she lifted her face then I saw she wasnt even looking at me at all I
could see that white rim

get up

I pulled her she was limp I lifted her to her feet

go on now

was Benjy still crying when you left

go on

we crossed the branch the roof came in sight then the windows upstairs

hes asleep now

I had to stop and fasten the gate she went on in the grey light the
smell of rain and still it wouldnt rain and honeysuckle beginning to
come from the garden fence beginning she went into the shadow I could
hear her feet then

Caddy

I stopped at the steps I couldnt hear her feet

Caddy

I heard her feet then my hand touched her not warm not cool just still
her clothes a little damp still

do you love him now

not breathing except slow like far away breathing

Caddy do you love him now

I dont know

outside the grey light the shadows of things like dead things in
stagnant water

I wish you were dead

do you you coming in now

are you thinking about him now

I dont know

tell me what youre thinking about tell me

stop stop Quentin

you shut up you shut up you hear me you shut up are you going to shut up

all right I will stop well make too much noise

Ill kill you do you hear

lets go out to the swing theyll hear you here

Im not crying do you say Im crying

no hush now well wake Benjy up

you go on into the house go on now

I am dont cry Im bad anyway you cant help it

theres a curse on us its not our fault is it our fault

hush come on and go to bed now

you cant make me theres a curse on us

finally I saw him he was just going into the barbershop he looked out I
went on and waited

Ive been looking for you two or three days

you wanted to see me

Im going to see you

he rolled the cigarette quickly with about two motions he struck the
match with his thumb

we cant talk here suppose I meet you somewhere

Ill come to your room are you at the hotel

no thats not so good you know that bridge over the creek in there back
of

yes all right

at one oclock right

yes

I turned away

Im obliged to you

look

I stopped looked back

she all right

he looked like he was made out of bronze his khaki shirt

she need me for anything now

Ill be there at one

she heard me tell T. P. to saddle Prince at one oclock she kept watching
me not eating much she came too

what are you going to do

nothing cant I go for a ride if I want to

youre going to do something what is it

none of your business whore whore

T. P. had Prince at the side door

I wont want him Im going to walk

I went down the drive and out the gate I turned into the lane then I ran
before I reached the bridge I saw him leaning on the rail the horse was
hitched in the woods he looked over his shoulder then he turned his back
he didnt look up until I came onto the bridge and stopped he had a piece
of bark in his hands breaking pieces from it and dropping them over the
rail into the water

I came to tell you to leave town

he broke a piece of bark deliberately dropped it carefully into the
water watched it float away

I said you must leave town

he looked at me

did she send you to me

I say you must go not my father not anybody I say it

listen save this for a while I want to know if shes all right have they
been bothering her up there

thats something you dont need to trouble yourself about

then I heard myself saying Ill give you until sundown to leave town

he broke a piece of bark and dropped it into the water then he laid the
bark on the rail and rolled a cigarette with those two swift motions
spun the match over the rail

what will you do if I dont leave

Ill kill you dont think that just because I look like a kid to you

the smoke flowed in two jets from his nostrils across his face

how old are you

I began to shake my hands were on the rail I thought if I hid them hed
know why

Ill give you until tonight

listen buddy whats your name Benjys the natural isnt he you are

Quentin

my mouth said it I didnt say it at all

Ill give you till sundown

Quentin

he raked the cigarette ash carefully off against the rail he did it
slowly and carefully like sharpening a pencil my hands had quit shaking

listen no good taking it so hard its not your fault kid it would have
been some other fellow

did you ever have a sister did you

no but theyre all bitches

I hit him my open hand beat the impulse to shut it to his face his hand
moved as fast as mine the cigarette went over the rail I swung with the
other hand he caught it too before the cigarette reached the water he
held both my wrists in the same hand his other hand flicked to his
armpit under his coat behind him the sun slanted and a bird singing
somewhere beyond the sun we looked at one another while the bird singing
he turned my hands loose

look here

he took the bark from the rail and dropped it into the water it bobbed
up the current took it floated away his hand lay on the rail holding the
pistol loosely we waited

you cant hit it now

no

it floated on it was quite still in the woods I heard the bird again and
the water afterward the pistol came up he didnt aim at all the bark
disappeared then pieces of it floated up spreading he hit two more of
them pieces of bark no bigger than silver dollars

thats enough I guess

he swung the cylinder out and blew into the barrel a thin wisp of smoke
dissolved he reloaded the three chambers shut the cylinder he handed it
to me butt first

what for I wont try to beat that

youll need it from what you said Im giving you this one because youve
seen what itll do

to hell with your gun

I hit him I was still trying to hit him long after he was holding my
wrists but I still tried then it was like I was looking at him through a
piece of coloured glass I could hear my blood and then I could see the
sky again and branches against it and the sun slanting through them and
he holding me on my feet

did you hit me

I couldnt hear

what

yes how do you feel

all right let go

he let me go I leaned against the rail

do you feel all right

let me alone Im all right

can you make it home all right

go on let me alone

youd better not try to walk take my horse

no you go on

you can hang the reins on the pommel and turn him loose hell go back to
the stable

let me alone you go on and let me alone

I leaned on the rail looking at the water I heard him untie the horse
and ride off and after a while I couldnt hear anything but the water and
then the bird again I left the bridge and sat down with my back against
a tree and leaned my head against the tree and shut my eyes a patch of
sun came through and fell across my eyes and I moved a little further
around the tree I heard the bird again and the water and then everything
sort of rolled away and I didnt feel anything at all I felt almost good
after all those days and the nights with honeysuckle coming up out of
the darkness into my room where I was trying to sleep even when after a
while I knew that he hadnt hit me that he had lied about that for her
sake too and that I had just passed out like a girl but even that didnt
matter anymore and I sat there against the tree with little flecks of
sunlight brushing across my face like yellow leaves on a twig listening
to the water and not thinking about anything at all even when I heard
the horse coming fast I sat there with my eyes closed and heard its feet
bunch scuttering the hissing sand and feet running and her hard running
hands

fool fool are you hurt

I opened my eyes her hands running on my face

I didnt know which way until I heard the pistol I didnt know where I
didnt think he and you running off slipping I didnt think he would have

she held my face between her hands bumping my head against the tree

stop stop that

I caught her wrists

quit that quit it

I knew he wouldnt I knew he wouldnt

she tried to bump my head against the tree

I told him never to speak to me again I told him

she tried to break her wrists free

let me go

stop it Im stronger than you stop it now

let me go Ive got to catch him and ask his let me go Quentin please let
me go let me go

all at once she quit her wrists went lax

yes I can tell him I can make him believe anytime I can make him

Caddy

she hadnt hitched Prince he was liable to strike out for home if the
notion took him

anytime he will believe me

do you love him Caddy

do I what

she looked at me then everything emptied out of her eyes and they looked
like the eyes in the statues blank and unseeing and serene

put your hand against my throat

she took my hand and held it flat against her throat

now say his name

Dalton Ames

I felt the first surge of blood there it surged in strong accelerating
beats

say it again

her face looked off into the trees where the sun slanted and where the
bird

say it again

Dalton Ames

her blood surged steadily beating and beating against my hand

It kept on running for a long time, but my face felt cold and sort of
dead, and my eye, and the cut place on my finger was smarting again. I
could hear Shreve working the pump, then he came back with the basin and
a round blob of twilight wobbling in it, with a yellow edge like a
fading balloon, then my reflection. I tried to see my face in it.

Has it stopped? Shreve said. Give me the rag. He tried to take it
from my hand.

Look out, I said, I can do it. Yes, its about stopped now. I dipped
the rag again, breaking the balloon. The rag stained the water. I wish
I had a clean one.

You need a piece of beefsteak for that eye, Shreve said. Damn if you
wont have a shiner tomorrow. The son of a bitch, he said.

Did I hurt him any? I wrung out the handkerchief and tried to clean
the blood off of my vest.

You cant get that off, Shreve said. Youll have to send it to the
cleaners. Come on, hold it on your eye, why dont you.

I can get some of it off, I said. But I wasnt doing much good. What
sort of shape is my collar in?

I dont know, Shreve said. Hold it against your eye. Here.

Look out, I said. I can do it. Did I hurt him any?

You may have hit him. I may have looked away just then or blinked or
something. He boxed the hell out of you. He boxed you all over the
place. What did you want to fight him with your fists for? You goddamn
fool. How do you feel?

I feel fine, I said. I wonder if I can get something to clean my
vest.

Oh, forget your damn clothes. Does your eye hurt?

I feel fine, I said. Everything was sort of violet and still, the sky
green paling into gold beyond the gable of the house and a plume of
smoke rising from the chimney without any wind. I heard the pump again.
A man was filling a pail, watching us across his pumping shoulder. A
woman crossed the door, but she didnt look out. I could hear a cow
lowing somewhere.

Come on, Shreve said, Let your clothes alone and put that rag on your
eye. Ill send your suit out first thing tomorrow.

All right. Im sorry I didnt bleed on him a little, at least.

Son of a bitch, Shreve said. Spoade came out of the house, talking to
the woman I reckon, and crossed the yard. He looked at me with his cold,
quizzical eyes.

Well, bud, he said, looking at me, Ill be damned if you dont go to a
lot of trouble to have your fun. Kidnapping, then fighting. What do you
do on your holidays? burn houses?

Im all right, I said. What did Mrs Bland say?

Shes giving Gerald hell for bloodying you up. Shell give you hell for
letting him, when she sees you. She dont object to the fighting, its
the blood that annoys her. I think you lost caste with her a little by
not holding your blood better. How do you feel?

Sure, Shreve said, If you cant be a Bland, the next best thing is to
commit adultery with one or get drunk and fight him, as the case may
be.

Quite right, Spoade said. But I didnt know Quentin was drunk.

He wasnt, Shreve said. Do you have to be drunk to want to hit that
son of a bitch?

Well, I think Id have to be pretty drunk to try it, after seeing how
Quentin came out. Whered he learn to box?

Hes been going to Mikes every day, over in town, I said.

He has? Spoade said. Did you know that when you hit him?

I dont know, I said. I guess so. Yes.

Wet it again, Shreve said. Want some fresh water?

This is all right, I said. I dipped the cloth again and held it to my
eye. Wish I had something to clean my vest. Spoade was still watching
me.

Say, he said, What did you hit him for? What was it he said?

I dont know. I dont know why I did.

The first I knew was when you jumped up all of a sudden and said, Did
you ever have a sister? Did you? and when he said No, you hit him. I
noticed you kept on looking at him, but you didnt seem to be paying any
attention to what anybody was saying until you jumped up and asked him
if he had any sisters.

Ah, he was blowing off as usual, Shreve said, about his women. You
know: like he does, before girls, so they dont know exactly what hes
saying. All his damn innuendo and lying and a lot of stuff that dont
make sense even. Telling us about some wench that he made a date with to
meet at a dance hall in Atlantic City and stood her up and went to the
hotel and went to bed and how he lay there being sorry for her waiting
on the pier for him, without him there to give her what she wanted.
Talking about the bodys beauty and the sorry ends thereof and how tough
women have it, without anything else they can do except lie on their
backs. Leda lurking in the bushes, whimpering and moaning for the swan,
see. The son of a bitch. Id hit him myself. Only Id grabbed up her
damn hamper of wine and done it if it had been me.

Oh, Spoade said, the champion of dames. Bud, you excite not only
admiration, but horror. He looked at me, cold and quizzical. Good
God, he said.

Im sorry I hit him, I said. Do I look too bad to go back and get it
over with?

Apologies, hell, Shreve said, Let them go to hell. Were going to
town.

He ought to go back so theyll know he fights like a gentleman, Spoade
said. Gets licked like one, I mean.

Like this? Shreve said, With his clothes all over blood?

Why, all right, Spoade said, You know best.

He cant go around in his undershirt, Shreve said, Hes not a senior
yet. Come on, lets go to town.

You neednt come, I said. You go on back to the picnic.

Hell with them, Shreve said. Come on here.

Whatll I tell them? Spoade said. Tell them you and Quentin had a
fight too?

Tell them nothing, Shreve said. Tell her her option expired at
sunset. Come on, Quentin. Ill ask that woman where the nearest
interurban

No, I said, Im not going back to town.

Shreve stopped, looking at me. Turning, his glasses looked like small
yellow moons.

What are you going to do?

Im not going back to town yet. You go on back to the picnic. Tell them
I wouldnt come back because my clothes were spoiled.

Look here, he said, What are you up to?

Nothing. Im all right. You and Spoade go on back. Ill see you
tomorrow. I went on across the yard, toward the road.

Do you know where the station is? Shreve said.

Ill find it. Ill see you all tomorrow. Tell Mrs Bland Im sorry I
spoiled her party. They stood watching me. I went around the house. A
rock path went down to the road. Roses grew on both sides of the path. I
went through the gate, onto the road. It dropped downhill, toward the
woods, and I could make out the auto beside the road. I went up the
hill. The light increased as I mounted, and before I reached the top I
heard a car. It sounded far away across the twilight and I stopped and
listened to it. I couldnt make out the auto any longer, but Shreve was
standing in the road before the house, looking up the hill. Behind him
the yellow light lay like a wash of paint on the roof of the house. I
lifted my hand and went on over the hill, listening to the car. Then the
house was gone and I stopped in the green and yellow light and heard the
car growing louder and louder, until just as it began to die away it
ceased all together. I waited until I heard it start again. Then I went
on.

As I descended the light dwindled slowly, yet at the same time without
altering its quality, as if I and not light were changing, decreasing,
though even when the road ran into trees you could have read a
newspaper. Pretty soon I came to a lane. I turned into it. It was closer
and darker than the road, but when it came out at the trolley
stopanother wooden marqueethe light was still unchanged. After the
lane it seemed brighter, as though I had walked through night in the
lane and come out into morning again. Pretty soon the car came. I got on
it, they turning to look at my eye, and found a seat on the left side.

The lights were on in the car, so while we ran between trees I couldnt
see anything except my own face and a woman across the aisle with a hat
sitting right on top of her head, with a broken feather in it, but when
we ran out of the trees I could see the twilight again, that quality of
light as if time really had stopped for a while, with the sun hanging
just under the horizon, and then we passed the marquee where the old man
had been eating out of the sack, and the road going on under the
twilight, into twilight and the sense of water peaceful and swift
beyond. Then the car went on, the draught building steadily up in the
open door until it was drawing steadily through the car with the odour
of summer and darkness except honeysuckle. Honeysuckle was the saddest
odour of all, I think. I remember lots of them. Wistaria was one. On the
rainy days when Mother wasnt feeling quite bad enough to stay away from
the windows we used to play under it. When Mother stayed in bed Dilsey
would put old clothes on us and let us go out in the rain because she
said rain never hurt young folks. But if Mother was up we always began
by playing on the porch until she said we were making too much noise,
then we went out and played under the wistaria frame.

This was where I saw the river for the last time this morning, about
here. I could feel water beyond the twilight, smell. When it bloomed in
the spring and it rained the smell was everywhere you didnt notice it so
much at other times but when it rained the smell began to come into the
house at twilight either it would rain more at twilight or there was
something in the light itself but it always smelled strongest then until
I would lie in bed thinking when will it stop when will it stop. The
draft in the door smelled of water, a damp steady breath. Sometimes I
could put myself to sleep saying that over and over until after the
honeysuckle got all mixed up in it the whole thing came to symbolise
night and unrest I seemed to be lying neither asleep nor awake looking
down a long corridor of grey halflight where all stable things had
become shadowy paradoxical all I had done shadows all I had felt
suffered taking visible form antic and perverse mocking without
relevance inherent themselves with the denial of the significance they
should have affirmed thinking I was I was not who was not was not who.

I could smell the curves of the river beyond the dusk and I saw the last
light supine and tranquil upon tideflats like pieces of broken mirror,
then beyond them lights began in the pale clear air, trembling a little
like butterflies hovering a long way off. Benjamin the child of. How he
used to sit before that mirror. Refuge unfailing in which conflict
tempered silenced reconciled. Benjamin the child of mine old age held
hostage into Egypt. O Benjamin. Dilsey said it was because Mother was
too proud for him. They come into white peoples lives like that in
sudden sharp black trickles that isolate white facts for an instant in
unarguable truth like under a microscope; the rest of the time just
voices that laugh when you see nothing to laugh at, tears when no reason
for tears. They will bet on the odd or even number of mourners at a
funeral. A brothel full of them in Memphis went into a religious trance
ran naked into the street. It took three policemen to subdue one of
them. Yes Jesus O good man Jesus O that good man.

The car stopped. I got out, with them looking at my eye. When the
trolley came it was full. I stopped on the back platform.

Seats up front, the conductor said. I looked into the car. There were
no seats on the left side.

Im not going far, I said. Ill just stand here.

We crossed the river. The bridge, that is, arching slow and high into
space, between silence and nothingness where lightsyellow and red and
greentrembled in the clear air, repeating themselves.

Better go up front and get a seat, the conductor said.

I get off pretty soon, I said. A couple of blocks.

I got off before we reached the postoffice. Theyd all be sitting around
somewhere by now though, and then I was hearing my watch and I began to
listen for the chimes and I touched Shreves letter through my coat, the
bitten shadows of the elms flowing upon my hand. And then as I turned
into the quad the chimes did begin and I went on while the notes came up
like ripples on a pool and passed me and went on, saying Quarter to
what? All right. Quarter to what.

Our windows were dark. The entrance was empty. I walked close to the
left wall when I entered, but it was empty: just the stairs curving up
into shadows echoes of feet in the sad generations like light dust upon
the shadows, my feet waking them like dust, lightly to settle again.

I could see the letter before I turned the light on, propped against a
book on the table so I would see it. Calling him my husband. And then
Spoade said they were going somewhere, would not be back until late, and
Mrs Bland would need another cavalier. But I would have seen him and he
cannot get another car for an hour because after six oclock. I took out
my watch and listened to it clicking away, not knowing it couldnt even
lie. Then I laid it face up on the table and took Mrs Blands letter and
tore it across and dropped the pieces into the waste basket and took off
my coat, vest, collar, tie and shirt. The tie was spoiled too, but then
niggers. Maybe a pattern of blood he could call that the one Christ was
wearing. I found the gasoline in Shreves room and spread the vest on
the table, where it would be flat, and opened the gasoline.

_the first car in town a girl Girl thats what Jason couldnt bear smell
of gasoline making him sick then got madder than ever because a girl
Girl had no sister but Benjamin Benjamin the child of my sorrowful if
Id just had a mother so I could say Mother Mother_ It took a lot of
gasoline, and then I couldnt tell if it was still the stain or just the
gasoline. It had started the cut to smarting again so when I went to
wash I hung the vest on a chair and lowered the light cord so that the
bulb would be drying the splotch. I washed my face and hands, but even
then I could smell it within the soap stinging, constricting the
nostrils a little. Then I opened the bag and took the shirt and collar
and tie out and put the bloody ones in and closed the bag, and dressed.
While I was brushing my hair the half hour went. But there was until the
three quarters anyway, except suppose _seeing on the rushing darkness
only his own face no broken feather unless two of them but not two like
that going to Boston the same night then my face his face for an instant
across the crashing when out of darkness two lighted windows in rigid
fleeing crash gone his face and mine just I see saw did I see not
goodbye the marquee empty of eating the road empty in darkness in
silence the bridge arching into silence darkness sleep the water
peaceful and swift not goodbye_

I turned out the light and went into my bedroom, out of the gasoline but
I could still smell it. I stood at the window the curtains moved slow
out of the darkness touching my face like someone breathing asleep,
breathing slow into the darkness again, leaving the touch. _After they
had gone up stairs Mother lay back in her chair, the camphor
handkerchief to her mouth. Father hadnt moved he still sat beside her
holding her hand the bellowing hammering away like no place for it in
silence_ When I was little there was a picture in one of our books, a
dark place into which a single weak ray of light came slanting upon two
faces lifted out of the shadow. _You know what Id do if I were King?_
she never was a queen or a fairy she was always a king or a giant or a
general _Id break that place open and drag them out and Id whip them
good_ It was torn out, jagged out. I was glad. Id have to turn back to
it until the dungeon was Mother herself she and Father upward into weak
light holding hands and us lost somewhere below even them without even a
ray of light. Then the honeysuckle got into it. As soon as I turned off
the light and tried to go to sleep it would begin to come into the room
in waves building and building up until I would have to pant to get any
air at all out of it until I would have to get up and feel my way like
when I was a little boy _hands can see touching in the mind shaping
unseen door Door now nothing hands can see_ My nose could see gasoline,
the vest on the table, the door. The corridor was still empty of all the
feet in sad generations seeking water. _yet the eyes unseeing clenched
like teeth not disbelieving doubting even the absence of pain shin ankle
knee the long invisible flowing of the stair-railing where a misstep in
the darkness filled with sleeping Mother Father Caddy Jason Maury door I
am not afraid only Mother Father Caddy Jason Maury getting so far ahead
sleeping I will sleep fast when I door Door door_ It was empty too, the
pipes, the porcelain, the stained quiet walls, the throne of
contemplation. I had forgotten the glass, but I could _hands can see
cooling fingers invisible swan-throat where less than Moses rod the
glass touch tentative not to drumming lean cool throat drumming cooling
the metal the glass full overfull cooling the glass the fingers flushing
sleep leaving the taste of dampened sleep in the long silence of the
throat_ I returned up the corridor, waking the lost feet in whispering
battalions in the silence, into the gasoline, the watch telling its
furious lie on the dark table. Then the curtains breathing out of the
dark upon my face, leaving the breathing upon my face. A quarter hour
yet. And then Ill not be. The peacefullest words. Peacefullest words.
_Non fui. Sum. Fui. Nom sum._ Somewhere I heard bells once. Mississippi
or Massachusetts. I was. I am not. Massachusetts or Mississippi. Shreve
has a bottle in his trunk. _Arent you even going to open it_ Mr and Mrs
Jason Richmond Compson announce the _Three times. Days. Arent you even
going to open it_ marriage of their daughter Candace _that liquor
teaches you to confuse the means with the end_. I am. Drink. I was not.
Let us sell Benjys pasture so that Quentin may go to Harvard and I may
knock my bones together and together. I will be dead in. Was it one year
Caddy said. Shreve has a bottle in his trunk. Sir I will not need
Shreves I have sold Benjys pasture and I can be dead in Harvard Caddy
said in the caverns and the grottoes of the sea tumbling peacefully to
the wavering tides because Harvard is such a fine sound forty acres is
no high price for a fine sound. A find dead sound we will swap Benjys
pasture for a fine dead sound. It will last him a long time because he
cannot hear it unless he can smell it _as soon as she came in the door
he began to cry_ I thought all the time it was just one of those town
squirts that Father was always teasing her about until. I didnt notice
him any more than any other stranger drummer or what thought they were
army shirts until all of a sudden I knew he wasnt thinking of me at all
as a potential source of harm, but was thinking of her when he looked at
me was looking at me through her like through a piece of coloured glass
_why must you meddle with me dont you know it wont do any good I thought
youd have left that for Mother and Jason_

_did Mother set Jason to spy on you_ I wouldnt have.

_Women only use other peoples codes of honour its because she loves
Caddy_ staying downstairs even when she was sick so Father couldnt kid
Uncle Maury before Jason Father said Uncle Maury was too poor a
classicist to risk the blind immortal boy in person he should have
chosen Jason because Jason would have made only the same kind of blunder
Uncle Maury himself would have made not one to get him a black eye the
Patterson boy was smaller than Jason too they sold the kites for a
nickel apiece until the trouble over finances Jason got a new partner
still smaller one small enough anyway because T. P. said Jason still
treasurer but Father said why should Uncle Maury work if he father could
support five or six niggers that did nothing at all but sit with their
feet in the oven he certainly could board and lodge Uncle Maury now and
then and lend him a little money who kept his Fathers belief in the
celestial derivation of his own species at such a fine heat then Mother
would cry and say that Father believed his people were better than hers
that he was ridiculing Uncle Maury to teach us the same thing she
couldnt see that Father was teaching us that all men are just
accumulations dolls stuffed with sawdust swept up from the trash heaps
where all previous dolls had been thrown away the sawdust flowing from
what wound in what side that not for me died not. It used to be I
thought of death as a man something like Grandfather a friend of his a
kind of private and particular friend like we used to think of
Grandfathers desk not to touch it not even to talk loud in the room
where it was I always thought of them as being together somewhere all
the time waiting for old Colonel Sartoris to come down and sit with them
waiting on a high place beyond cedar trees Colonel Sartoris was on a
still higher place looking out across at something and they were waiting
for him to get done looking at it and come down Grandfather wore his
uniform and we could hear the murmur of their voices from beyond the
cedars they were always talking and Grandfather was always right

The three quarters began. The first note sounded, measured and tranquil,
serenely peremptory, emptying the unhurried silence for the next one and
thats it if people could only change one another forever that way merge
like a flame swirling up for an instant then blown cleanly out along the
cool eternal dark instead of lying there trying not to think of the
swing until all cedars came to have that vivid dead smell of perfume
that Benjy hated so. Just by imagining the clump it seemed to me that I
could hear whispers secret surges smell the beating of hot blood under
wild unsecret flesh watching against red eyelids the swine untethered in
pairs rushing coupled into the sea and he we must just stay awake and
see evil done for a little while its not always and i it doesnt have to
be even that long for a man of courage and he do you consider that
courage and i yes sir dont you and he every man is the arbiter of his
own virtues whether or not you consider it courageous is of more
importance than the act itself than any act otherwise you could not be
in earnest and i you dont believe i am serious and he i think you are
too serious to give me any cause for alarm you wouldnt have felt driven
to the expedient of telling me you have committed incest otherwise and i
i wasnt lying i wasnt lying and he you wanted to sublimate a piece of
natural human folly into a horror and then exorcise it with truth and i
it was to isolate her out of the loud world so that it would have to
flee us of necessity and then the sound of it would be as though it had
never been and he did you try to make her do it and i i was afraid to i
was afraid she might and then it wouldnt have done any good but if i
could tell you we did it would have been so and then the others wouldnt
be so and then the world would roar away and he and now this other you
are not lying now either but you are still blind to what is in yourself
to that part of general truth the sequence of natural events and their
causes which shadows every mans brow even benjys you are not thinking of
finitude you are contemplating an apotheosis in which a temporary state
of mind will become symmetrical above the flesh and aware both of itself
and of the flesh it will not quite discard you will not even be dead and
i temporary and he you cannot bear to think that someday it will no
longer hurt you like this now were getting at it you seem to regard it
merely as an experience that will whiten your hair overnight so to speak
without altering your appearance at all you wont do it under these
conditions it will be a gamble and the strange thing is that man who is
conceived by accident and whose every breath is a fresh cast with dice
already loaded against him will not face that final main which he knows
before hand he has assuredly to face without essaying expedients ranging
all the way from violence to petty chicanery that would not deceive a
child until someday in very disgust he risks everything on a single
blind turn of a card no man ever does that under the first fury of
despair or remorse or bereavement he does it only when he has realised
that even the despair or remorse or bereavement is not particularly
important to the dark diceman and i temporary and he it is hard
believing to think that a love or a sorrow is a bond purchased without
design and which matures willynilly and is recalled without warning to
be replaced by whatever issue the gods happen to be floating at the time
no you will not do that until you come to believe that even she was not
quite worth despair perhaps and i i will never do that nobody knows what
i know and he i think youd better go on up to cambridge right away you
might go up into maine for a month you can afford it if you are careful
it might be a good thing watching pennies has healed more scars than
jesus and i suppose i realise what you believe i will realise up there
next week or next month and he then you will remember that for you to go
to harvard has been your mothers dream since you were born and no
compson has ever disappointed a lady and i temporary it will be better
for me for all of us and he every man is the arbiter of his own virtues
but let no man prescribe for another mans wellbeing and i temporary and
he was the saddest word of all there is nothing else in the world its
not despair until time its not even time until it was

The last note sounded. At last it stopped vibrating and the darkness was
still again. I entered the sitting room and turned on the light. I put
my vest on. The gasoline was faint now, barely noticeable, and in the
mirror the stain didnt show. Not like my eye did, anyway. I put on my
coat. Shreves letter crackled through the cloth and I took it out and
examined the address, and put it in my side pocket. Then I carried the
watch into Shreves room and put it in his drawer and went to my room
and got a fresh handkerchief and went to the door and put my hand on the
light switch. Then I remembered I hadnt brushed my teeth, so I had to
open the bag again. I found my toothbrush and got some of Shreves paste
and went out and brushed my teeth. I squeezed the brush as dry as I
could and put it back in the bag and shut it, and went to the door
again. Before I snapped the light out I looked around to see if there
was anything else, then I saw that I had forgotten my hat. Id have to
go by the postoffice and Id be sure to meet some of them, and theyd
think I was a Harvard Square student making like he was a senior. I had
forgotten to brush it too, but Shreve had a brush, so I didnt have to
open the bag any more.




                           APRIL SIXTH, 1928


Once a bitch always a bitch, what I say. I says youre lucky if her
playing out of school is all that worries you. I says she ought to be
down there in that kitchen right now, instead of up there in her room,
gobbing paint on her face and waiting for six niggers that cant even
stand up out of a chair unless theyve got a pan full of bread and meat
to balance them, to fix breakfast for her. And Mother says,

But to have the school authorities think that I have no control over
her, that I cant

Well, I says, You cant, can you? You never have tried to do anything
with her, I says, How do you expect to begin this late, when shes
seventeen years old?

She thought about that for a while.

But to have them think that . . . I didnt even know she had a report
card. She told me last fall that they had quit using them this year. And
now for Professor Junkin to call me on the telephone and tell me if
shes absent one more time, she will have to leave school. How does she
do it? Where does she go? Youre down town all day; you ought to see her
if she stays on the streets.

Yes, I says, If she stayed on the streets. I dont reckon shed be
playing out of school just to do something she could do in public, I
says.

What do you mean? she says.

I dont mean anything, I says. I just answered your question. Then
she begun to cry again, talking about how her own flesh and blood rose
up to curse her.

You asked me, I says.

I dont mean you, she says. You are the only one of them that isnt a
reproach to me.

Sure, I says, I never had time to be. I never had time to go to
Harvard like Quentin or drink myself into the ground like Father. I had
to work. But of course if you want me to follow her around and see what
she does, I can quit the store and get a job where I can work at night.
Then I can watch her during the day and you can use Ben for the night
shift.

I know Im just a trouble and a burden to you, she says, crying on the
pillow.

I ought to know it, I says. Youve been telling me that for thirty
years. Even Ben ought to know it now. Do you want me to say anything to
her about it?

Do you think it will do any good? she says.

Not if you come down there interfering just when I get started, I
says. If you want me to control her, just say so and keep your hands
off. Everytime I try to, you come butting in and then she gives both of
us the laugh.

Remember shes your own flesh and blood, she says.

Sure, I says, thats just what Im thinking offlesh. And a little
blood too, if I had my way. When people act like niggers, no matter who
they are the only thing to do is treat them like a nigger.

Im afraid youll lose your temper with her, she says.

Well, I says, You havent had much luck with your system. You want me
to do anything about it, or not? Say one way or the other; Ive got to
get on to work.

I know you have to slave your life away for us, she says. You know if
I had my way, youd have an office of your own to go to, and hours that
became a Bascomb. Because you are a Bascomb, despite your name. I know
that if your father could have forseen

Well, I says, I reckon hes entitled to guess wrong now and then,
like anybody else, even a Smith or a Jones. She begun to cry again.

To hear you speak bitterly of your dead father, she says.

All right, I says, all right. Have it your way. But as I havent got
an office, Ill have to get on to what I have got. Do you want me to say
anything to her?

Im afraid youll lose your temper with her, she says.

All right, I says, I wont say anything, then.

But something must be done, she says. To have people think I permit
her to stay out of school and run about the streets, or that I cant
prevent her doing it. . . . Jason, Jason, she says, How could you. How
could you leave me with these burdens.

Now, now, I says, Youll make yourself sick. Why dont you either lock
her up all day too, or turn her over to me and quit worrying over her?

My own flesh and blood, she says, crying. So I says,

All right. Ill tend to her. Quit crying, now.

Dont lose your temper, she says. Shes just a child, remember.

No, I says, I wont. I went out, closing the door.

Jason, she says. I didnt answer. I went down the hall. Jason, she
says beyond the door. I went on down stairs. There wasnt anybody in the
diningroom, then I heard her in the kitchen. She was trying to make
Dilsey let her have another cup of coffee. I went in.

I reckon thats your school costume, is it? I says. Or maybe todays
a holiday?

Just a half a cup, Dilsey, she says. Please.

No, suh, Dilsey says, I aint gwine do it. You aint got no business
wid mon one cup, a seventeen year old gal, let lone whut Miss Cahline
say. You go on and git dressed for school, so you kin ride to town wid
Jason. You fixin to be late again.

No shes not, I says. Were going to fix that right now. She looked
at me, the cup in her hand. She brushed her hair back from her face, her
kimono slipping off her shoulder. You put that cup down and come in
here a minute, I says.

What for? she says.

Come on, I says. Put that cup in the sink and come in here.

What you up to now, Jason? Dilsey says.

You may think you can run over me like you do your grandmother and
everybody else, I says, But youll find out different. Ill give you
ten seconds to put that cup down like I told you.

She quit looking at me. She looked at Dilsey. What time is it, Dilsey?
she says. When its ten seconds, you whistle. Just a half a cup.
Dilsey, pl

I grabbed her by the arm. She dropped the cup. It broke on the floor and
she jerked back, looking at me, but I held her arm. Dilsey got up from
her chair.

You, Jason, she says.

You turn me loose, Quentin says, Ill slap you.

You will, will you? I says, You will will you? She slapped at me. I
caught that hand too and held her like a wildcat. You will, will you?
I says. You think you will?

You, Jason! Dilsey says. I dragged her into the diningroom. Her kimono
came unfastened, flapping about her, damn near naked. Dilsey came
hobbling along. I turned and kicked the door shut in her face.

You keep out of here, I says.

Quentin was leaning against the table, fastening her kimono. I looked at
her.

Now, I says, I want to know what you mean, playing out of school and
telling your grandmother lies and forging her name on your report and
worrying her sick. What do you mean by it?

She didnt say anything. She was fastening her kimono up under her chin,
pulling it tight around her, looking at me. She hadnt got around to
painting herself yet and her face looked like she had polished it with a
gun rag. I went and grabbed her wrist. What do you mean? I says.

None of your damn business, she says. You turn me loose.

Dilsey came in the door. You, Jason, she says.

You get out of here, like I told you, I says, not even looking back.
I want to know where you go when you play out of school, I says. You
keep off the streets, or Id see you. Who do you play out with? Are you
hiding out in the woods with one of those damn slick-headed jellybeans?
Is that where you go?

Youyou old goddamn! she says. She fought, but I held her. You damn
old goddamn! she says.

Ill show you, I says. You may can scare an old woman off, but Ill
show you whos got hold of you now. I held her with one hand, then she
quit fighting and watched me, her eyes getting wide and black.

What are you going to do? she says.

You wait until I get this belt out and Ill show you, I says, pulling
my belt out. Then Dilsey grabbed my arm.

Jason, she says, You, Jason! Aint you shamed of yourself.

Dilsey, Quentin says, Dilsey.

I aint gwine let him, Dilsey says, Dont you worry, honey. She held
to my arm. Then the belt came out and I jerked loose and flung her away.
She stumbled into the table. She was so old she couldnt do any more
than move hardly. But thats all right: we need somebody in the kitchen
to eat up the grub the young ones cant tote off. She came hobbling
between us, trying to hold me again. Hit me, den, she says, ef nothin
else but hittin somebody wont do you. Hit me, she says.

You think I wont? I says.

I dont put no devilment beyond you, she says. Then I heard Mother on
the stairs. I might have known she wasnt going to keep out of it. I let
go. She stumbled back against the wall, holding her kimono shut.

All right, I says, Well just put this off a while. But dont think
you can run it over me. Im not an old woman, nor an old half dead
nigger, either. You damn little slut, I says.

Dilsey, she says, Dilsey, I want my mother.

Dilsey went to her. Now, now, she says, He aint gwine so much as lay
his hand on you while Ise here. Mother came on down the stairs.

Jason, she says, Dilsey.

Now, now, Dilsey says, I aint gwine let him tech you. She put her
hand on Quentin. She knocked it down.

You damn old nigger, she says. She ran toward the door.

Dilsey, Mother says on the stairs. Quentin ran up the stairs, passing
her. Quentin, Mother says, You, Quentin. Quentin ran on. I could
hear her when she reached the top, then in the hall. Then the door
slammed.

Mother had stopped. Then she came on. Dilsey, she says.

All right, Dilsey says, Ise comin. You go on and git dat car and wait
now, she says, so you kin cahy her to school.

Dont you worry, I says. Ill take her to school and Im going to see
that she stays there. Ive started this thing, and Im going through
with it.

Jason, Mother says on the stairs.

Go on, now, Dilsey says, going toward the door. You want to git her
started too? Ise comin, Miss Cahline.

I went on out. I could hear them on the steps. You go on back to bed
now, Dilsey was saying, Dont you know you aint feeling well enough to
git up yet? Go on back, now. Im gwine to see she gits to school in
time.

I went on out the back to back the car out, then I had to go all the way
round to the front before I found them.

I thought I told you to put that tire on the back of the car, I says.

I aint had time, Luster says. Aint nobody to watch him till mammy git
done in de kitchen.

Yes, I says, I feed a whole damn kitchen full of niggers to follow
around after him, but if I want an automobile tire changed, I have to do
it myself.

I aint had nobody to leave him wid, he says. Then he begun moaning and
slobbering.

Take him on round to the back, I says. What the hell makes you want
to keep him around here where people can see him? I made them go on,
before he got started bellowing good. Its bad enough on Sundays, with
that damn field full of people that havent got a side show and six
niggers to feed, knocking a damn oversize mothball around. Hes going to
keep on running up and down that fence and bellowing every time they
come in sight until first thing I know theyre going to begin charging
me golf dues, then Mother and Dilseyll have to get a couple of china
door knobs and a walking stick and work it out, unless I play at night
with a lantern. Then theyd send us all to Jackson, maybe. God knows,
theyd hold Old Home week when that happened.

I went on back to the garage. There was the tire, leaning against the
wall, but be damned if I was going to put it on. I backed out and turned
around. She was standing by the drive. I says,

I know you havent got any books: I just want to ask you what you did
with them, if its any of my business. Of course I havent got any right
to ask, I says, Im just the one that paid $11.65 for them last
September.

Mother buys my books, she says. Theres not a cent of your money on
me. Id starve first.

Yes? I says. You tell your grandmother that and see what she says.
You dont look all the way naked, I says, even if that stuff on your
face does hide more of you than anything else youve got on.

Do you think your money or hers either paid for a cent of this? she
says.

Ask your grandmother, I says. Ask her what became of those checks.
You saw her burn one of them, as I remember. She wasnt even listening,
with her face all gummed up with paint and her eyes hard as a fice
dogs.

Do you know what Id do if I thought your money or hers either bought
one cent of this? she says, putting her hand on her dress.

What would you do? I says, Wear a barrel?

Id tear it right off and throw it into the street, she says. Dont
you believe me?

Sure you would, I says. You do it every time.

See if I wouldnt, She says. She grabbed the neck of her dress in both
hands and made like she would tear it.

You tear that dress, I says, And Ill give you a whipping right here
that youll remember all your life.

See if I dont, she says. Then I saw that she really was trying to tear
it, to tear it right off of her. By the time I got the car stopped and
grabbed her hands there was about a dozen people looking. It made me so
mad for a minute it kind of blinded me.

You do a thing like that again and Ill make you sorry you ever drew
breath, I says.

Im sorry now, she says. She quit, then her eyes turned kind of funny
and I says to myself if you cry here in this car, on the street, Ill
whip you. Ill wear you out. Lucky for her she didnt, so I turned her
wrists loose and drove on. Luckily we were near an alley, where I could
turn into the back street and dodge the square. They were already
putting the tent up in Beards lot. Earl had already given me the two
passes for our show windows. She sat there with her face turned away,
chewing her lip. Im sorry now, she says. I dont see why I was ever
born.

And I know of at least one other person that dont understand all he
knows about that, I says. I stopped in front of the school house. The
bell had rung, and the last of them were just going in. Youre on time
for once, anyway, I says. Are you going in there and stay there, or am
I coming with you and make you? She got out and banged the door.
Remember what I say, I says, I mean it. Let me hear one more time
that you were slipping up and down back alleys with one of those damn
squirts.

She turned back at that. I dont slip around, she says. I dare anybody
to know everything I do.

And they all know it, too, I says. Everybody in this town knows what
you are. But I wont have it anymore, you hear? I dont care what you do,
myself, I says, But Ive got a position in this town, and Im not
going to have any member of my family going on like a nigger wench. You
hear me?

I dont care, she says, Im bad and Im going to hell, and I dont
care. Id rather be in hell than anywhere where you are.

If I hear one more time that you havent been to school, youll wish
you were in hell, I says. She turned and ran on across the yard. One
more time, remember, I says. She didnt look back.

I went to the postoffice and got the mail and drove on to the store and
parked. Earl looked at me when I came in. I gave him a chance to say
something about my being late, but he just said,

Those cultivators have come. Youd better help Uncle Job put them up.

I went on to the back, where old Job was uncrating them, at the rate of
about three bolts to the hour.

You ought to be working for me, I says. Every other no-count nigger
in town eats in my kitchen.

I works to suit de man whut pays me Satdy night, he says. When I
does dat, it dont leave me a whole lot of time to please other folks.
He screwed up a nut. Aint nobody works much in dis country cep de
boll-weevil, noways, he says.

Youd better be glad youre not a boll-weevil waiting on those
cultivators, I says. Youd work yourself to death before theyd be
ready to prevent you.

Dats de troof, he says, Boll-weevil got tough time. Work evy day in
de week out in de hot sun, rain er shine. Aint got no front porch to set
on en watch de wattermilyuns growin and Satdy dont mean nothin a-tall
to him.

Saturday wouldnt mean nothing to you, either, I says, if it depended
on me to pay you wages. Get those things out of the crates now and drag
them inside.

I opened her letter first and took the check out. Just like a woman. Six
days late. Yet they try to make men believe that theyre capable of
conducting a business. How long would a man that thought the first of
the month came on the sixth last in business. And like as not, when they
sent the bank statement out, she would want to know why I never
deposited my salary until the sixth. Things like that never occur to a
woman.

    I had no answer to my letter about Quentins easter dress. Did
    it arrive all right? Ive had no answer to the last two letters
    I wrote her, though the check in the second one was cashed with
    the other check. Is she sick? Let me know at once or Ill come
    there and see for myself. You promised you would let me know
    when she needed things. I will expect to hear from you before
    the 10th. No youd better wire me at once. You are opening my
    letters to her. I know that as well as if I were looking at you.
    Youd better wire me at once about her to this address.

About that time Earl started yelling at Job, so I put them away and went
over to try to put some life into him. What this country needs is white
labour. Let these damn trifling niggers starve for a couple of years,
then theyd see what a soft thing they have.

Along toward ten oclock I went up front. There was a drummer there. It
was a couple of minutes to ten, and I invited him up the street to get a
coca-cola. We got to talking about crops.

Theres nothing to it, I says, Cotton is a speculators crop. They
fill the farmer full of hot air and get him to raise a big crop for them
to whipsaw on the market, to trim the suckers with. Do you think the
farmer gets anything out of it except a red neck and a hump in his back?
You think the man that sweats to put it into the ground gets a red cent
more than a bare living, I says. Let him make a big crop and it wont
be worth picking; let him make a small crop and he wont have enough to
gin. And what for? so a bunch of damn eastern jews, Im not talking
about men of the jewish religion, I says, Ive known some jews that
were fine citizens. You might be one yourself, I says.

No, he says, Im an American.

No offense, I says. I give every man his due, regardless of religion
or anything else. I have nothing against jews as an individual, I says.
Its just the race. Youll admit that they produce nothing. They follow
the pioneers into a new country and sell them clothes.

Youre thinking of Armenians, he says, arent you. A pioneer wouldnt
have any use for new clothes.

No offense, I says. I dont hold a mans religion against him.

Sure, he says, Im an American. My folks have some French blood, why
I have a nose like this. Im an American, all right.

So am I, I says. Not many of us left. What Im talking about is the
fellows that sit up there in New York and trim the sucker gamblers.

Thats right, he says. Nothing to gambling, for a poor man. There
ought to be a law against it.

Dont you think Im right? I says.

Yes, he says, I guess youre right. The farmer catches it coming and
going.

I know Im right, I says. Its a sucker game, unless a man gets
inside information from somebody that knows whats going on. I happen to
be associated with some people whore right there on the ground. They
have one of the biggest manipulators in New York for an adviser. Way I
do it, I says, I never risk much at a time. Its the fellow that
thinks he knows it all and is trying to make a killing with three
dollars that theyre laying for. Thats why they are in the business.

Then it struck ten. I went up to the telegraph office. It opened up a
little, just like they said. I went into the corner and took out the
telegram again, just to be sure. While I was looking at it a report came
in. It was up two points. They were all buying. I could tell that from
what they were saying. Getting aboard. Like they didnt know it could go
but one way. Like there was a law or something against doing anything
but buying. Well, I reckon those eastern jews have got to live too. But
Ill be damned if it hasnt come to a pretty pass when any damn
foreigner that cant make a living in the country where God put him, can
come to this one and take money right out of an Americans pockets. It
was up two points more. Four points. But hell, they were right there and
knew what was going on. And if I wasnt going to take the advice, what
was I paying them ten dollars a month for. I went out, then I remembered
and came back and sent the wire. All well. Q writing today.

Q? the operator says.

Yes, I says, Q. Cant you spell Q?

I just asked to be sure, he says.

You send it like I wrote it and Ill guarantee you to be sure, I says.
Send it collect.

What you sending, Jason? Doc Wright says, looking over my shoulder.
Is that a code message to buy?

Thats all right about that, I says. You boys use your own judgment.
You know more about it than those New York folks do.

Well, I ought to, Doc says, Id a saved money this year raising it at
two cents a pound.

Another report came in. It was down a point.

Jasons selling, Hopkins says. Look at his face.

Thats all right about what Im doing, I says. You boys follow your
own judgment. Those rich New York jews have got to live like everybody
else, I says.

I went on back to the store. Earl was busy up front. I went on back to
the desk and read Lorraines letter. Dear daddy wish you were here. No
good parties when daddys out of town I miss my sweet daddy. I reckon
she does. Last time I gave her forty dollars. Gave it to her. I never
promise a woman anything nor let her know what Im going to give her.
Thats the only way to manage them. Always keep them guessing. If you
cant think of any other way to surprise them, give them a bust in the
jaw.

I tore it up and burned it over the spittoon. I make it a rule never to
keep a scrap of paper bearing a womans hand, and I never write them at
all. Lorraine is always after me to write to her but I says anything I
forgot to tell you will save till I get to Memphis again but I says I
dont mind you writing me now and then in a plain envelope, but if you
ever try to call me up on the telephone, Memphis wont hold you I says. I
says when Im up there Im one of the boys, but Im not going to have
any woman calling me on the telephone. Here I says, giving her the forty
dollars. If you ever get drunk and take a notion to call me on the
phone, just remember this and count ten before you do it.

Whenll that be? she says.

What? I says.

When youre coming back, she says.

Ill let you know, I says. Then she tried to buy a beer, but I
wouldnt let her. Keep your money, I says. Buy yourself a dress with
it. I gave the maid a five, too. After all, like I say money has no
value; its just the way you spend it. It dont belong to anybody, so why
try to hoard it. It just belongs to the man that can get it and keep it.
Theres a man right here in Jefferson made a lot of money selling rotten
goods to niggers, lived in a room over the store about the size of a
pigpen, and did his own cooking. About four or five years ago he was
taken sick. Scared the hell out of him so that when he was up again he
joined the church and bought himself a Chinese missionary, five thousand
dollars a year. I often think how mad hell be if he was to die and find
out theres not any heaven, when he thinks about that five thousand a
year. Like I say, hed better go on and die now and save money.

When it was burned good I was just about to shove the others into my
coat when all of a sudden something told me to open Quentins before I
went home, but about that time Earl started yelling for me up front, so
I put them away and went and waited on the damn redneck while he spent
fifteen minutes deciding whether he wanted a twenty cent hame string or
a thirty-five cent one.

Youd better take that good one, I says. How do you fellows ever
expect to get ahead, trying to work with cheap equipment?

If this one aint any good, he says, why have you got it on sale?

I didnt say it wasnt any good, I says, I said its not as good as
that other one.

How do you know its not, he says. You ever use airy one of them?

Because they dont ask thirty-five cents for it, I says. Thats how I
know its not as good.

He held the twenty cent one in his hands, drawing it through his
fingers. I reckon Ill take this hyer one, he says. I offered to take
it and wrap it, but he rolled it up and put it in his overalls. Then he
took out a tobacco sack and finally got it untied and shook some coins
out. He handed me a quarter. That fifteen cents will buy me a snack of
dinner, he says.

All right, I says, Youre the doctor. But dont come complaining to me
next year when you have to buy a new outfit.

I aint makin next years crop yit, he says. Finally I got rid of him,
but every time I took that letter out something would come up. They were
all in town for the show, coming in in droves to give their money to
something that brought nothing to the town and wouldnt leave anything
except what those grafters in the Mayors office will split among
themselves, and Earl chasing back and forth like a hen in a coop, saying
Yes, maam, Mr Compson will wait on you. Jason, show this lady a churn
or a nickels worth of screen hooks.

Well, Jason likes work. I says no I never had university advantages
because at Harvard they teach you how to go for a swim at night without
knowing how to swim and at Sewanee they dont even teach you what water
is. I says you might send me to the state University; maybe Ill learn
how to stop my clock with a nose spray and then you can send Ben to the
Navy I says or to the cavalry anyway, they use geldings in the cavalry.
Then when she sent Quentin home for me to feed too I says I guess thats
right too, instead of me having to go way up north for a job they sent
the job down here to me and then Mother begun to cry and I says its not
that I have any objection to having it here; if its any satisfaction to
you Ill quit work and nurse it myself and let you and Dilsey keep the
flour barrel full, or Ben. Rent him out to a sideshow; there must be
folks somewhere that would pay a dime to see him, then she cried more
and kept saying my poor afflicted baby and I says yes hell be quite a
help to you when he gets his growth not being more than one and a half
times as high as me now and she says shed be dead soon and then wed
all be better off and so I says all right, all right, have it your way.
Its your grandchild, which is more than any other grandparents its got
can say for certain. Only I says its only a question of time. If you
believe shell do what she says and not try to see it, you fool yourself
because the first time that was that Mother kept on saying thank God you
are not a Compson except in name, because you are all I have left now,
you and Maury, and I says well I could spare Uncle Maury myself and then
they came and said they were ready to start. Mother stopped crying then.
She pulled her veil down and we went down stairs. Uncle Maury was coming
out of the diningroom, his handkerchief to his mouth. They kind of made
a lane and we went out the door just in time to see Dilsey driving Ben
and T. P. back around the corner. We went down the steps and got in.
Uncle Maury kept saying Poor little sister, poor little sister, talking
around his mouth and patting Mothers hand. Talking around whatever it
was.

Have you got your band on? she says. Why dont they go on, before
Benjamin comes out and makes a spectacle. Poor little boy. He doesnt
know. He cant even realise.

There, there, Uncle Maury says, patting her hand, talking around his
mouth. Its better so. Let him be unaware of bereavement until he has
to.

Other women have their children to support them in times like this,
Mother says.

You have Jason and me, he says.

Its so terrible to me, she says, Having the two of them like this,
in less than two years.

There, there, he says. After a while he kind of sneaked his hand to
his mouth and dropped them out the window. Then I knew what I had been
smelling. Clove stems. I reckon he thought that the least he could do at
Fathers funeral or maybe the sideboard thought it was still Father and
tripped him up when he passed. Like I say, if he had to sell something
to send Quentin to Harvard wed all been a damn sight better off if hed
sold that sideboard and bought himself a one-armed strait jacket with
part of the money. I reckon the reason all the Compson gave out before
it got to me like Mother says, is that he drank it up. At least I never
heard of him offering to sell anything to send me to Harvard.

So he kept on patting her hand and saying Poor little sister, patting
her hand with one of the black gloves that we got the bill for four days
later because it was the twenty-sixth because it was the same day one
month that Father went up there and got it and brought it home and
wouldnt tell anything about where she was or anything and Mother crying
and saying And you didnt even see him? You didnt even try to get him
to make any provision for it? and Father says No she shall not touch
his money not one cent of it and Mother says He can be forced to by
law. He can prove nothing, unlessJason Compson, she says, Were you
fool enough to tell

Hush, Caroline, Father says, then he sent me to help Dilsey get that
old cradle out of the attic and I says,

Well, they brought my job home tonight because all the time we kept
hoping theyd get things straightened out and hed keep her because
Mother kept saying she would at least have enough regard for the family
not to jeopardize my chance after she and Quentin had had theirs.

And whar else do she belong? Dilsey says, Who else gwine raise her
cep me? Aint I raised evey one of yall?

And a damn fine job you made of it, I says. Anyway itll give her
something to sure enough worry over now. So we carried the cradle down
and Dilsey started to set it up in her old room. Then Mother started
sure enough.

Hush, Miss Cahline, Dilsey says, You gwine wake her up.

In there? Mother says, To be contaminated by that atmosphere? Itll
be hard enough as it is, with the heritage she already has.

Hush, Father says, Dont be silly.

Why aint she gwine sleep in here, Dilsey says, In the same room whar
I put her ma to bed evy night of her life since she was big enough to
sleep by herself.

You dont know, Mother says, To have my own daughter cast off by her
husband. Poor little innocent baby, she says, looking at Quentin. You
will never know the suffering youve caused.

Hush, Caroline, Father says.

What you want to go on like that fo Jason fer? Dilsey says.

Ive tried to protect him, Mother says. Ive always tried to protect
him from it. At least I can do my best to shield her.

How sleepin in dis room gwine hurt her, I like to know, Dilsey says.

I cant help it, Mother says. I know Im just a troublesome old woman.
But I know that people cannot flout Gods laws with impunity.

Nonsense, Father said. Fix it in Miss Carolines room then, Dilsey.

You can say nonsense, Mother says. But she must never know. She must
never even learn that name. Dilsey, I forbid you ever to speak that name
in her hearing. If she could grow up never to know that she had a
mother, I would thank God.

Dont be a fool, Father says.

I have never interfered with the way you brought them up, Mother says,
But now I cannot stand anymore. We must decide this now, tonight.
Either that name is never to be spoken in her hearing, or she must go,
or I will go. Take your choice.

Hush, Father says, Youre just upset. Fix it in here, Dilsey.

En yous about sick too, Dilsey says. You looks like a hant. You git
in bed and Ill fix you a toddy and see kin you sleep. I bet you aint
had a full nights sleep since you lef.

No, Mother says, Dont you know what the doctor says? Why must you
encourage him to drink? Thats whats the matter with him now. Look at
me, I suffer too, but Im not so weak that I must kill myself with
whiskey.

Fiddlesticks, Father says, What do doctors know? They make their
livings advising people to do whatever they are not doing at the time,
which is the extent of anyones knowledge of the degenerate ape. Youll
have a minister in to hold my hand next. Then Mother cried, and he went
out. Went down stairs, and then I heard the sideboard. I woke up and
heard him going down again. Mother had gone to sleep or something,
because the house was quiet at last. He was trying to be quiet too,
because I couldnt hear him, only the bottom of his nightshirt and his
bare legs in front of the sideboard.

Dilsey fixed the cradle and undressed her and put her in it. She never
had waked up since he brought her in the house.

She pretty near too big fer hit, Dilsey says. Dar now. I gwine spread
me a pallet right acrost de hall, so you wont need to git up in de
night.

I wont sleep, Mother says. You go on home. I wont mind. Ill be happy
to give the rest of my life to her, if I can just prevent

Hush, now, Dilsey says. We gwine take keer of her. En you go on to
bed too, she says to me, You got to go to school tomorrow.

So I went out, then Mother called me back and cried on me awhile.

You are my only hope, she says. Every night I thank God for you.
While we were waiting there for them to start she says Thank God if he
had to be taken too, it is you left me and not Quentin. Thank God you
are not a Compson, because all I have left now is you and Maury and I
says, Well I could spare Uncle Maury myself. Well, he kept on patting
her hand with his black glove, talking away from her. He took them off
when his turn with the shovel came. He got up near the first, where they
were holding the umbrellas over them, stamping every now and then and
trying to kick the mud off their feet and sticking to the shovels so
theyd have to knock it off, making a hollow sound when it fell on it,
and when I stepped back around the hack I could see him behind a
tombstone, taking another one out of a bottle. I thought he never was
going to stop because I had on my new suit too, but it happened that
there wasnt much mud on the wheels yet, only Mother saw it and says I
dont know when youll ever have another one and Uncle Maury says, Now,
now. Dont you worry at all. You have me to depend on, always.

And we have. Always. The fourth letter was from him. But there wasnt
any need to open it. I could have written it myself, or recited it to
her from memory, adding ten dollars just to be safe. But I had a hunch
about that other letter. I just felt that it was about time she was up
to some of her tricks again. She got pretty wise after that first time.
She found out pretty quick that I was a different breed of cat from
Father. When they begun to get it filled up toward the top Mother
started crying sure enough, so Uncle Maury got in with her and drove
off. He says You can come in with somebody; theyll be glad to give you
a lift. Ill have to take your mother on and I thought about saying, Yes
you ought to brought two bottles instead of just one only I thought
about where we were, so I let them go on. Little they cared how wet I
got, because then Mother could have a whale of a time being afraid I was
taking pneumonia.

Well, I got to thinking about that and watching them throwing dirt into
it, slapping it on anyway like they were making mortar or something or
building a fence, and I began to feel sort of funny and so I decided to
walk around a while. I thought that if I went toward town theyd catch
up and be trying to make me get in one of them, so I went on back toward
the nigger graveyard. I got under some cedars, where the rain didnt
come much, only dripping now and then, where I could see when they got
through and went away. After a while they were all gone and I waited a
minute and came out.

I had to follow the path to keep out of the wet grass so I didnt see
her until I was pretty near there, standing there in a black cloak,
looking at the flowers. I knew who it was right off, before she turned
and looked at me and lifted up her veil.

Hello, Jason, she says, holding out her hand. We shook hands.

What are you doing here? I says. I thought you promised her you
wouldnt come back here. I thought you had more sense than that.

Yes? she says. She looked at the flowers again. There must have been
fifty dollars worth. Somebody had put one bunch on Quentins. You
did? she says.

Im not surprised though, I says. I wouldnt put anything past you.
You dont mind anybody. You dont give a damn about anybody.

Oh, she says, that job. She looked at the grave. Im sorry about
that, Jason.

I bet you are, I says. Youll talk mighty meek now. But you neednt
have come back. Theres not anything left. Ask Uncle Maury, if you dont
believe me.

I dont want anything, she says. She looked at the grave. Why didnt
they let me know? she says. I just happened to see it in the paper. On
the back page. Just happened to.

I didnt say anything. We stood there, looking at the grave, and then I
got to thinking about when we were little and one thing and another and
I got to feeling funny again, kind of mad or something, thinking about
now wed have Uncle Maury around the house all the time, running things
like the way he left me to come home in the rain by myself. I says,

A fine lot you care, sneaking in here soon as hes dead. But it wont do
you any good. Dont think that you can take advantage of this to come
sneaking back. If you cant stay on the horse youve got, youll have to
walk, I says. We dont even know your name at that house, I says. Do
you know that? We dont even know you with him and Quentin, I says. Do
you know that?

I know it, she says. Jason, she says, looking at the grave, if
youll fix it so I can see her a minute Ill give you fifty dollars.

You havent got fifty dollars, I says.

Will you? she says, not looking at me.

Lets see it, I says. I dont believe youve got fifty dollars.

I could see where her hands were moving under her cloak, then she held
her hand out. Damn if it wasnt full of money. I could see two or three
yellow ones.

Does he still give you money? I says. How much does he send you?

Ill give you a hundred, she says. Will you?

Just a minute, I says, And just like I say. I wouldnt have her know
it for a thousand dollars.

Yes, she says. Just like you say do it. Just so I see her a minute. I
wont beg or do anything. Ill go right on away.

Give me the money, I says.

Ill give it to you afterward, she says.

Dont you trust me? I says.

No, she says. I know you. I grew up with you.

Youre a fine one to talk about trusting people, I says. Well, I
says, I got to get on out of the rain. Goodbye. I made to go away.

Jason, she says. I stopped.

Yes? I says. Hurry up. Im getting wet.

All right, she says. Here. There wasnt anybody in sight. I went
back and took the money. She still held to it. Youll do it? she says,
looking at me from under the veil, You promise?

Let go, I says, You want somebody to come along and see us?

She let go. I put the money in my pocket. Youll do it, Jason? she
says. I wouldnt ask you, if there was any other way.

Youre damn right theres no other way, I says. Sure Ill do it. I
said I would, didnt I? Only youll have to do just like I say, now.

Yes, she says, I will. So I told her where to be, and went to the
livery stable. I hurried and got there just as they were unhitching the
hack. I asked if they had paid for it yet and he said No and I said Mrs
Compson forgot something and wanted it again, so they let me take it.
Mink was driving. I bought him a cigar, so we drove around until it
begun to get dark on the back streets where they wouldnt see him. Then
Mink said hed have to take the team on back and so I said Id buy him
another cigar and so we drove into the lane and I went across the yard
to the house. I stopped in the hall until I could hear Mother and Uncle
Maury upstairs, then I went on back to the kitchen. She and Ben were
there with Dilsey. I said Mother wanted her and I took her into the
house. I found Uncle Maurys raincoat and put it around her and picked
her up and went back to the lane and got in the hack. I told Mink to
drive to the depot. He was afraid to pass the stable, so we had to go
the back way and I saw her standing on the corner under the light and I
told Mink to drive close to the walk and when I said Go on, to give the
team a bat. Then I took the raincoat off of her and held her to the
window and Caddy saw her and sort of jumped forward.

Hit em, Mink! I says, and Mink gave them a cut and we went past her
like a fire engine. Now get on that train like you promised, I says. I
could see her running after us through the back window. Hit em again,
I says, Lets get on home. When we turned the corner she was still
running.

And so I counted the money again that night and put it away, and I
didnt feel so bad. I says I reckon thatll show you. I reckon youll
know now that you cant beat me out of a job and get away with it. It
never occurred to me she wouldnt keep her promise and take that train.
But I didnt know much about them then; I didnt have any more sense
than to believe what they said, because the next morning damn if she
didnt walk right into the store, only she had sense enough to wear the
veil and not speak to anybody. It was Saturday morning, because I was at
the store, and she came right on back to the desk where I was, walking
fast.

Liar, she says, Liar.

Are you crazy? I says. What do you mean? coming in here like this?
She started in, but I shut her off. I says, You already cost me one
job; do you want me to lose this one too? If youve got anything to say
to me, Ill meet you somewhere after dark. What have you got to say to
me? I says, Didnt I do everything I said? I said see her a minute,
didnt I? Well, didnt you? She just stood there looking at me, shaking
like an ague-fit, her hands clenched and kind of jerking. I did just
what I said I would, I says, Youre the one that lied. You promised to
take that train. Didnt you Didnt you promise? If you think you can get
that money back, just try it, I says. If itd been a thousand dollars,
youd still owe me after the risk I took. And if I see or hear youre
still in town after number 17 runs, I says, Ill tell Mother and Uncle
Maury. Then hold your breath until you see her again. She just stood
there, looking at me, twisting her hands together.

Damn you, she says, Damn you.

Sure, I says, Thats all right too. Mind what I say, now. After
number 17, and I tell them.

After she was gone I felt better. I says I reckon youll think twice
before you deprive me of a job that was promised me. I was a kid then. I
believed folks when they said theyd do things. Ive learned better
since. Besides, like I say I guess I dont need any mans help to get
along I can stand on my own feet like I always have. Then all of a
sudden I thought of Dilsey and Uncle Maury. I thought how shed get
around Dilsey and that Uncle Maury would do anything for ten dollars.
And there I was, couldnt even get away from the store to protect my own
Mother. Like she says, if one of you had to be taken, thank God it was
you left me I can depend on you and I says well I dont reckon Ill ever
get far enough from the store to get out of your reach. Somebodys got
to hold on to what little we have left, I reckon.

So as soon as I got home I fixed Dilsey. I told Dilsey she had leprosy
and I got the bible and read where a mans flesh rotted off and I told
her that if she ever looked at her or Ben or Quentin theyd catch it
too. So I thought I had everything all fixed until that day when I came
home and found Ben bellowing. Raising hell and nobody could quiet him.
Mother said, Well, get him the slipper then. Dilsey made out she didnt
hear. Mother said it again and I says Id go I couldnt stand that damn
noise. Like I say I can stand lots of things I dont expect much from
them but if I have to work all day long in a damn store damn if I dont
think I deserve a little peace and quiet to eat dinner in. So I says Id
go and Dilsey says quick, Jason!

Well, like a flash I knew what was up, but just to make sure I went and
got the slipper and brought it back, and just like I thought, when he
saw it youd thought we were killing him. So I made Dilsey own up, then
I told Mother. We had to take her up to bed then, and after things got
quieted down a little I put the fear of God into Dilsey. As much as you
can into a nigger, that is. Thats the trouble with nigger servants,
when theyve been with you for a long time they get so full of self
importance that theyre not worth a damn. Think they run the whole
family.

I like to know whuts de hurt in lettin dat po chile see her own baby,
Dilsey says. If Mr Jason was still here hit ud be different.

Only Mr Jasons not here, I says. I know you wont pay me any mind,
but I reckon youll do what Mother says. You keep on worrying her like
this until you get her into the graveyard too, then you can fill the
whole house full of ragtag and bobtail. But what did you want to let
that damn idiot see her for?

Yous a cold man, Jason, if man you is, she says. I thank de Lawd I
got mo heart dan dat, even ef hit is black.

At least Im man enough to keep that flour barrel full, I says. And
if you do that again, you wont be eating out of it either.

So the next time I told her that if she tried Dilsey again, Mother was
going to fire Dilsey and send Ben to Jackson and take Quentin and go
away. She looked at me for a while. There wasnt any street light close
and I couldnt see her face much. But I could feel her looking at me.
When we were little when shed get mad and couldnt do anything about it
her upper lip would begin to jump. Everytime it jumped it would leave a
little more of her teeth showing, and all the time shed be as still as
a post, not a muscle moving except her lip jerking higher and higher up
her teeth. But she didnt say anything. She just said,

All right. How much?

Well, if one look through a hack window was worth a hundred, I says.
So after that she behaved pretty well, only one time she asked to see a
statement of the bank account.

I know they have Mothers indorsement on them, she says, But I want
to see the bank statement. I want to see myself where those checks go.

Thats in Mothers private business, I says. If you think you have
any right to pry into her private affairs Ill tell her you believe
those checks are being misappropriated and you want an audit because you
dont trust her.

She didnt say anything or move. I could hear her whispering Damn you oh
damn you oh damn you.

Say it out, I says, I dont reckon its any secret what you and I
think of one another. Maybe you want the money back, I says.

Listen, Jason, she says, Dont lie to me now. About her. I wont ask to
see anything. If that isnt enough, Ill send more each month. Just
promise that shellthat sheYou can do that. Things for her. Be kind
to her. Little things that I cant, they wont let. . . . But you wont.
You never had a drop of warm blood in you. Listen, she says, If youll
get Mother to let me have her back, Ill give you a thousand dollars.

You havent got a thousand dollars, I says, I know youre lying now.

Yes I have. I will have. I can get it.

And I know how youll get it, I says, Youll get it the same way you
got her. And when she gets big enough Then I thought she really was
going to hit at me, and then I didnt know what she was going to do. She
acted for a minute like some kind of a toy thats wound up too tight and
about to burst all to pieces.

Oh, Im crazy, she says, Im insane. I cant take her. Keep her. What
am I thinking of. Jason, she says, grabbing my arm. Her hands were hot
as fever. Youll have to promise to take care of her, toShes kin to
you; your own flesh and blood. Promise, Jason. You have Fathers name:
do you think Id have to ask him twice? once, even?

Thats so, I says, He did leave me something. What do you want me to
do, I says, Buy an apron and a go-cart? I never got you into this, I
says. I run more risk than you do, because you havent got anything at
stake. So if you expect

No, she says, then she begun to laugh and to try to hold it back all
at the same time. No. I have nothing at stake, she says, making that
noise, putting her hands to her mouth, Nuh-nuh-nothing, she says.

Here, I says, Stop that!

Im tr-trying to, she says, holding her hands over her mouth. Oh God,
oh God.

Im going away from here, I says, I cant be seen here. You get on out
of town now, you hear?

Wait, she says, catching my arm. Ive stopped. I wont again. You
promise, Jason? she says, and me feeling her eyes almost like they were
touching my face, You promise? Motherthat moneyif sometimes she
needs thingsIf I send checks for her to you, other ones besides those,
youll give them to her? You wont tell? Youll see that she has things
like other girls?

Sure, I says, As long as you behave and do like I tell you.

And so when Earl came up front with his hat on he says, Im going to
step up to Rogers and get a snack. We wont have time to go home to
dinner, I reckon.

Whats the matter we wont have time? I says.

With this show in town and all, he says. Theyre going to give an
afternoon performance too, and theyll all want to get done trading in
time to go to it. So wed better just run up to Rogers.

All right, I says, Its your stomach. If you want to make a slave of
yourself to your business, its all right with me.

I reckon youll never be a slave to any business, he says.

Not unless its Jason Compsons business, I says.

So when I went back and opened it the only thing that surprised me was
it was a money order not a check. Yes, sir. You cant trust a one of
them. After all the risk Id taken, risking Mother finding out about her
coming down here once or twice a year sometimes, and me having to tell
Mother lies about it. Thats gratitude for you. And I wouldnt put it
past her to try to notify the postoffice not to let anyone except her
cash it. Giving a kid like that fifty dollars. Why I never saw fifty
dollars until I was twenty-one years old, with all the other boys with
the afternoon off and all day Saturday and me working in a store. Like I
say, how can they expect anybody to control her, with her giving her
money behind our backs. She has the same home you had I says, and the
same raising. I reckon Mother is a better judge of what she needs than
you are, that havent even got a home. If you want to give her money,
I says, You send it to Mother, dont be giving it to her. If Ive got to
run this risk every few months, youll have to do like I say, or its
out.

And just about the time I got ready to begin on it because if Earl
thought I was going to dash up the street and gobble two bits worth of
indigestion on his account he was bad fooled. I may not be sitting with
my feet on a mahogany desk but I am being paid for what I do inside this
building and if I cant manage to live a civilised life outside of it
Ill go where I can. I can stand on my own feet; I dont need any mans
mahogany desk to prop me up. So just about the time I got ready to start
Id have to drop everything and run to sell some redneck a dimes worth
of nails or something, and Earl up there gobbling a sandwich and half
way back already, like as not, and then I found that all the blanks were
gone. I remembered then that I had aimed to get some more, but it was
too late now, and then I looked up and there Quentin came. In the back
door. I heard her asking old Job if I was there. I just had time to
stick them in the drawer and close it.

She came around to the desk. I looked at my watch.

You been to dinner already? I says. Its just twelve; I just heard it
strike. You must have flown home and back.

Im not going home to dinner, she says. Did I get a letter today?

Were you expecting one? I says. Have you got a sweetie that can
write?

From Mother, she says. Did I get a letter from Mother? she says,
looking at me.

Mother got one from her, I says. I havent opened it. Youll have to
wait until she opens it. Shell let you see it, I imagine.

Please, Jason, she says, not paying any attention, Did I get one?

Whats the matter? I says. I never knew you to be this anxious about
anybody. You must expect some money from her.

She said she she says. Please, Jason, she says, Did I?

You must have been to school today, after all, I says, Somewhere
where they taught you to say please. Wait a minute, while I wait on that
customer.

I went and waited on him. When I turned to come back she was out of
sight behind the desk. I ran. I ran around the desk and caught her as
she jerked her hand out of the drawer. I took the letter away from her,
beating her knuckles on the desk until she let go.

You would, would you? I says.

Give it to me, she says, Youve already opened it. Give it to me.
Please, Jason. Its mine. I saw the name.

Ill take a hame string to you, I says. Thats what Ill give you.
Going into my papers.

Is there some money in it? she says, reaching for it. She said she
would send me some money. She promised she would. Give it to me.

What do you want with money? I says.

She said she would, she says, Give it to me. Please, Jason. I wont
ever ask you anything again, if youll give it to me this time.

Im going to, if youll give me time, I says. I took the letter and
the money order out and gave her the letter. She reached for the money
order, not hardly glancing at the letter. Youll have to sign it
first, I says.

How much is it? she says.

Read the letter, I says. I reckon itll say.

She read it fast, in about two looks.

It dont say, she says, looking up. She dropped the letter to the
floor. How much is it?

Its ten dollars, I says.

Ten dollars? she says, staring at me.

And you ought to be damn glad to get that, I says, A kid like you.
What are you in such a rush for money all of a sudden for?

Ten dollars? she says, like she was talking in her sleep, Just ten
dollars? She made a grab at the money order. Youre lying, she says.
Thief! she says, Thief!

You would, would you? I says, holding her off.

Give it to me! she says, Its mine. She sent it to me. I will see it.
I will.

You will? I says, holding her, Howre you going to do it?

Just let me see it, Jason, she says, Please. I wont ask you for
anything again.

Think Im lying, do you? I says. Just for that you wont see it.

But just ten dollars, she says, She told me sheshe told meJason,
please please please. Ive got to have some money. Ive just got to.
Give it to me, Jason. Ill do anything if you will.

Tell me what youve got to have money for, I says.

Ive got to have it, she says. She was looking at me. Then all of a
sudden she quit looking at me without moving her eyes at all. I knew she
was going to lie. Its some money I owe, she says. Ive got to pay
it. Ive got to pay it today.

Who to? I says. Her hands were sort of twisting. I could watch her
trying to think of a lie to tell. Have you been charging things at
stores again? I says. You neednt bother to tell me that. If you can
find anybody in this town thatll charge anything to you after what I
told them, Ill eat it.

Its a girl, she says, Its a girl. I borrowed some money from a
girl. Ive got to pay it back. Jason, give it to me. Please. Ill do
anything. Ive got to have it. Mother will pay you. Ill write to her to
pay you and that I wont ever ask her for anything again. You can see the
letter. Please, Jason. Ive got to have it.

Tell me what you want with it, and Ill see about it, I says. Tell
me. She just stood there, with her hands working against her dress.
All right, I says, If ten dollars is too little for you, Ill just
take it home to Mother, and you know whatll happen to it then. Of
course, if youre so rich you dont need ten dollars

She stood there, looking at the floor, kind of mumbling to herself. She
said she would send me some money. She said she sends money here and you
say she dont send any. She said shes sent a lot of money here. She says
its for me. That its for me to have some of it. And you say we havent
got any money.

You know as much about that as I do, I says. Youve seen what happens
to those checks.

Yes, she says, looking at the floor. Ten dollars, she says, Ten
dollars.

And youd better thank your stars its ten dollars, I says. Here, I
says. I put the money order face down on the desk, holding my hand on
it, Sign it.

Will you let me see it? she says. I just want to look at it. Whatever
it says, I wont ask for but ten dollars. You can have the rest. I just
want to see it.

Not after the way youve acted, I says. Youve got to learn one
thing, and that is that when I tell you to do something, youve got it
to do. You sign your name on that line.

She took the pen, but instead of signing it she just stood there with
her head bent and the pen shaking in her hand. Just like her mother.
Oh, God, she says, oh, God.

Yes, I says, Thats one thing youll have to learn if you never learn
anything else. Sign it now, and get on out of here.

She signed it. Wheres the money? she says. I took the order and
blotted it and put it in my pocket. Then I gave her the ten dollars.

Now you go on back to school this afternoon, you hear? I says. She
didnt answer. She crumpled the bill up in her hand like it was a rag or
something and went on out the front door just as Earl came in. A
customer came in with him and they stopped up front. I gathered up the
things and put on my hat and went up front.

Been much busy? Earl says.

Not much, I says. He looked out the door.

That your car over yonder? he says. Better not try to go out home to
dinner. Well likely have another rush just before the show opens. Get
you a lunch at Rogers and put a ticker in the drawer.

Much obliged, I says. I can still manage to feed myself, I reckon.

And right there hed stay, watching that door like a hawk until I came
through it again. Well, hed just have to watch it for a while; I was
doing the best I could. The time before I says thats the last one now;
youll have to remember to get some more right away. But who can
remember anything in all this hurrah. And now this damn show had to come
here the one day Id have to hunt all over town for a blank check,
besides all the other things I had to do to keep the house running, and
Earl watching the door like a hawk.

I went to the printing shop and told him I wanted to play a joke on a
fellow, but he didnt have anything. Then he told me to have a look in
the old opera house, where somebody had stored a lot of papers and junk
out of the old Merchants and Farmers Bank when it failed, so I dodged
up a few more alleys so Earl couldnt see me and finally found old man
Simmons and got the key from him and went up there and dug around. At
last I found a pad on a Saint Louis bank. And of course shed pick this
one time to look at it close. Well, it would have to do. I couldnt
waste any more time now.

I went back to the store. Forgot some papers Mother wants to go to the
bank, I says. I went back to the desk and fixed the check. Trying to
hurry and all, I says to myself its a good thing her eyes are giving
out, with that little whore in the house, a Christian forbearing woman
like Mother. I says you know just as well as I do what shes going to
grow up into but I says thats your business, if you want to keep her
and raise her in your house just because of Father. Then she would begin
to cry and say it was her own flesh and blood so I just says All right.
Have it your way. I can stand it if you can.

I fixed the letter up again and glued it back and went out.

Try not to be gone any longer than you can help, Earl says.

All right, I says. I went to the telegraph office. The smart boys were
all there.

Any of you boys made a million yet? I says.

Who can do anything, with a market like that? Doc says.

Whats it doing? I says. I went in and looked. It was three points
under the opening. You boys are not going to let a little thing like
the cotton market beat you, are you? I says. I thought you were too
smart for that.

Smart, hell, Doc says. It was down twelve points at twelve oclock.
Cleaned me out.

Twelve points? I says. Why the hell didnt somebody let me know? Why
didnt you let me know? I says to the operator.

I take it as it comes in, he says. Im not running a bucket shop.

Youre smart, arent you? I says. Seems to me, with the money I spend
with you, you could take time to call me up. Or maybe your damn
companys in a conspiracy with those damn eastern sharks.

He didnt say anything. He made like he was busy.

Youre getting a little too big for your pants, I says. First thing
you know youll be working for a living.

Whats the matter with you? Doc says. Youre still three points to
the good.

Yes, I says, If I happened to be selling. I havent mentioned that
yet, I think. You boys all cleaned out?

I got caught twice, Doc says. I switched just in time.

Well,  I. O. Snopes says, Ive picked hit; I reckon taint no more
than fair fer hit to pick me once in a while.

So I left them buying and selling among themselves at a nickel a point.
I found a nigger and sent him for my car and stood on the corner and
waited. I couldnt see Earl looking up and down the street, with one eye
on the clock, because I couldnt see the door from here. After about a
week he got back with it.

Where the hell have you been? I says, Riding around where the wenches
could see you?

I come straight as I could, he says, I had to drive clean around the
square, wid all dem wagons.

I never found a nigger yet that didnt have an airtight alibi for
whatever he did. But just turn one loose in a car and hes bound to show
off. I got in and went on around the square. I caught a glimpse of Earl
in the door across the square.

I went straight to the kitchen and told Dilsey to hurry up with dinner.

Quentin aint come yit, she says.

What of that? I says. Youll be telling me next that Lusters not
quite ready to eat yet. Quentin knows when meals are served in this
house. Hurry up with it, now.

Mother was in her room. I gave her the letter. She opened it and took
the check out and sat holding it in her hand. I went and got the shovel
from the corner and gave her a match. Come on, I says, Get it over
with. Youll be crying in a minute.

She took the match, but she didnt strike it. She sat there, looking at
the check. Just like I said it would be.

I hate to do it, she says, To increase your burden by adding
Quentin. . . .

I guess well get along, I says. Come on. Get it over with.

But she just sat there, holding the check.

This one is on a different bank, she says. They have been on an
Indianapolis bank.

Yes, I says. Women are allowed to do that too.

Do what? she says.

Keep money in two different banks, I says.

Oh, she says. She looked at the check a while. Im glad to know shes
so . . . she has so much . . . God sees that I am doing right, she
says.

Come on, I says, Finish it. Get the fun over.

Fun? she says, When I think

I thought you were burning this two hundred dollars a month for fun, I
says. Come on, now. Want me to strike the match?

I could bring myself to accept them, she says, For my childrens
sake. I have no pride.

Youd never be satisfied, I says, You know you wouldnt. Youve
settled that once, let it stay settled. We can get along.

I leave everything to you, she says. But sometimes I become afraid
that in doing this I am depriving you all of what is rightfully yours.
Perhaps I shall be punished for it. If you want me to, I will smother my
pride and accept them.

What would be the good in beginning now, when youve been destroying
them for fifteen years? I says. If you keep on doing it, you have lost
nothing, but if youd begin to take them now, youll have lost fifty
thousand dollars. Weve got along so far, havent we? I says. I
havent seen you in the poorhouse yet.

Yes, she says, We Bascombs need nobodys charity. Certainly not that
of a fallen woman.

She struck the match and lit the check and put it in the shovel, and
then the envelope, and watched them burn.

You dont know what it is, she says, Thank God you will never know
what a mother feels.

There are lots of women in this world no better than her, I says.

But they are not my daughters, she says. Its not myself, she says,
Id gladly take her back, sins and all, because she is my flesh and
blood. Its for Quentins sake.

Well, I could have said it wasnt much chance of anybody hurting Quentin
much, but like I say I dont expect much but I do want to eat and sleep
without a couple of women squabbling and crying in the house.

And yours, she says. I know how you feel toward her.

Let her come back, I says, far as Im concerned.

No, she says. I owe that to your fathers memory.

When he was trying all the time to persuade you to let her come home
when Herbert threw her out? I says.

You dont understand, she says. I know you dont intend to make it more
difficult for me. But its my place to suffer for my children, she
says. I can bear it.

Seems to me you go to a lot of unnecessary trouble doing it, I says.
The paper burned out. I carried it to the grate and put it in. It just
seems a shame to me to burn up good money, I says.

Let me never see the day when my children will have to accept that, the
wages of sin, she says. Id rather see even you dead in your coffin
first.

Have it your way, I says. Are we going to have dinner soon? I says,
Because if were not, Ill have to go on back. Were pretty busy
today. She got up. Ive told her once, I says. It seems shes
waiting on Quentin or Luster or somebody. Here, Ill call her. Wait.
But she went to the head of the stairs and called.

Quentin aint come yit, Dilsey says.

Well, Ill have to get on back, I says. I can get a sandwich
downtown. I dont want to interfere with Dilseys arrangements, I says.
Well, that got her started again, with Dilsey hobbling and mumbling back
and forth, saying,

All right, all right, Ise puttin hit on fast as I kin.

I try to please you all, Mother says, I try to make things as easy
for you as I can.

Im not complaining, am I? I says. Have I said a word except I had to
go back to work?

I know, she says, I know you havent had the chance the others had,
that youve had to bury yourself in a little country store. I wanted you
to get ahead. I knew your father would never realise that you were the
only one who had any business sense, and then when everything else
failed I believed that when she married, and Herbert . . . after his
promise . . .

Well, he was probably lying too, I says. He may not have even had a
bank. And if he had, I dont reckon hed have to come all the way to
Mississippi to get a man for it.

We ate awhile. I could hear Ben in the kitchen, where Luster was feeding
him. Like I say, if weve got to feed another mouth and she wont take
that money, why not send him down to Jackson. Hell be happier there,
with people like him. I says God knows theres little enough room for
pride in this family, but it dont take much pride to not like to see a
thirty year old man playing around the yard with a nigger boy, running
up and down the fence and lowing like a cow whenever they play golf over
there. I says if theyd sent him to Jackson at first wed all be better
off today. I says, youve done your duty by him; youve done all anybody
can expect of you and more than most folks would do, so why not send him
there and get that much benefit out of the taxes we pay. Then she says,
Ill be gone soon. I know Im just a burden to you and I says Youve
been saying that so long that Im beginning to believe you only I says
youd better be sure and not let me know youre gone because Ill sure
have him on number seventeen that night and I says I think I know a
place where theyll take her too and the name of its not Milk street
and Honey avenue either. Then she begun to cry and I says All right all
right I have as much pride about my kinfolks as anybody even if I dont
always know where they come from.

We ate for awhile. Mother sent Dilsey to the front to look for Quentin
again.

I keep telling you shes not coming to dinner, I says.

She knows better than that, Mother says, She knows I dont permit her
to run about the streets and not come home at meal time. Did you look
good, Dilsey?

Dont let her, then, I says.

What can I do, she says. You have all of you flouted me. Always.

If you wouldnt come interfering, Id make her mind, I says. It
wouldnt take me but about one day to straighten her out.

Youd be too brutal with her, she says. You have your Uncle Maurys
temper.

That reminded me of the letter. I took it out and handed it to her. You
wont have to open it, I says. The bank will let you know how much it
is this time.

Its addressed to you, she says.

Go on and open it, I says. She opened it and read it and handed it to
me.

My dear young nephew, it says,

    You will be glad to learn that I am now in a position to avail
    myself of an opportunity regarding which, for reasons which I
    shall make obvious to you, I shall not go into details until I
    have an opportunity to divulge it to you in a more secure
    manner. My business experience has taught me to be chary of
    committing anything of a confidential nature to any more
    concrete medium than speech, and my extreme precaution in this
    instance should give you some inkling of its value. Needless to
    say, I have just completed a most exhaustive examination of all
    its phases, and I feel no hesitancy in telling you that it is
    that sort of golden chance that comes but once in a lifetime,
    and I now see clearly before me that goal toward which I have
    long and unflaggingly striven: i.e., the ultimate solidification
    of my affairs by which I may restore to its rightful position
    that family of which I have the honour to be the sole remaining
    male descendant; that family in which I have ever included your
    lady mother and her children.

    As it so happens, I am not quite in a position to avail myself
    of this opportunity to the uttermost which it warrants, but
    rather than go out of the family to do so, I am today drawing
    upon your Mothers bank for the small sum necessary to
    complement my own initial investment, for which I herewith
    enclose, as a matter of formality, my note of hand at eight
    percent per annum. Needless to say, this is merely a formality,
    to secure your Mother in the event of that circumstance of which
    man is ever the plaything and sport. For naturally I shall
    employ this sum as though it were my own and so permit your
    Mother to avail herself of this opportunity which my exhaustive
    investigation has shown to be a bonanzaif you will permit the
    vulgarismof the first water and purest ray serene.

    This is in confidence, you will understand, from one business
    man to another; we will harvest our own vineyards, eh? And
    knowing your Mothers delicate health and that timorousness
    which such delicately nutured Southern ladies would naturally
    feel regarding matters of business, and their charming proneness
    to divulge unwittingly such matters in conversation, I would
    suggest that you do not mention it to her at all. On second
    thought, I advise you not to do so. It might be better to simply
    restore this sum to the bank at some future date, say, in a lump
    sum with the other small sums for which I am indebted to her,
    and say nothing about it at all. It is our duty to shield her
    from the crass material world as much as possible.

                                 Your affectionate Uncle,
                                             Maury L. Bascomb.

What do you want to do about it? I says, flipping it across the table.

I know you grudge what I give him, she says.

Its your money, I says. If you want to throw it to the birds even,
its your business.

Hes my own brother, Mother says. Hes the last Bascomb. When we are
gone there wont be any more of them.

Thatll be hard on somebody, I guess, I says. All right, all right,
I says, Its your money. Do as you please with it. You want me to tell
the bank to pay it?

I know you begrudge him, she says. I realise the burden on your
shoulders. When Im gone it will be easier on you.

I could make it easier right now, I says. All right, all right, I
wont mention it again. Move all bedlam in here if you want to.

Hes your own brother, she says, Even if he is afflicted.

Ill take your bank book, I says. Ill draw my check today.

He kept you waiting six days, she says. Are you sure the business is
sound? It seems strange to me that a solvent business cannot pay its
employees promptly.

Hes all right, I says, Safe as a bank. I tell him not to bother
about mine until we get done collecting every month. Thats why its
late sometimes.

I just couldnt bear to have you lose the little I had to invest for
you, she says. Ive often thought that Earl is not a good business
man. I know he doesnt take you into his confidence to the extent that
your investment in the business should warrant. Im going to speak to
him.

No, you let him alone, I says. Its his business.

You have a thousand dollars in it.

You let him alone, I says, Im watching things. I have your power of
attorney. Itll be all right.

You dont know what a comfort you are to me, she says. You have always
been my pride and joy, but when you came to me of your own accord and
insisted on banking your salary each month in my name, I thanked God it
was you left me if they had to be taken.

They were all right, I says. They did the best they could, I reckon.

When you talk that way I know you are thinking bitterly of your
fathers memory, she says. You have a right to, I suppose. But it
breaks my heart to hear you.

I got up. If youve got any crying to do, I says, youll have to do
it alone, because Ive got to get on back. Ill get the bank book.

Ill get it, she says.

Keep still, I says, Ill get it. I went upstairs and got the bank
book out of her desk and went back to town. I went to the bank and
deposited the check and the money order and the other ten, and stopped
at the telegraph office. It was one point above the opening. I had
already lost thirteen points, all because she had to come helling in
there at twelve, worrying me about that letter.

What time did that report come in? I says.

About an hour ago, he says.

An hour ago? I says. What are we paying you for? I says, Weekly
reports? How do you expect a man to do anything? The whole damn top
could blow off and wed not know it.

I dont expect you to do anything, he says. They changed that law
making folks play the cotton market.

They have? I says. I hadnt heard. They must have sent the news out
over the Western Union.

I went back to the store. Thirteen points. Damn if I believe anybody
knows anything about the damn thing except the ones that sit back in
those New York offices and watch the country suckers come up and beg
them to take their money. Well, a man that just calls shows he has no
faith in himself, and like I say if you arent going to take the advice,
whats the use in paying money for it. Besides, these people are right
up there on the ground; they know everything thats going on. I could
feel the telegram in my pocket. Id just have to prove that they were
using the telegraph company to defraud. That would constitute a bucket
shop. And I wouldnt hesitate that long, either. Only be damned if it
doesnt look like a company as big and rich as the Western Union could
get a market report out on time. Half as quick as theyll get a wire to
you saying Your account closed out. But what the hell do they care about
the people. Theyre hand in glove with that New York crowd. Anybody
could see that.

When I came in Earl looked at his watch. But he didnt say anything
until the customer was gone. Then he says,

You go home to dinner?

I had to go to the dentist, I says because its not any of his
business where I eat but Ive got to be in the store with him all the
afternoon. And with his jaw running off after all Ive stood. You take a
little two by four country storekeeper like I say it takes a man with
just five hundred dollars to worry about it fifty thousand dollars
worth.

You might have told me, he says. I expected you back right away.

Ill trade you this tooth and give you ten dollars to boot, any time,
I says. Our agreement was an hour for dinner, I says, and if you dont
like the way I do, you know what you can do about it.

Ive known that some time, he says. If it hadnt been for your mother
Id have done it before now, too. Shes a lady Ive got a lot of
sympathy for, Jason. Too bad some other folks I know cant say as much.

Then you can keep it, I says. When we need any sympathy Ill let you
know in plenty of time.

Ive protected you about that business a long time, Jason, he says.

Yes? I says, letting him go on. Listening to what he would say before
I shut him up.

I believe I know more about where that automobile came from than she
does.

You think so, do you? I says. When are you going to spread the news
that I stole it from my mother?

I dont say anything, he says, I know you have her power of attorney.
And I know she still believes that thousand dollars is in this
business.

All right, I says, Since you know so much, Ill tell you a little
more: go to the bank and ask them whose account Ive been depositing a
hundred and sixty dollars on the first of every month for twelve years.

I dont say anything, he says, I just ask you to be a little more
careful after this.

I never said anything more. It doesnt do any good. Ive found that when
a man gets into a rut the best thing you can do is let him stay there.
And when a man gets it in his head that hes got to tell something on
you for your own good, good-night. Im glad I havent got the sort of
conscience Ive got to nurse like a sick puppy all the time. If Id ever
be as careful over anything as he is to keep his little shirt tail full
of business from making him more then eight percent. I reckon he thinks
theyd get him on the usury law if he netted more than eight percent.
What the hell chance has a man got, tied down in a town like this and to
a business like this. Why I could take his business in one year and fix
him so hed never have to work again, only hed give it all away to the
church or something. If theres one thing gets under my skin, its a
damn hypocrite. A man that thinks anything he dont understand all about
must be crooked and that first chance he gets hes morally bound to tell
the third party whats none of his business to tell. Like I say if I
thought every time a man did something I didnt know all about he was
bound to be a crook, I reckon I wouldnt have any trouble finding
something back there on those books that you wouldnt see any use for
running and telling somebody I thought ought to know about it, when for
all I knew they might know a damn sight more about it now than I did,
and if they didnt it was damn little of my business anyway and he says,
My books are open to anybody. Anybody that has any claim or believes
she has any claim on this business can go back there and welcome.

Sure, you wont tell, I says, You couldnt square your conscience with
that. Youll just take her back there and let her find it. You wont
tell, yourself.

Im not trying to meddle in your business, he says. I know you missed
out on some things like Quentin had. But your mother has had a
misfortunate life too, and if she was to come in here and ask me why you
quit, Id have to tell her. It aint that thousand dollars. You know
that. Its because a man never gets anywhere if fact and his ledgers
dont square. And Im not going to lie to anybody, for myself or anybody
else.

Well, then, I says, I reckon that conscience of yours is a more
valuable clerk than I am; it dont have to go home at noon to eat. Only
dont let it interfere with my appetite, I says, because how the hell
can I do anything right, with that damn family and her not making any
effort to control her nor any of them, like that time when she happened
to see one of them kissing Caddy and all next day she went around the
house in a black dress and a veil and even Father couldnt get her to
say a word except crying and saying her little daughter was dead and
Caddy about fifteen then only in three years shed been wearing
haircloth or probably sandpaper at that rate. Do you think I can afford
to have her running bout the streets with every drummer that comes to
town, I says, and them telling the new ones up and down the road where
to pick up a hot one when they made Jefferson. I havent got much pride,
I cant afford it with a kitchen full of niggers to feed and robbing the
state asylum of its star freshman. Blood, I says, governors and
generals. Its a damn good thing we never had any kings and presidents;
wed all be down there at Jackson chasing butterflies. I say itd be bad
enough if it was mine; Id at least be sure it was a bastard to begin
with, and now even the Lord doesnt know that for certain probably.

So after awhile I heard the band start up, and then they begun to clear
out. Headed for the show, every one of them. Haggling over a twenty cent
hame string to save fifteen cents, so they can give it to a bunch of
Yankees that come in and pay maybe ten dollars for the privilege. I went
on out to the back.

Well, I says, If you dont look out, that bolt will grow into your
hand. And then Im going to take an axe and chop it out. What do you
reckon the boll-weevilsll eat if you dont get those cultivators in
shape to raise them a crop? I says, sage grass?

Dem folks sho do play dem horns, he says. Tell me man in dat show kin
play a tune on a handsaw. Pick hit like a banjo.

Listen, I says. Do you know how much that showll spend in this town?
About ten dollars, I says. The ten dollars Buck Turpin has in his
pocket right now.

Whut dey give Mr Buck ten dollars fer? he says.

For the privilege of showing here, I says. You can put the balance of
what theyll spend in your eye.

You mean dey pays ten dollars jest to give dey show here? he says.

Thats all, I says. And how much do you reckon . . .

Gret day, he says, You mean to tell me dey chargin um to let um show
here? Id pay ten dollars to see dat man pick dat saw, ef I had to. I
figures dat tomorrow mawnin I be still owin um nine dollars and six bits
at dat rate.

And then a Yankee will talk your head off about niggers getting ahead.
Get them ahead, what I say. Get them so far ahead you cant find one
south of Louisville with a blood hound. Because when I told him about
how theyd pick up Saturday night and carry off at least a thousand
dollars out of the county, he says,

I dont begrudge um. I kin sho afford my two bits.

Two bits hell, I says. That dont begin it. How about the dime or
fifteen cents youll spend for a damn two cent box of candy or
something. How about the time youre wasting right now, listening to
that band.

Dats de troof, he says. Well, ef I lives twell night hits gwine to
be two bits mo dey takin out of town, dats sho.

Then youre a fool, I says.

Well, he says, I dont spute dat neither. Ef dat uz a crime, all
chain-gangs wouldnt be black.

Well, just about that time I happened to look up the alley and saw her.
When I stepped back and looked at my watch I didnt notice at the time
who he was because I was looking at the watch. It was just two thirty,
forty-five minutes before anybody but me expected her to be out. So when
I looked around the door the first thing I saw was the red tie he had on
and I was thinking what the hell kind of a man would wear a red tie. But
she was sneaking along the alley, watching the door, so I wasnt
thinking anything about him until they had gone past. I was wondering if
shed have so little respect for me that shed not only play out of
school when I told her not to, but would walk right past the store,
daring me not to see her. Only she couldnt see into the door because
the sun fell straight into it and it was like trying to see through an
automobile searchlight, so I stood there and watched her go on past,
with her face painted up like a damn clowns and her hair all gummed and
twisted and a dress that if a woman had come out doors even on Gayoso or
Beale street when I was a young fellow with no more than that to cover
her legs and behind, shed been thrown in jail. Ill be damned if they
dont dress like they were trying to make every man they passed on the
street want to reach out and clap his hand on it. And so I was thinking
what kind of a damn man would wear a red tie when all of a sudden I knew
he was one of those show folks well as if shed told me. Well, I can
stand a lot; if I couldnt, damn if I wouldnt be in a hell of a fix, so
when they turned the corner I jumped down and followed. Me, without any
hat, in the middle of the afternoon, having to chase up and down back
alleys because of my mothers good name. Like I say you cant do anything
with a woman like that, if shes got it in her. If its in her blood,
you cant do anything with her. The only thing you can do is to get rid
of her, let her go on and live with her own sort.

I went on to the street, but they were out of sight. And there I was,
without any hat, looking like I was crazy too. Like a man would
naturally think, one of them is crazy and another one drowned himself
and the other one was turned out into the street by her husband, whats
the reason the rest of them are not crazy too. All the time I could see
them watching me like a hawk, waiting for a chance to say Well Im not
surprised I expected it all the time the whole familys crazy. Selling
land to send him to Harvard and paying taxes to support a state
University all the time that I never saw except twice at a baseball game
and not letting her daughters name be spoken on the place until after a
while Father wouldnt even come down town anymore but just sat there all
day with the decanter I could see the bottom of his nightshirt and his
bare legs and hear the decanter clinking until finally T. P. had to pour
it for him and she says You have no respect for your Fathers memory and
I says I dont know why not it sure is preserved well enough to last only
if Im crazy too God knows what Ill do about it just to look at water
makes me sick and Id just as soon swallow gasoline as a glass of
whiskey and Lorraine telling them he may not drink but if you dont
believe hes a man I can tell you how to find out she says If I catch
you fooling with any of these whores you know what Ill do she says Ill
whip her grabbing at her Ill whip her as long as I can find her she
says and I says if I dont drink thats my business but have you ever
found me short I says Ill buy you enough beer to take a bath in if you
want it because Ive got every respect for a good honest whore because
with Mothers health and the position I try to uphold to have her with
no more respect for what I try to do for her than to make her name and
my name and my Mothers name a byword in the town.

She had dodged out of sight somewhere. Saw me coming and dodged into
another alley, running up and down the alleys with a damn show man in a
red tie that everybody would look at and think what kind of a damn man
would wear a red tie. Well, the boy kept speaking to me and so I took
the telegram without knowing I had taken it. I didnt realise what it
was until I was signing for it, and I tore it open without even caring
much what it was. I knew all the time what it would be, I reckon. That
was the only thing else that could happen, especially holding it up
until I had already had the check entered on the pass book.

I dont see how a city no bigger than New York can hold enough people to
take the money away from us country suckers. Work like hell all day
every day, send them your money and get a little piece of paper back,
Your account closed at 20.62. Teasing you along, letting you pile up a
little paper profit, then bang! Your account closed at 20.62. And if
that wasnt enough, paying ten dollars a month to somebody to tell you
how to lose it fast, that either dont know anything about it or is in
cahoots with the telegraph company. Well, Im done with them. Theyve
sucked me in for the last time. Any fool except a fellow that hasnt got
any more sense than to take a jews word for anything could tell the
market was going up all the time, with the whole damn delta about to be
flooded again and the cotton washed right out of the ground like it was
last year. Let it wash a mans crop out of the ground year after year,
and them up there in Washington spending fifty thousand dollars a day
keeping an army in Nicaragua or some place. Of course itll overflow
again, and then cottonll be worth thirty cents a pound. Well, I just
want to hit them one time and get my money back. I dont want a killing;
only these small town gamblers are out for that, I just want my money
back that these damn jews have gotten with all their guaranteed inside
dope. Then Im through; they can kiss my foot for every other red cent
of mine they get.

I went back to the store. It was half past three almost. Damn little
time to do anything in, but then I am used to that. I never had to go to
Harvard to learn that. The band had quit playing. Got them all inside
now, and they wouldnt have to waste any more wind. Earl says,

He found you, did he? He was in here with it a while ago. I thought you
were out back somewhere.

Yes, I says, I got it. They couldnt keep it away from me all
afternoon. The towns too small. Ive got to go out home a minute, I
says. You can dock me if itll make you feel any better.

Go ahead, he says, I can handle it now. No bad news, I hope.

Youll have to go to the telegraph office and find that out, I says.
Theyll have time to tell you. I havent.

I just asked, he says. Your mother knows she can depend on me.

Shell appreciate it, I says. I wont be gone any longer than I have
to.

Take your time, he says. I can handle it now. You go ahead.

I got the car and went home. Once this morning, twice at noon, and now
again, with her and having to chase all over town and having to beg them
to let me eat a little of the food I am paying for. Sometimes I think
whats the use of anything. With the precedent Ive been set I must be
crazy to keep on. And now I reckon Ill get home just in time to take a
nice long drive after a basket of tomatoes or something and then have to
go back to town smelling like a camphor factory so my head wont explode
right on my shoulders. I keep telling her theres not a damn thing in
that aspirin except flour and water for imaginary invalids. I says you
dont know what a headache is. I says you think Id fool with that damn
car at all if it depended on me. I says I can get along without one Ive
learned to get along without lots of things but if you want to risk
yourself in that old wornout surrey with a halfgrown nigger boy all
right because I says God looks after Bens kind, God knows He ought to
do something for him but if you think Im going to trust a thousand
dollars worth of delicate machinery to a halfgrown nigger or a grown
one either, youd better buy him one yourself because I says you like to
ride in the car and you know you do.

Dilsey said Mother was in the house. I went on into the hall and
listened, but I didnt hear anything. I went up stairs, but just as I
passed her door she called me.

I just wanted to know who it was, she says. Im here alone so much
that I hear every sound.

You dont have to stay here, I says. You could spend the whole day
visiting like other women, if you wanted to. She came to the door.

I thought maybe you were sick, she says. Having to hurry through your
dinner like you did.

Better luck next time, I says. What do you want?

Is anything wrong? she says.

What could be? I says. Cant I come home in the middle of the
afternoon without upsetting the whole house?

Have you seen Quentin? she says.

Shes in school, I says.

Its after three, she says. I heard the clock strike at least a half
an hour ago. She ought to be home by now.

Ought she? I says. When have you ever seen her before dark?

She ought to be home, she says. When I was a girl . . .

You had somebody to make you behave yourself, I says. She hasnt.

I cant do anything with her, she says. Ive tried and Ive tried.

And you wont let me, for some reason, I says, So you ought to be
satisfied. I went on to my room. I turned the key easy and stood there
until the knob turned. Then she says,

Jason.

What, I says.

I just thought something was wrong.

Not in here, I says. Youve come to the wrong place.

I dont mean to worry you, she says.

Im glad to hear that, I says. I wasnt sure. I thought I might have
been mistaken. Do you want anything?

After awhile she says, No. Not any thing. Then she went away. I took
the box down and counted out the money and hid the box again and
unlocked the door and went out. I thought about the camphor, but it
would be too late now, anyway. And Id just have one more round trip.
She was at her door, waiting.

You want anything from town? I says.

No, she says. I dont mean to meddle in your affairs. But I dont know
what Id do if anything happened to you, Jason.

Im all right, I says. Just a headache.

I wish youd take some aspirin, she says. I know youre not going to
stop using the car.

Whats the car got to do with it? I says. How can a car give a man a
headache?

You know gasoline always made you sick, she says. Ever since you were
a child. I wish youd take some aspirin.

Keep on wishing it, I says. It wont hurt you.

I got in the car and started back to town. I had just turned onto the
street when I saw a ford coming helling toward me. All of a sudden it
stopped. I could hear the wheels sliding and it slewed around and backed
and whirled and just as I was thinking what the hell they were up to, I
saw that red tie. Then I recognised her face looking back through the
window. It whirled into the alley. I saw it turn again, but when I got
to the back street it was just disappearing, running like hell.

I saw red. When I recognised that red tie, after all I had told her, I
forgot about everything. I never thought about my head even until I came
to the first forks and had to stop. Yet we spend money and spend money
on roads and damn if it isnt like trying to drive over a sheet of
corrugated iron roofing. Id like to know how a man could be expected to
keep up with even a wheelbarrow. I think too much of my car; Im not
going to hammer it to pieces like it was a ford. Chances were they had
stolen it, anyway, so why should they give a damn. Like I say blood
always tells. If youve got blood like that in you, youll do anything.
I says whatever claim you believe she has on you has already been
discharged; I says from now on you have only yourself to blame because
you know what any sensible person would do. I says if Ive got to spend
half my time being a damn detective, at least Ill go where I can get
paid for it.

So I had to stop there at the forks. Then I remembered it. It felt like
somebody was inside with a hammer, beating on it. I says Ive tried to
keep you from being worried by her; I says far as Im concerned, let her
go to hell as fast as she pleases and the sooner the better. I says what
else do you expect except every drummer and cheap show that comes to
town because even these town jellybeans give her the go-by now. You dont
know what goes on I says, you dont hear the talk that I hear and you can
just bet I shut them up too. I says my people owned slaves here when you
all were running little shirt tail country stores and farming land no
nigger would look at on shares.

If they ever farmed it. Its a good thing the Lord did something for
this country; the folks that live on it never have. Friday afternoon,
and from right here I could see three miles of land that hadnt even
been broken, and every able bodied man in the county in town at that
show. I might have been a stranger starving to death, and there wasnt a
soul in sight to ask which way to town even. And she trying to get me to
take aspirin. I says when I eat bread Ill do it at the table. I says
you always talking about how much you give up for us when you could buy
ten new dresses a year on the money you spend for those damn patent
medicines. Its not something to cure it I need its just an even break
not to have to have them but as long as I have to work ten hours a day
to support a kitchen full of niggers in the style theyre accustomed to
and send them to the show with every other nigger in the county, only he
was late already. By the time he got there it would be over.

After awhile he got up to the car and when I finally got it through his
head if two people in a ford had passed him, he said yes. So I went on,
and when I came to where the wagon road turned off I could see the tire
tracks. Ab Russell was in his lot, but I didnt bother to ask him and I
hadnt got out of sight of his barn hardly when I saw the ford. They had
tried to hide it. Done about as well at it as she did at everything else
she did. Like I say its not that I object to so much; maybe she cant
help that, its because she hasnt even got enough consideration for her
own family to have any discretion. Im afraid all the time Ill run into
them right in the middle of the street or under a wagon on the square,
like a couple of dogs.

I parked and got out. And now Id have to go way around and cross a
plowed field, the only one I had seen since I left town, with every step
like somebody was walking along behind me, hitting me on the head with a
club. I kept thinking that when I got across the field at least Id have
something level to walk on, that wouldnt jolt me every step, but when I
got into the woods it was full of underbrush and I had to twist around
through it, and then I came to a ditch full of briers. I went along it
for awhile, but it got thicker and thicker, and all the time Earl
probably telephoning home about where I was and getting Mother all upset
again.

When I finally got through I had had to wind around so much that I had
to stop and figure out just where the car would be. I knew they wouldnt
be far from it, just under the closest bush, so I turned and worked back
toward the road. Then I couldnt tell just how far I was, so Id have to
stop and listen, and then with my legs not using so much blood, it all
would go into my head like it would explode any minute, and the sun
getting down just to where it could shine straight into my eyes and my
ears ringing so I couldnt hear anything. I went on, trying to move
quiet, then I heard a dog or something and I knew that when he scented
me hed have to come helling up, then it would be all off.

I had gotten beggar lice and twigs and stuff all over me, inside my
clothes and shoes and all, and then I happened to look around and I had
my hand right on a bunch of poison oak. The only thing I couldnt
understand was why it was just poison oak and not a snake or something.
So I didnt even bother to move it. I just stood there until the dog
went away. Then I went on.

I didnt have any idea where the car was now. I couldnt think about
anything except my head, and Id just stand in one place and sort of
wonder if I had really seen a ford even, and I didnt even care much
whether I had or not. Like I say, let her lay out all day and all night
with everything in town that wears pants, what do I care. I dont owe
anything to anybody that has no more consideration for me, that wouldnt
be a damn bit above planting that ford there and making me spend a whole
afternoon and Earl taking her back there and showing her the books just
because hes too damn virtuous for this world. I says youll have one
hell of a time in heaven, without anybodys business to meddle in only
dont you ever let me catch you at it I says, I close my eyes to it
because of your grandmother, but just you let me catch you doing it one
time on this place, where my mother lives. These damn little slick
haired squirts, thinking they are raising so much hell, Ill show them
something about hell I says, and you too. Ill make him think that damn
red tie is the latch string to hell, if he thinks he can run the woods
with my niece.

With the sun and all in my eyes and my blood going so I kept thinking
every time my head would go on and burst and get it over with, with
briers and things grabbing at me, then I came onto the sand ditch where
they had been and I recognised the tree where the car was, and just as I
got out of the ditch and started running I heard the car start. It went
off fast, blowing the horn. They kept on blowing it, like it was saying
Yah. Yah. Yaaahhhhhhhh, going out of sight. I got to the road just in
time to see it go out of sight.

By the time I got up to where my car was, they were clean out of sight,
the horn still blowing. Well, I never thought anything about it except I
was saying Run. Run back to town. Run home and try to convince Mother
that I never saw you in that car. Try to make her believe that I dont
know who he was. Try to make her believe that I didnt miss ten feet of
catching you in that ditch. Try to make her believe you were standing
up, too.

It kept on saying Yahhhhh, Yahhhhh, Yaaahhhhhhhhh, getting fainter and
fainter. Then it quit, and I could hear a cow lowing up at Russells
barn. And still I never thought. I went up to the door and opened it and
raised my foot. I kind of thought then that the car was leaning a little
more than the slant of the road would be, but I never found it out until
I got in and started off.

Well, I just sat there. It was getting on toward sundown, and town was
about five miles. They never even had guts enough to puncture it, to jab
a hole in it. They just let the air out. I just stood there for awhile,
thinking about that kitchen full of niggers and not one of them had time
to lift a tire onto the rack and screw up a couple of bolts. It was kind
of funny because even she couldnt have seen far enough ahead to take
the pump out on purpose, unless she thought about it while he was
letting out the air maybe. But what it probably was, was somebody took
it out and gave it to Ben to play with for a squirt gun because theyd
take the whole car to pieces if he wanted it and Dilsey says, Aint
nobody teched yo car. What we want to fool with hit fer? and I says
Youre a nigger. Youre lucky, do you know it? I says Ill swap with you
any day because it takes a white man not to have anymore sense than to
worry about what a little slut of a girl does.

I walked up to Russells. He had a pump. That was just an oversight on
their part, I reckon. Only I still couldnt believe shed have had the
nerve to. I kept thinking that. I dont know why it is I cant seem to
learn that a womanll do anything. I kept thinking, Lets forget for
awhile how I feel toward you and how you feel toward me: I just wouldnt
do you this way. I wouldnt do you this way no matter what you had done
to me. Because like I say blood is blood and you cant get around it.
Its not playing a joke that any eight year old boy could have thought
of, its letting your own uncle be laughed at by a man that would wear a
red tie. They come into town and call us all a bunch of hicks and think
its too small to hold them. Well he doesnt know just how right he is.
And her too. If thats the way she feels about it, shed better keep
right on going and a damn good riddance.

I stopped and returned Russells pump and drove on to town. I went to
the drugstore and got a coca-cola and then I went to the telegraph
office. It had closed at 12.21, forty points down. Forty times five
dollars; buy something with that if you can, and shell say, Ive got to
have it Ive just got to and Ill say thats too bad youll have to try
somebody else, I havent got any money; Ive been too busy to make any.

I just looked at him.

Ill tell you some news, I says, Youll be astonished to learn that I
am interested in the cotton market, I says. That never occurred to
you, did it?

I did my best to deliver it, he says. I tried the store twice and
called up your house, but they didnt know where you were, he says,
digging in the drawer.

Deliver what? I says. He handed me a telegram. What time did this
come? I says.

About half past three, he says.

And now its ten minutes past five, I says.

I tried to deliver it, he says. I couldnt find you.

Thats not my fault, is it? I says. I opened it, just to see what kind
of a lie theyd tell me this time. They must be in one hell of a shape
if theyve got to come all the way to Mississippi to steal ten dollars a
month. Sell, it says. The market will be unstable, with a general
downward tendency. Do not be alarmed following government report.

How much would a message like this cost? I says. He told me.

They paid it, he says.

Then I owe them that much, I says. I already knew this. Send this
collect, I says, taking a blank. Buy, I wrote, Market just on point of
blowing its head off. Occasional flurries for purpose of hooking a few
more country suckers who havent got in to the telegraph office yet. Do
not be alarmed. Send that collect, I says.

He looked at the message, then he looked at the clock. Market closed an
hour ago, he says.

Well, I says, Thats not my fault either. I didnt invent it; I just
bought a little of it while under the impression that the telegraph
company would keep me informed as to what it was doing.

A report is posted whenever it comes in, he says.

Yes, I says, And in Memphis they have it on a blackboard every ten
seconds, I says. I was within sixty-seven miles of there once this
afternoon.

He looked at the message. You want to send this? he says.

I still havent changed my mind, I says. I wrote the other one out and
counted the money. And this one too, if youre sure you can spell
b-u-y.

I went back to the store. I could hear the band from down the street.
Prohibitions a fine thing. Used to be theyd come in Saturday with just
one pair of shoes in the family and him wearing them, and theyd go down
to the express office and get his package; now they all go to the show
barefooted, with the merchants in the door like a row of tigers or
something in a cage, watching them pass. Earl says,

I hope it wasnt anything serious.

What? I says. He looked at his watch. Then he went to the door and
looked at the courthouse clock. You ought to have a dollar watch, I
says. It wont cost you so much to believe its lying each time.

What? he says.

Nothing, I says. Hope I havent inconvenienced you.

We were not busy much, he says. They all went to the show. Its all
right.

If its not all right, I says, You know what you can do about it.

I said it was all right, he says.

I heard you, I says. And if its not all right, you know what you can
do about it.

Do you want to quit? he says.

Its not my business, I says. My wishes dont matter. But dont get the
idea that you are protecting me by keeping me.

Youd be a good business man if youd let yourself, Jason, he says.

At least I can tend to my own business and let other peoples alone, I
says.

I dont know why you are trying to make me fire you, he says. You know
you could quit anytime and there wouldnt be any hard feelings between
us.

Maybe thats why I dont quit, I says. As long as I tend to my job,
thats what you are paying me for. I went on to the back and got a
drink of water and went on out to the back door. Job had the cultivators
all set up at last. It was quiet there, and pretty soon my head got a
little easier. I could hear them singing now, and then the band played
again. Well, let them get every quarter and dime in the county; it was
no skin off my back. Ive done what I could; a man that can live as long
as I have and not know when to quit is a fool. Especially as its no
business of mine. If it was my own daughter now it would be different,
because she wouldnt have time to; shed have to work some to feed a few
invalids and idiots and niggers, because how could I have the face to
bring anybody there. Ive too much respect for anybody to do that. Im a
man, I can stand it, its my own flesh and blood and Id like to see the
colour of the mans eyes that would speak disrespectful of any woman
that was my friend its these damn good women that do it Id like to see
the good, church-going woman thats half as square as Lorraine, whore or
no whore. Like I say if I was to get married youd go up like a balloon
and you know it and she says I want you to be happy to have a family of
your own not to slave your life away for us. But Ill be gone soon and
then you can take a wife but youll never find a woman who is worthy of
you and I says yes I could. Youd get right up out of your grave you
know you would. I says no thank you I have all the women I can take care
of now if I married a wife shed probably turn out to be a hophead or
something. Thats all we lack in this family, I says.

The sun was down beyond the Methodist church now, and the pigeons were
flying back and forth around the steeple, and when the band stopped I
could hear them cooing. It hadnt been four months since Christmas, and
yet they were almost as thick as ever. I reckon Parson Walthall was
getting a belly full of them now. Youd have thought we were shooting
people, with him making speeches and even holding onto a mans gun when
they came over. Talking about peace on earth good will toward all and
not a sparrow can fall to earth. But what does he care how thick they
get, he hasnt got anything to do; what does he care what time it is. He
pays no taxes, he doesnt have to see his money going every year to have
the courthouse clock cleaned to where itll run. They had to pay a man
forty-five dollars to clean it. I counted over a hundred half-hatched
pigeons on the ground. Youd think theyd have sense enough to leave
town. Its a good thing I dont have any more ties than a pigeon, Ill
say that.

The band was playing again, a loud fast tune, like they were breaking
up. I reckon theyd be satisfied now. Maybe theyd have enough music to
entertain them while they drove fourteen or fifteen miles home and
unharnessed in the dark and fed the stock and milked. All theyd have to
do would be to whistle the music and tell the jokes to the live stock in
the barn, and then they could count up how much theyd made by not
taking the stock to the show too. They could figure that if a man had
five children and seven mules, he cleared a quarter by taking his family
to the show. Just like that. Earl came back with a couple of packages.

Heres some more stuff going out, he says. Wheres Uncle Job?

Gone to the show, I imagine, I says. Unless you watched him.

He doesnt slip off, he says. I can depend on him.

Meaning me by that, I says.

He went to the door and looked out, listening.

Thats a good band, he says. Its about time they were breaking up,
Id say.

Unless theyre going to spend the night there, I says. The swallows
had begun, and I could hear the sparrows beginning to swarm in the trees
in the courthouse yard. Every once in a while a bunch of them would come
swirling around in sight above the roof, then go away. They are as big a
nuisance as the pigeons, to my notion. You cant even sit in the
courthouse yard for them. First thing you know, bing. Right on your hat.
But it would take a millionaire to afford to shoot them at five cents a
shot. If theyd just put a little poison out there in the square, theyd
get rid of them in a day, because if a merchant cant keep his stock from
running around the square, hed better try to deal in something besides
chickens, something that dont eat, like plows or onions. And if a man
dont keep his dogs up, he either dont want it or he hasnt any business
with one. Like I say if all the businesses in a town are run like
country businesses, youre going to have a country town.

It wont do you any good if they have broke up, I says. Theyll have
to hitch up and take out to get home by midnight as it is.

Well, he says, They enjoy it. Let them spend a little money on a show
now and then. A hill farmer works pretty hard and gets mighty little for
it.

Theres no law making them farm in the hills, I says, Or anywhere
else.

Where would you and me be, if it wasnt for the farmers? he says.

Id be home right now, I says, Lying down, with an ice pack on my
head.

You have these headaches too often, he says. Why dont you have your
teeth examined good? Did he go over them all this morning?

Did who? I says.

You said you went to the dentist this morning.

Do you object to my having the headache on your time? I says. Is that
it? They were crossing the alley now, coming up from the show.

There they come, he says. I reckon I better get up front. He went
on. Its a curious thing how no matter whats wrong with you, a manll
tell you to have your teeth examined and a womanll tell you to get
married. It always takes a man that never made much at any thing to tell
you how to run your business, though. Like these college professors
without a whole pair of socks to their name, telling you how to make a
million in ten years, and a woman that couldnt even get a husband can
always tell you how to raise a family.

Old man Job came up with the wagon. After a while he got through
wrapping the lines around the whip socket.

Well, I says, Was it a good show?

I aint been yit, he says. But I kin be arrested in dat tent tonight,
dough.

Like hell you havent, I says. Youve been away from here since three
oclock. Mr Earl was just back here looking for you.

I been tendin to my business, he says. Mr Earl knows whar I been.

You may can fool him, I says. I wont tell on you.

Den hes de onliest man here Id try to fool, he says. Whut I want to
waste my time foolin a man whut I dont keer whether I sees him Satdy
night er not? I wont try to fool you, he says. You too smart fer me.
Yes, suh, he says, looking busy as hell, putting five or six little
packages into the wagon, Yous too smart fer me. Aint a man in dis town
kin keep up wid you fer smartness. You fools a man whut so smart he cant
even keep up wid hisself, he says, getting in the wagon and unwrapping
the reins.

Whos that? I says.

Dats Mr Jason Compson, he says. Git up dar, Dan!

One of the wheels was just about to come off. I watched to see if hed
get out of the alley before it did. Just turn any vehicle over to a
nigger, though. I says that old rattletraps just an eyesore, yet youll
keep it standing there in the carriage house a hundred years just so
that boy can ride to the cemetery once a week. I says hes not the first
fellow thatll have to do things he doesnt want to. Id make him ride
in that car like a civilised man or stay at home. What does he know
about where he goes or what he goes in, and us keeping a carriage and a
horse so he can take a ride on Sunday afternoon.

A lot Job cared whether the wheel came off or not, long as he wouldnt
have too far to walk back. Like I say the only place for them is in the
field, where theyd have to work from sunup to sundown. They cant stand
prosperity or an easy job. Let one stay around white people for a while
and hes not worth killing. They get so they can outguess you about work
before your very eyes, like Roskus the only mistake he ever made was he
got careless one day and died. Shirking and stealing and giving you a
little more lip and a little more lip until some day you have to lay
them out with a scantling or something. Well, its Earls business. But
Id hate to have my business advertised over this town by an old
doddering nigger and a wagon that you thought every time it turned a
corner it would come all to pieces.

The sun was all high up in the air now, and inside it was beginning to
get dark. I went up front. The square was empty. Earl was back closing
the safe, and then the clock begun to strike.

You lock the back door, he says. I went back and locked it and came
back. I suppose youre going to the show tonight, he says. I gave you
those passes yesterday, didnt I?

Yes, I said. You want them back?

No, no, he says, I just forgot whether I gave them to you or not. No
sense in wasting them.

He locked the door and said Goodnight and went on. The sparrows were
still rattling away in the trees, but the square was empty except for a
few cars. There was a ford in front of the drugstore, but I didnt even
look at it. I know when Ive had enough of anything. I dont mind trying
to help her, but I know when Ive had enough. I guess I could teach
Luster to drive it, then they could chase her all day long if they
wanted to, and I could stay home and play with Ben.

I went in and got a couple of cigars. Then I thought Id have another
headache shot for luck, and I stood and talked with them awhile.

Well, Mac says, I reckon youve got your money on the Yankees this
year.

What for? I says.

The Pennant, he says. Not anything in the League can beat them.

Like hell theres not, I says. Theyre shot, I says. You think a
team can be that lucky forever?

I dont call it luck, Mac says.

I wouldnt bet on any team that fellow Ruth played on, I says. Even
if I knew it was going to win.

Yes? Mac says.

I can name you a dozen men in either League whore more valuable than
he is, I says.

What have you got against Ruth? Mac says.

Nothing, I says. I havent got any thing against him. I dont even
like to look at his picture. I went on out. The lights were coming on,
and people going along the streets toward home. Sometimes the sparrows
never got still until full dark. The night they turned on the new lights
around the courthouse it waked them up and they were flying around and
blundering into the lights all night long. They kept it up two or three
nights, then one morning they were all gone. Then after about two months
they all came back again.

I drove on home. There were no lights in the house yet, but theyd all
be looking out the windows, and Dilsey jawing away in the kitchen like
it was her own food she was having to keep hot until I got there. Youd
think to hear her that there wasnt but one supper in the world, and
that was the one she had to keep back a few minutes on my account. Well
at least I could come home one time without finding Ben and that nigger
hanging on the gate like a bear and a monkey in the same cage. Just let
it come toward sundown and hed head for the gate like a cow for the
barn, hanging onto it and bobbing his head and sort of moaning to
himself. Thats a hog for punishment for you. If what had happened to
him for fooling with open gates had happened to me, I never would want
to see another one. I often wondered what hed be thinking about, down
there at the gate, watching the girls going home from school, trying to
want something he couldnt even remember he didnt and couldnt want any
longer. And what hed think when theyd be undressing him and hed
happen to take a look at himself and begin to cry like hed do. But like
I say they never did enough of that. I says I know what you need, you
need what they did to Ben then youd behave. And if you dont know what
that was I says, ask Dilsey to tell you.

There was a light in Mothers room. I put the car up and went on into
the kitchen. Luster and Ben were there.

Wheres Dilsey? I says. Putting supper on?

She upstairs wid Miss Cahline, Luster says. Dey been goin hit. Ever
since Miss Quentin come home. Mammy up there keepin um fum fightin. Is
dat show come, Mr Jason?

Yes, I says.

I thought I heard de band, he says. Wish I could go, he says. I
could ef I jes had a quarter.

Dilsey came in. You come, is you? she says. Whut you been up to dis
evenin? You knows how much work I got to do; whynt you git here on
time?

Maybe I went to the show, I says. Is supper ready?

Wish I could go, Luster said. I could ef I jes had a quarter.

You aint got no business at no show, Dilsey says. You go on in de
house and set down, she says. Dont you go up stairs and git um started
again, now.

Whats the matter? I says.

Quentin come in a while ago and says you been follerin her around all
evenin and den Miss Cahline jumped on her. Whynt you let her alone?
Cant you live in de same house wid you own blood niece widout quoilin?

I cant quarrel with her, I says, because I havent seen her since
this morning. What does she say Ive done now? made her go to school?
Thats pretty bad, I says.

Well, you tend to yo business and let her alone, Dilsey says, Ill
take keer of her ef youn Miss Cahlinell let me. Go on in dar now and
behave yoself twell I get supper on.

Ef I jes had a quarter, Luster says, I could go to dat show.

En ef you had wings you could fly to heaven, Dilsey says. I dont want
to hear another word about dat show.

That reminds me, I says, Ive got a couple of tickets they gave me.
I took them out of my coat.

You fixin to use um? Luster says.

Not me, I says. I wouldnt go to it for ten dollars.

Gimme one of um, Mr Jason, he says.

Ill sell you one, I says. How about it?

I aint got no money, he says.

Thats too bad, I says. I made to go out.

Gimme one of um, Mr Jason, he says. You aint gwine need um bofe.

Hush yo mouf, Dilsey says, Dont you know he aint gwine give nothing
away?

How much you want fer hit? he says.

Five cents, I says.

I aint got dat much, he says.

How much you got? I says.

I aint got nothing, he says.

All right, I says. I went on.

Mr Jason, he says.

Whynt you hush up? Dilsey says. He jes teasin you. He fixin to use
dem tickets hisself. Go on, Jason, and let him lone.

I dont want them, I says. I came back to the stove. I came in here to
burn them up. But if you want to buy one for a nickel? I says, looking
at him and opening the stove lid.

I aint got dat much, he says.

All right, I says. I dropped one of them in the stove.

You, Jason, Dilsey says, Aint you shamed?

Mr Jason, he says, Please, suh. Ill fix dem tires evry day fer a
mont.

I need the cash, I says. You can have it for a nickel.

Hush, Luster, Dilsey says. She jerked him back. Go on, she says,
Drop hit in. Go on. Git hit over with.

You can have it for a nickel, I says.

Go on, Dilsey says. He aint got no nickel. Go on. Drop hit in.

All right, I says. I dropped it in and Dilsey shut the stove.

A big growed man like you, she says. Git on outen my kitchen. Hush,
she says to Luster. Dont you git Benjy started. Ill git you a quarter
fum Frony tonight and you kin go tomorrow night. Hush up, now.

I went on into the living room. I couldnt hear anything from upstairs.
I opened the paper. After awhile Ben and Luster came in. Ben went to the
dark place on the wall where the mirror used to be, rubbing his hands on
it and slobbering and moaning. Luster begun punching at the fire.

Whatre you doing? I says. We dont need any fire tonight.

I trying to keep him quiet, he says. Hit always cold Easter, he
says.

Only this is not Easter, I says. Let it alone.

He put the poker back and got the cushion out of Mothers chair and gave
it to Ben, and he hunkered down in front of the fireplace and got quiet.

I read the paper. There hadnt been a sound from upstairs when Dilsey
came in and sent Ben and Luster on to the kitchen and said supper was
ready.

All right, I says. She went out. I sat there, reading the paper. After
a while I heard Dilsey looking in at the door.

Whynt you come on and eat? she says.

Im waiting for supper, I says.

Hits on the table, she says. I done told you.

Is it? I says. Excuse me. I didnt hear anybody come down.

They aint comin, she says. You come on and eat, so I can take
something up to them.

Are they sick? I says. What did the doctor say it was? Not Smallpox,
I hope.

Come on here, Jason, she says, So I kin git done.

All right, I says, raising the paper again. Im waiting for supper
now.

I could feel her watching me at the door. I read the paper.

Whut you want to act like this fer? she says. When you knows how much
bother I has anyway.

If Mother is any sicker than she was when she came down to dinner, all
right, I says. But as long as I am buying food for people younger than
I am, theyll have to come down to the table to eat it. Let me know when
suppers ready, I says, reading the paper again. I heard her climbing
the stairs, dragging her feet and grunting and groaning like they were
straight up and three feet apart. I heard her at Mothers door, then I
heard her calling Quentin, like the door was locked, then she went back
to Mothers room and then Mother went and talked to Quentin. Then they
came down stairs. I read the paper.

Dilsey came back to the door. Come on, she says, fo you kin think up
some mo devilment. You just tryin yoself tonight.

I went to the diningroom. Quentin was sitting with her head bent. She
had painted her face again. Her nose looked like a porcelain insulator.

Im glad you feel well enough to come down, I says to Mother.

Its little enough I can do for you, to come to the table, she says.
No matter how I feel. I realise that when a man works all day he likes
to be surrounded by his family at the supper table. I want to please
you. I only wish you and Quentin got along better. It would be easier
for me.

We get along all right, I says. I dont mind her staying locked up in
her room all day if she wants to. But I cant have all this whoop-de-do
and sulking at mealtimes. I know thats a lot to ask her, but Im that
way in my own house. Your house, I meant to say.

Its yours, Mother says, You are the head of it now.

Quentin hadnt looked up. I helped the plates and she begun to eat.

Did you get a good piece of meat? I says. If you didnt, Ill try to
find you a better one.

She didnt say anything.

I say, did you get a good piece of meat? I says.

What? she says. Yes. Its all right.

Will you have some more rice? I says.

No, she says.

Better let me give you some more, I says.

I dont want any more, she says.

Not at all, I says, Youre welcome.

Is your headache gone? Mother says.

Headache? I says.

I was afraid you were developing one, she says. When you came in this
afternoon.

Oh, I says. No, it didnt show up. We stayed so busy this afternoon I
forgot about it.

Was that why you were late? Mother says. I could see Quentin
listening. I looked at her. Her knife and fork were still going, but I
caught her looking at me, then she looked at her plate again. I says,

No. I loaned my car to a fellow about three oclock and I had to wait
until he got back with it. I ate for a while.

Who was it? Mother says.

It was one of those show men, I says. It seems his sisters husband
was out riding with some town woman, and he was chasing them.

Quentin sat perfectly still, chewing.

You ought not to lend your car to people like that, Mother says. You
are too generous with it. Thats why I never call on you for it if I can
help it.

I was beginning to think that myself, for awhile, I says. But he got
back, all right. He says he found what he was looking for.

Who was the woman? Mother says.

Ill tell you later, I says. I dont like to talk about such things
before Quentin.

Quentin had quit eating. Every once in a while shed take a drink of
water, then shed sit there crumbling a biscuit up, her face bent over
her plate.

Yes, Mother says, I suppose women who stay shut up like I do have no
idea what goes on in this town.

Yes, I says, They dont.

My life has been so different from that, Mother says. Thank God I
dont know about such wickedness. I dont even want to know about it. Im
not like most people.

I didnt say any more. Quentin sat there, crumbling the biscuit until I
quit eating, then she says,

Can I go now? without looking at anybody.

What? I says. Sure, you can go. Were you waiting on us?

She looked at me. She had crumbled all the biscuit, but her hands still
went on like they were crumbling it yet and her eyes looked like they
were cornered or something and then she started biting her mouth like it
ought to have poisoned her, with all that red lead.

Grandmother, she says, Grandmother

Did you want something else to eat? I says.

Why does he treat me like this, Grandmother? she says. I never hurt
him.

I want you all to get along with one another, Mother says, You are
all thats left now, and I do want you all to get along better.

Its his fault, she says, He wont let me alone, and I have to. If he
doesnt want me here, why wont he let me go back to

Thats enough, I says, Not another word.

Then why wont he let me alone? she says. Hehe just

He is the nearest thing to a father youve ever had, Mother says.
Its his bread you and I eat. Its only right that he should expect
obedience from you.

Its his fault, she says. She jumped up. He makes me do it. If he
would just she looked at us, her eyes cornered, kind of jerking her
arms against her sides.

If I would just what? I says.

Whatever I do, its your fault, she says. If Im bad, its because I
had to be. You made me. I wish I was dead. I wish we were all dead.
Then she ran. We heard her run up the stairs. Then a door slammed.

Thats the first sensible thing she ever said, I says.

She didnt go to school today, Mother says.

How do you know? I says. Were you down town?

I just know, she says. I wish you could be kinder to her.

If I did that Id have to arrange to see her more than once a day, I
says. Youll have to make her come to the table every meal. Then I
could give her an extra piece of meat every time.

There are little things you could do, she says.

Like not paying any attention when you ask me to see that she goes to
school? I says.

She didnt go to school today, she says. I just know she didnt. She
says she went for a car ride with one of the boys this afternoon and you
followed her.

How could I, I says, When somebody had my car all afternoon? Whether
or not she was in school today is already past, I says, If youve got
to worry about it, worry about next Monday.

I wanted you and she to get along with one another, she says. But she
has inherited all of the headstrong traits. Quentins too. I thought at
the time, with the heritage she would already have, to give her that
name, too. Sometimes I think she is the judgment of Caddy and Quentin
upon me.

Good Lord, I says, Youve got a fine mind. No wonder you kept
yourself sick all the time.

What? she says. I dont understand.

I hope not, I says. A good woman misses a lot shes better off
without knowing.

They were both that way, she says, They would make interest with your
father against me when I tried to correct them. He was always saying
they didnt need controlling, that they already knew what cleanliness
and honesty were, which was all that anyone could hope to be taught. And
now I hope hes satisfied.

Youve got Ben to depend on, I says, Cheer up.

They deliberately shut me out of their lives, she says, It was always
her and Quentin. They were always conspiring against me. Against you
too, though you were too young to realise it. They always looked on you
and me as outsiders, like they did your Uncle Maury. I always told your
father that they were allowed too much freedom, to be together too much.
When Quentin started to school we had to let her go the next year, so
she could be with him. She couldnt bear for any of you to do anything
she couldnt. It was vanity in her, vanity and false pride. And then
when her troubles began I knew that Quentin would feel that he had to do
something just as bad. But I didnt believe that he would have been so
selfish as toI didnt dream that he

Maybe he knew it was going to be a girl, I says, And that one more of
them would be more than he could stand.

He could have controlled her, she says. He seemed to be the only
person she had any consideration for. But that is a part of the judgment
too, I suppose.

Yes, I says, Too bad it wasnt me instead of him. Youd be a lot
better off.

You say things like that to hurt me, she says. I deserve it though.
When they began to sell the land to send Quentin to Harvard I told your
father that he must make an equal provision for you. Then when Herbert
offered to take you into the bank I said, Jason is provided for now, and
when all the expense began to pile up and I was forced to sell our
furniture and the rest of the pasture, I wrote her at once because I
said she will realise that she and Quentin have had their share and part
of Jasons too and that it depends on her now to compensate him. I said
she will do that out of respect for her father. I believed that, then.
But Im just a poor old woman; I was raised to believe that people would
deny themselves for their own flesh and blood. Its my fault. You were
right to reproach me.

Do you think I need any mans help to stand on my feet? I says, Let
alone a woman that cant name the father of her own child.

Jason, she says.

All right, I says. I didnt mean that. Of course not.

If I believed that were possible, after all my suffering.

Of course its not, I says. I didnt mean it.

I hope that at least is spared me, she says.

Sure it is, I says, Shes too much like both of them to doubt that.

I couldnt bear that, she says.

Then quit thinking about it, I says. Has she been worrying you any
more about getting out at night?

No. I made her realise that it was for her own good and that shed
thank me for it some day. She takes her books with her and studies after
I lock the door. I see the light on as late as eleven oclock some
nights.

How do you know shes studying? I says.

I dont know what else shed do in there alone, she says. She never
did read any.

No, I says, You wouldnt know. And you can thank your stars for
that, I says. Only what would be the use in saying it aloud. It would
just have her crying on me again.

I heard her go up stairs. Then she called Quentin and Quentin says What?
through the door. Goodnight, Mother says. Then I heard the key in the
lock, and Mother went back to her room.

When I finished my cigar and went up, the light was still on. I could
see the empty keyhole, but I couldnt hear a sound. She studied quiet.
Maybe she learned that in school. I told Mother goodnight and went on to
my room and got the box out and counted it again. I could hear the Great
American Gelding snoring away like a planing mill. I read somewhere
theyd fix men that way to give them womens voices. But maybe he didnt
know what theyd done to him. I dont reckon he even knew what he had
been trying to do, or why Mr Burgess knocked him out with the fence
picket. And if theyd just sent him on to Jackson while he was under the
ether, hed never have known the difference. But that would have been
too simple for a Compson to think of. Not half complex enough. Having to
wait to do it at all until he broke out and tried to run a little girl
down on the street with her own father looking at him. Well, like I say
they never started soon enough with their cutting, and they quit too
quick. I know at least two more that needed something like that, and one
of them not over a mile away, either. But then I dont reckon even that
would do any good. Like I say once a bitch always a bitch. And just let
me have twenty-four hours without any damn New York jew to advise me
what its going to do. I dont want to make a killing; save that to suck
in the smart gamblers with. I just want an even chance to get my money
back. And once Ive done that they can bring all Beale Street and all
bedlam in here and two of them can sleep in my bed and another one can
have my place at the table too.




                           APRIL EIGHTH, 1928


The day dawned bleak and chill, a moving wall of grey light out of the
northeast which, instead of dissolving into moisture, seemed to
disintegrate into minute and venomous particles, like dust that, when
Dilsey opened the door of the cabin and emerged, needled laterally into
her flesh, precipitating not so much a moisture as a substance partaking
of the quality of thin, not quite congealed oil. She wore a stiff black
straw hat perched upon her turban, and a maroon velvet cape with a
border of mangy and anonymous fur above a dress of purple silk, and she
stood in the door for awhile with her myriad and sunken face lifted to
the weather, and one gaunt hand flac-soled as the belly of a fish, then
she moved the cape aside and examined the bosom of her gown.

The gown fell gauntly from her shoulders, across her fallen breasts,
then tightened upon her paunch and fell again, ballooning a little above
the nether garments which she would remove layer by layer as the spring
accomplished and the warm days, in colour regal and moribund. She had
been a big woman once but now her skeleton rose, draped loosely in
unpadded skin that tightened again upon a paunch almost dropsical, as
though muscle and tissue had been courage or fortitude which the days or
the years had consumed until only the indomitable skeleton was left
rising like a ruin or a landmark above the somnolent and impervious
guts, and above that the collapsed face that gave the impression of the
bones themselves being outside the flesh, lifted into the driving day
with an expression at once fatalistic and of a childs astonished
disappointment, until she turned and entered the house again and closed
the door.

The earth immediately about the door was bare. It had a patina, as
though from the soles of bare feet in generations, like old silver or
the walls of Mexican houses which have been plastered by hand. Beside
the house, shading it in summer, stood three mulberry trees, the fledged
leaves that would later be broad and placid as the palms of hands
streaming flatly undulant upon the driving air. A pair of jaybirds came
up from nowhere, whirled up on the blast like gaudy scraps of cloth or
paper and lodged in the mulberries, where they swung in raucous tilt and
recover, screaming into the wind that ripped their harsh cries onward
and away like scraps of paper or of cloth in turn. Then three more
joined them and they swung and tilted in the wrung branches for a time,
screaming. The door of the cabin opened and Dilsey emerged once more,
this time in a mans felt hat and an army overcoat, beneath the frayed
skirts of which her blue gingham dress fell in uneven balloonings,
streaming too about her as she crossed the yard and mounted the steps to
the kitchen door.

A moment later she emerged, carrying an open umbrella now, which she
slanted ahead into the wind, and crossed to the woodpile and laid the
umbrella down, still open. Immediately she caught at it and arrested it
and held to it for a while, looking about her. Then she closed it and
laid it down and stacked stovewood into her crooked arm, against her
breast, and picked up the umbrella and got it open at last and returned
to the steps and held the wood precariously balanced while she contrived
to close the umbrella, which she propped in the corner just within the
door. She dumped the wood into the box behind the stove. Then she
removed the overcoat and hat and took a soiled apron down from the wall
and put it on and built a fire in the stove. While she was doing so,
rattling the grate bars and clattering the lids, Mrs Compson began to
call her from the head of the stairs.

She wore a dressing gown of quilted black satin, holding it close under
her chin. In the other hand she held a red rubber hot water bottle and
she stood at the head of the back stairway, calling Dilsey at steady
and inflectionless intervals into the quiet stairwell that descended
into complete darkness, then opened again where a grey window fell
across it. Dilsey, she called, without inflection or emphasis or
haste, as though she were not listening for a reply at all. Dilsey.

Dilsey answered and ceased clattering the stove, but before she could
cross the kitchen Mrs Compson called her again, and before she crossed
the diningroom and brought her head into relief against the grey splash
of the window, still again.

All right, Dilsey said, All right, here I is. Ill fill hit soon ez I
git some hot water. She gathered up her skirts and mounted the stairs,
wholly blotting the grey light. Put hit down dar en gawn back to bed.

I couldnt understand what was the matter, Mrs Compson said. Ive
been lying awake for an hour at least, without hearing a sound from the
kitchen.

You put hit down and gawn back to bed, Dilsey said. She toiled
painfully up the steps, shapeless, breathing heavily. Ill have de fire
gwine in a minute, en de water hot in two mo.

Ive been lying there for an hour, at least, Mrs Compson said. I
thought maybe you were waiting for me to come down and start the fire.

Dilsey reached the top of the stairs and took the water bottle. Ill
fix hit in a minute, she said. Luster overslep dis mawnin, up half de
night at dat show. I gwine build de fire myself. Go on now, so you wont
wake de others twell I ready.

If you permit Luster to do things that interfere with his work, youll
have to suffer for it yourself, Mrs Compson said. Jason wont like this
if he hears about it. You know he wont.

Twusnt none of Jasons money he went on, Dilsey said. Dats one
thing sho. She went on down the stairs. Mrs Compson returned to her
room. As she got into bed again she could hear Dilsey yet descending the
stairs with a sort of painful and terrific slowness that would have
become maddening had it not presently ceased beyond the flapping
diminishment of the pantry door.

She entered the kitchen and built up the fire and began to prepare
breakfast. In the midst of this she ceased and went to the window and
looked out toward her cabin, then she went to the door and opened it and
shouted into the driving weather.

Luster! she shouted, standing to listen, tilting her face from the
wind, You, Luster? She listened, then as she prepared to shout again
Luster appeared around the corner of the kitchen.

Maam? he said innocently, so innocently that Dilsey looked down at
him, for a moment motionless, with something more than mere surprise.

Whar you at? she said.

Nowhere, he said. Jes in de cellar.

Whut you doin in de cellar? she said. Dont stand dar in de rain,
fool, she said.

Aint doin nothin, he said. He came up the steps.

Dont you dare come in dis do widout a armful of wood, she said. Here
I done had to tote yo wood en build yo fire bofe. Didnt I tole you not
to leave dis place last night befo dat woodbox wus full to de top?

I did, Luster said, I filled hit.

Whar hit gone to, den?

I dont knowm. I aint teched hit.

Well, you git hit full up now, she said. And git on up den en see
bout Benjy.

She shut the door. Luster went to the woodpile. The five jaybirds
whirled over the house, screaming, and into the mulberries again. He
watched them. He picked up a rock and threw it. Whoo, he said, Git on
back to hell, whar you belong at. Taint Monday yit.

He loaded himself mountainously with stove wood. He could not see over
it, and he staggered to the steps and up them and blundered crashing
against the door, shedding billets. Then Dilsey came and opened the door
for him and he blundered across the kitchen. You, Luster! she shouted,
but he had already hurled the wood into the box with a thunderous crash.
Hah! he said.

Is you tryin to wake up de whole house? Dilsey said. She hit him on
the back of his head with the flat of her hand. Go on up dar and git
Benjy dressed, now.

Yessum, he said. He went toward the outer door.

Whar you gwine? Dilsey said.

I thought I better go round de house en in by de front, so I wont wake
up Miss Cahline en dem.

You go on up dem backstairs like I tole you en git Benjys clothes on
him, Dilsey said. Go on, now.

Yessum, Luster said. He returned and left by the diningroom door.
After awhile it ceased to flap. Dilsey prepared to make biscuit. As she
ground the sifter steadily above the bread board, she sang, to herself
at first, something without particular tune or words, repetitive,
mournful and plaintive, austere, as she ground a faint, steady snowing
of flour onto the bread board. The stove had begun to heat the room and
to fill it with murmurous minors of the fire, and presently she was
singing louder, as if her voice too had been thawed out by the growing
warmth, and then Mrs Compson called her name again from within the
house. Dilsey raised her face as if her eyes could and did penetrate the
walls and ceiling and saw the old woman in her quilted dressing gown at
the head of the stairs, calling her name with machinelike regularity.

Oh, Lawd, Dilsey said. She set the sifter down and swept up the hem of
her apron and wiped her hands and caught up the bottle from the chair on
which she had laid it and gathered her apron about the handle of the
kettle which was now jetting faintly. Jes a minute, she called, De
water jes dis minute got hot.

It was not the bottle which Mrs Compson wanted, however, and clutching
it by the neck like a dead hen Dilsey went to the foot of the stairs and
looked upward.

Aint Luster up dar wid him? she said.

Luster hasnt been in the house. Ive been lying here listening for
him. I knew he would be late, but I did hope hed come in time to keep
Benjamin from disturbing Jason on Jasons one day in the week to sleep
in the morning.

I dont see how you expect anybody to sleep, wid you standin in de hall,
hollin at folks fum de crack of dawn, Dilsey said. She began to mount
the stairs, toiling heavily. I sont dat boy up dar half hour ago.

Mrs Compson watched her, holding the dressing gown under her chin. What
are you going to do? she said.

Gwine git Benjy dressed en bring him down to de kitchen, whar he wont
wake Jason en Quentin, Dilsey said.

Havent you started breakfast yet?

Ill tend to dat too, Dilsey said. You better git back in bed twell
Luster make yo fire. Hit cold dis mawnin.

I know it, Mrs Compson said. My feet are like ice. They were so cold
they waked me up. She watched Dilsey mount the stairs. It took her a
long while. You know how it frets Jason when breakfast is late, Mrs
Compson said.

I cant do but one thing at a time, Dilsey said. You git on back to
bed, fo I has you on my hands dis mawnin too.

If youre going to drop everything to dress Benjamin, Id better come
down and get breakfast. You know as well as I do how Jason acts when
its late.

En who gwine eat yo messin? Dilsey said. Tell me dat. Go on now, she
said, toiling upward. Mrs Compson stood watching her as she mounted,
steadying herself against the wall with one hand, holding her skirts up
with the other.

Are you going to wake him up just to dress him? she said.

Dilsey stopped. With her foot lifted to the next step she stood there,
her hand against the wall and the grey splash of the window behind her,
motionless and shapeless she loomed.

He aint awake den? she said.

He wasnt when I looked in, Mrs Compson said. But its past his time.
He never does sleep after half past seven. You know he doesnt.

Dilsey said nothing. She made no further move, but though she could not
see her save as a blobby shape without depth, Mrs Compson knew that she
had lowered her face a little and that she stood now like a cow in the
rain, as she held the empty water bottle by its neck.

Youre not the one who has to bear it, Mrs Compson said. Its not
your responsibility. You can go away. You dont have to bear the brunt of
it day in and day out. You owe nothing to them, to Mr Compsons memory.
I know you have never had any tenderness for Jason. Youve never tried
to conceal it.

Dilsey said nothing. She turned slowly and descended, lowering her body
from step to step, as a small child does, her hand against the wall.
You go on and let him alone, she said. Dont go in dar no mo, now.
Ill send Luster up soon as I find him. Let him alone, now.

She returned to the kitchen. She looked into the stove, then she drew
her apron over her head and donned the overcoat and opened the outer
door and looked up and down the yard. The weather drove upon her flesh,
harsh and minute, but the scene was empty of all else that moved. She
descended the steps, gingerly, as if for silence, and went around the
corner of the kitchen. As she did so Luster emerged quickly and
innocently from the cellar door.

Dilsey stopped. Whut you up to? she said.

Nothin, Luster said, Mr Jason say fer me to find out whar dat water
leak in de cellar fum.

En when wus hit he say fer you to do dat? Dilsey said. Last New
Years day, wasnt hit?

I thought I jes be lookin whiles dey sleep, Luster said. Dilsey went
to the cellar door. He stood aside and she peered down into the
obscurity odorous of dank earth and mould and rubber.

Huh, Dilsey said. She looked at Luster again. He met her gaze blandly,
innocent and open. I dont know whut you up to, but you aint got no
business doin hit. You jes tryin me too dis mawnin cause de others is,
aint you? You git on up dar en see to Benjy, you hear?

Yessum, Luster said. He went on toward the kitchen steps, swiftly.

Here, Dilsey said, You git me another armful of wood while I got
you.

Yessum, he said. He passed her on the steps and went to the woodpile.
When he blundered again at the door a moment later, again invisible and
blind within and beyond his wooden avatar, Dilsey opened the door and
guided him across the kitchen with a firm hand.

Jes thow hit at dat box again, she said, Jes thow hit.

I got to, Luster said, panting, I cant put hit down no other way.

Den you stand dar en hold hit a while, Dilsey said. She unloaded him a
stick at a time. Whut got into you dis mawnin? Here I sont you fer wood
en you aint never brought mon six sticks at a time to save yo life
twell today. Whut you fixin to ax me kin you do now? Aint dat show lef
town yit?

Yessum. Hit done gone.

She put the last stick into the box. Now you go on up dar wid Benjy,
like I tole you befo, she said. And I dont want nobody else yellin
down dem stairs at me twell I rings de bell. You hear me.

Yessum, Luster said. He vanished through the swing door. Dilsey put
some more wood in the stove and returned to the bread board. Presently
she began to sing again.

The room grew warmer. Soon Dilseys skin had taken on a rich, lustrous
quality as compared with that as of a faint dusting of wood ashes which
both it and Lusters had worn, as she moved about the kitchen, gathering
about her the raw materials of food, coordinating the meal. On the wall
above a cupboard, invisible save at night, by lamp light and even then
evincing an enigmatic profundity because it had but one hand, a cabinet
clock ticked, then with a preliminary sound as if it had cleared its
throat, struck five times.

Eight oclock, Dilsey said. She ceased and tilted her head upward,
listening. But there was no sound save the clock and the fire. She
opened the oven and looked at the pan of bread, then stooping she paused
while someone descended the stairs. She heard the feet cross the
diningroom, then the swing door opened and Luster entered, followed by a
big man who appeared to have been shaped of some substance whose
particles would not or did not cohere to one another or to the frame
which supported it. His skin was dead looking and hairless; dropsical
too, he moved with a shambling gait like a trained bear. His hair was
pale and fine. It had been brushed smoothly down upon his brow like that
of children in daguerreotypes. His eyes were clear, of the pale sweet
blue of cornflowers, his thick mouth hung open, drooling a little.

Is he cold? Dilsey said. She wiped her hands on her apron and touched
his hand.

Ef he aint, I is, Luster said. Always cold Easter. Aint never seen
hit fail. Miss Cahline say ef you aint got time to fix her hot water
bottle to never mind about hit.

Oh, Lawd, Dilsey said. She drew a chair into the corner between the
woodbox and the stove. The man went obediently and sat in it. Look in
de dinin room and see whar I laid dat bottle down, Dilsey said. Luster
fetched the bottle from the diningroom and Dilsey filled it and give it
to him. Hurry up, now, she said. See ef Jason wake now. Tell em hits
all ready.

Luster went out. Ben sat beside the stove. He sat loosely, utterly
motionless save for his head, which made a continual bobbing sort of
movement as he watched Dilsey with his sweet vague gaze as she moved
about. Luster returned.

He up, he said, Miss Cahline say put hit on de table. He came to the
stove and spread his hands palm down above the firebox. He up, too, He
said, Gwine hit wid bofe feet dis mawnin.

Whuts de matter now? Dilsey said. Git away fum dar. How kin I do
anything wid you standin over de stove?

I cold, Luster said.

You ought to thought about dat whiles you wus down dar in dat cellar,
Dilsey said. Whut de matter wid Jason?

Sayin me en Benjy broke dat winder in his room.

Is dey one broke? Dilsey said.

Dats whut he sayin, Luster said. Say I broke hit.

How could you, when he keep hit locked all day en night?

Say I broke hit chunkin rocks at hit, Luster said.

En did you?

Nome, Luster said.

Dont lie to me, boy, Dilsey said.

I never done hit, Luster said. Ask Benjy ef I did. I aint studin dat
winder.

Who could a broke hit, den? Dilsey said. He jes tryin hisself, to
wake Quentin up, she said, taking the pan of biscuits out of the stove.

Reckin so, Luster said. Dese is funny folks. Glad I aint none of em.

Aint none of who? Dilsey said. Lemme tell you somethin, nigger boy,
you got jes es much Compson devilment in you es any of em. Is you right
sho you never broke dat window?

Whut I want to break hit fur?

Whut you do any of yo devilment fur? Dilsey said. Watch him now, so
he cant burn his hand again twell I git de table set.

She went to the diningroom, where they heard her moving about, then she
returned and set a plate at the kitchen table and set food there. Ben
watched her, slobbering, making a faint, eager sound.

All right, honey, she said, Here yo breakfast. Bring his chair,
Luster. Luster moved the chair up and Ben sat down, whimpering and
slobbering. Dilsey tied a cloth about his neck and wiped his mouth with
the end of it. And see kin you kep fum messin up his clothes one time,
she said, handing Luster a spoon.

Ben ceased whimpering. He watched the spoon as it rose to his mouth. It
was as if even eagerness were muscle-bound in him too, and hunger itself
inarticulate, not knowing it is hunger. Luster fed him with skill and
detachment. Now and then his attention would return long enough to
enable him to feint the spoon and cause Ben to close his mouth upon the
empty air, but it was apparent that Lusters mind was elsewhere. His
other hand lay on the back of the chair and upon that dead surface it
moved tentatively, delicately, as if he were picking an inaudible tune
out of the dead void, and once he even forgot to tease Ben with the
spoon while his fingers teased out of the slain wood a soundless and
involved arpeggio until Ben recalled him by whimpering again.

In the diningroom Dilsey moved back and forth. Presently she rang a
small clear bell, then in the kitchen Luster heard Mrs Compson and Jason
descending, and Jasons voice, and he rolled his eyes whitely with
listening.

Sure, I know they didnt break it, Jason said. Sure, I know that.
Maybe the change of weather broke it.

I dont see how it could have, Mrs Compson said. Your room stays
locked all day long, just as you leave it when you go to town. None of
us ever go in there except Sunday, to clean it. I dont want you to think
that I would go where Im not wanted, or that I would permit anyone else
to.

I never said you broke it, did I? Jason said.

I dont want to go in your room, Mrs Compson said. I respect anybodys
private affairs. I wouldnt put my foot over the threshold, even if I
had a key.

Yes, Jason said, I know your keys wont fit. Thats why I had the lock
changed. What I want to know is, how that window got broken.

Luster say he didnt do hit, Dilsey said.

I knew that without asking him, Jason said. Wheres Quentin? he
said.

Where she is evy Sunday mawnin, Dilsey said. Whut got into you de
last few days, anyhow?

Well, were going to change all that, Jason said. Go up and tell her
breakfast is ready.

You leave her alone now, Jason, Dilsey said. She gits up fer
breakfast evy week mawnin, en Cahline lets her stay in bed evy Sunday.
You knows dat.

I cant keep a kitchen full of niggers to wait on her pleasure, much as
Id like to, Jason said. Go and tell her to come down to breakfast.

Aint nobody have to wait on her, Dilsey said. I puts her breakfast in
de warmer en she

Did you hear me? Jason said.

I hears you, Dilsey said. All I been hearin, when you in de house. Ef
hit aint Quentin er yo maw, hits Luster en Benjy. Whut you let him go
on dat way fer, Miss Cahline?

Youd better do as he says, Mrs Compson said, Hes head of the house
now. Its his right to require us to respect his wishes. I try to do it,
and if I can, you can too.

Taint no sense in him bein so bad tempered he got to make Quentin git
up jes to suit him, Dilsey said. Maybe you think she broke dat
window.

She would, if she happened to think of it, Jason said. You go and do
what I told you.

En I wouldnt blame her none ef she did, Dilsey said, going toward the
stairs. Wid you naggin at her all de blessed time you in de house.

Hush, Dilsey, Mrs Compson said, Its neither your place nor mine to
tell Jason what to do. Sometimes I think he is wrong, but I try to obey
his wishes for you alls sakes. If Im strong enough to come to the
table, Quentin can too.

Dilsey went out. They heard her mounting the stairs. They heard her a
long while on the stairs.

Youve got a prize set of servants, Jason said. He helped his mother
and himself to food. Did you ever have one that was worth killing? You
must have had some before I was big enough to remember.

I have to humour them, Mrs Compson said. I have to depend on them so
completely. Its not as if I were strong. I wish I were. I wish I could
do all the house work myself. I could at least take that much off your
shoulders.

And a fine pigsty wed live in, too, Jason said. Hurry up, Dilsey,
he shouted.

I know you blame me, Mrs Compson said, for letting them off to go to
church today.

Go where? Jason said. Hasnt that damn show left yet?

To church, Mrs Compson said. The darkies are having a special Easter
service. I promised Dilsey two weeks ago that they could get off.

Which means well eat cold dinner, Jason said, or none at all.

I know its my fault, Mrs Compson said. I know you blame me.

For what? Jason said. You never resurrected Christ, did you?

They heard Dilsey mount the final stair, then her slow feet overhead.

Quentin, she said. When she called the first time Jason laid his knife
and fork down and he and his mother appeared to wait across the table
from one another, in identical attitudes; the one cold and shrewd, with
close-thatched brown hair curled into two stubborn hooks, one on either
side of his forehead like a bartender in caricature, and hazel eyes with
black-ringed irises like marbles, the other cold and querulous, with
perfectly white hair and eyes pouched and baffled and so dark as to
appear to be all pupil or all iris.

Quentin, Dilsey said, Get up, honey. Dey waitin breakfast on you.

I cant understand how that window got broken, Mrs Compson said. Are
you sure it was done yesterday? It could have been like that a long
time, with the warm weather. The upper sash, behind the shade like
that.

Ive told you for the last time that it happened yesterday, Jason
said. Dont you reckon I know the room I live in? Do you reckon I could
have lived in it a week with a hole in the window you could stick your
hand his voice ceased, ebbed, left him staring at his mother with
eyes that for an instant were quite empty of anything. It was as though
his eyes were holding their breath, while his mother looked at him, her
face flaccid and querulous, interminable, clairvoyant yet obtuse. As
they sat so Dilsey said,

Quentin. Dont play wid me, honey. Come on to breakfast, honey. Dey
waitin fer you.

I cant understand it, Mrs Compson said, Its just as if somebody had
tried to break into the house Jason sprang up. His chair crashed over
backward. What Mrs Compson said, staring at him as he ran past her
and went jumping up the stairs, where he met Dilsey. His face was now in
shadow, and Dilsey said,

She sullin. Yo ma aint unlocked But Jason ran on past her and along
the corridor to a door. He didnt call. He grasped the knob and tried
it, then he stood with the knob in his hand and his head bent a little,
as if he were listening to something much further away than the
dimensioned room beyond the door, and which he already heard. His
attitude was that of one who goes through the motions of listening in
order to deceive himself as to what he already hears. Behind him Mrs
Compson mounted the stairs, calling his name. Then she saw Dilsey and
she quit calling him and began to call Dilsey instead.

I told you she aint unlocked dat do yit, Dilsey said.

When she spoke he turned and ran toward her, but his voice was quiet,
matter of fact. She carry the key with her? he said. Has she got it
now, I mean, or will she have

Dilsey, Mrs Compson said on the stairs.

Is which? Dilsey said. Whynt you let

The key, Jason said, To that room. Does she carry it with her all the
time. Mother. Then he saw Mrs Compson and he went down the stairs and
met her. Give me the key, he said. He fell to pawing at the pockets of
the rusty black dressing sacque she wore. She resisted.

Jason, she said, Jason! Are you and Dilsey trying to put me to bed
again? she said, trying to fend him off, Cant you even let me have
Sunday in peace?

The key, Jason said, pawing at her, Give it here. He looked back at
the door, as if he expected it to fly open before he could get back to
it with the key he did not yet have.

You, Dilsey! Mrs Compson said, clutching her sacque about her.

Give me the key, you old fool! Jason cried suddenly. From her pocket
he tugged a huge bunch of rusted keys on an iron ring like a mediaeval
jailers and ran back up the hall with the two women behind him.

You, Jason! Mrs Compson said. He will never find the right one, she
said, You know I never let anyone take my keys, Dilsey, she said. She
began to wail.

Hush, Dilsey said, He aint gwine do nothin to her. I aint gwine let
him.

But on Sunday morning, in my own house, Mrs Compson said, When Ive
tried so hard to raise them Christians. Let me find the right key,
Jason, she said. She put her hand on his arm. Then she began to
struggle with him, but he flung her aside with a motion of his elbow and
looked around at her for a moment, his eyes cold and harried, then he
turned to the door again and the unwieldy keys.

Hush, Dilsey said, You, Jason!

Something terrible has happened, Mrs Compson said, wailing again, I
know it has. You, Jason, she said, grasping at him again. He wont even
let me find the key to a room in my own house!

Now, now, Dilsey said, Whut kin happen? I right here. I aint gwine
let him hurt her. Quentin, she said, raising her voice, dont you be
skeered, honey, Ise right here.

The door opened, swung inward. He stood in it for a moment, hiding the
room, then he stepped aside. Go in, he said in a thick, light voice.
They went in. It was not a girls room. It was not anybodys room, and
the faint scent of cheap cosmetics and the few feminine objects and the
other evidences of crude and hopeless efforts to feminize it but added
to its anonymity, giving it that dead and stereotyped transience of
rooms in assignation houses. The bed had not been disturbed. On the
floor lay a soiled undergarment of cheap silk a little too pink; from a
half open bureau drawer dangled a single stocking. The window was open.
A pear tree grew there, close against the house. It was in bloom and the
branches scraped and rasped against the house and the myriad air,
driving in the window, brought into the room the forlorn scent of the
blossoms.

Dar now, Dilsey said, Didnt I told you she all right?

All right? Mrs Compson said. Dilsey followed her into the room and
touched her.

You come on and lay down, now, she said. I find her in ten minutes.

Mrs Compson shook her off. Find the note, she said. Quentin left a
note when he did it.

All right, Dilsey said, Ill find hit. You come on to yo room, now.

I knew the minute they named her Quentin this would happen, Mrs
Compson said. She went to the bureau and began to turn over the
scattered objects therescent bottles, a box of powder, a chewed
pencil, a pair of scissors with one broken blade lying upon a darned
scarf dusted with powder and stained with rouge. Find the note, she
said.

I is, Dilsey said. You come on, now. Me and Jasonll find hit. You
come on to yo room.

Jason, Mrs Compson said, Where is he? She went to the door. Dilsey
followed her on down the hall, to another door. It was closed. Jason,
she called through the door. There was no answer. She tried the knob,
then she called him again. But there was still no answer, for he was
hurling things backward out of the closet: garments, shoes, a suitcase.
Then he emerged carrying a sawn section of tongue-and-groove planking
and laid it down and entered the closet again and emerged with a metal
box. He set it on the bed and stood looking at the broken lock while he
dug a key ring from his pocket and selected a key, and for a time longer
he stood with the selected key in his hand, looking at the broken lock,
then he put the keys back in his pocket and carefully tilted the
contents of the box out upon the bed. Still carefully he sorted the
papers, taking them up one at a time and shaking them. Then he upended
the box and shook it too and slowly replaced the papers and stood again,
looking at the broken lock, with the box in his hands and his head bent.
Outside the window he heard some jaybirds swirl shrieking past, and
away, their cries whipping away along the wind, and an automobile passed
somewhere and died away also. His mother spoke his name again beyond the
door, but he didnt move. He heard Dilsey lead her away up the hall, and
then a door closed. Then he replaced the box in the closet and flung the
garments back into it and went down stairs to the telephone. While he
stood there with the receiver to his ear, waiting, Dilsey came down the
stairs. She looked at him, without stopping, and went on.

The wire opened. This is Jason Compson, he said, his voice so harsh
and thick that he had to repeat himself. Jason Compson, he said,
controlling his voice. Have a car ready, with a deputy, if you cant go,
in ten minutes. Ill be thereWhat?Robbery. My house. I know who
itRobbery, I say. Have a car readWhat? Arent you a paid law
enforcementYes, Ill be there in five minutes. Have that car ready to
leave at once. If you dont, Ill report it to the governor.

He clapped the receiver back and crossed the diningroom, where the
scarce-broken meal now lay cold on the table, and entered the kitchen.
Dilsey was filling the hot water bottle. Ben sat, tranquil and empty.
Beside him Luster looked like a fice dog, brightly watchful. He was
eating something. Jason went on across the kitchen.

Aint you going to eat no breakfast? Dilsey said. He paid her no
attention. Go on and eat yo breakfast, Jason. He went on. The outer
door banged behind him. Luster rose and went to the window and looked
out.

Whoo, he said, Whut happenin up dar? He been beatin Miss Quentin?

You hush yo mouf, Dilsey said. You git Benjy started now en I beat yo
head off. You keep him quiet es you kin twell I get back, now. She
screwed the cap on the bottle and went out. They heard her go up the
stairs, then they heard Jason pass the house in his car. Then there was
no sound in the kitchen save the simmering murmur of the kettle and the
clock.

You know whut I bet? Luster said. I bet he beat her. I bet he knock
her in de head en now he gone fer de doctor. Dats whut I bet. The
clock tick-tocked, solemn and profound. It might have been the dry pulse
of the decaying house itself; after a while it whirred and cleared its
throat and struck six times. Ben looked up at it, then he looked at the
bullet-like silhouette of Lusters head in the window and he begun to
bob his head again, drooling. He whimpered.

Hush up, loony, Luster said without turning. Look like we aint gwine
git to go to no church today. But Ben sat in the chair, his big soft
hands dangling between his knees, moaning faintly. Suddenly he wept, a
slow bellowing sound, meaningless and sustained. Hush, Luster said. He
turned and lifted his hand. You want me to whup you? But Ben looked at
him, bellowing slowly with each expiration. Luster came and shook him.
You hush dis minute! he shouted. Here, he said. He hauled Ben out of
the chair and dragged the chair around facing the stove and opened the
door to the firebox and shoved Ben into the chair. They looked like a
tug nudging at a clumsy tanker in a narrow dock. Ben sat down again
facing the rosy door. He hushed. Then they heard the clock again, and
Dilsey slow on the stairs. When she entered he began to whimper again.
Then he lifted his voice.

Whut you done to him? Dilsey said. Why cant you let him lone dis
mawnin, of all times?

I aint doin nothin to him, Luster said. Mr Jason skeered him, dats
whut hit is. He aint kilt Miss Quentin, is he?

Hush, Benjy, Dilsey said. He hushed. She went to the window and looked
out. Is it quit rainin? she said.

Yessum, Luster said. Quit long time ago.

Den yall go out dos awhile, she said. I jes got Miss Cahline quiet
now.

Is we gwine to church? Luster said.

I let you know bout dat when de time come. You keep him away fum de
house twell I calls you.

Kin we go to de pastuh? Luster said.

All right. Only you keep him away fum de house. I done stood all I
kin.

Yessum, Luster said. Whar Mr Jason gone, mammy?

Dats some mo of yo business, aint it? Dilsey said. She began to clear
the table. Hush, Benjy. Luster gwine take you out to play.

Whut he done to Miss Quentin, mammy? Luster said.

Aint done nothin to her. You all git on outen here?

I bet she aint here, Luster said.

Dilsey looked at him. How you know she aint here?

Me and Benjy seed her clamb out de window last night. Didnt us,
Benjy?

You did? Dilsey said, looking at him.

We sees her doin hit evy night, Luster said, Clamb right down dat
pear tree.

Dont you lie to me, nigger boy, Dilsey said.

I aint lyin. Ask Benjy ef I is.

Whynt you say somethin about it, den?

Twarnt none o my business, Luster said. I aint gwine git mixed up
in white folks business. Come on here, Benjy, les go out dos.

They went out. Dilsey stood for awhile at the table, then she went and
cleared the breakfast things from the diningroom and ate her breakfast
and cleaned up the kitchen. Then she removed her apron and hung it up
and went to the foot of the stairs and listened for a moment. There was
no sound. She donned the overcoat and the hat and went across to her
cabin.

The rain had stopped. The air now drove out of the southeast, broken
overhead into blue patches. Upon the crest of a hill beyond the trees
and roofs and spires of town sunlight lay like a pale scrap of cloth,
was blotted away. Upon the air a bell came, then as if at a signal,
other bells took up the sound and repeated it.

The cabin door opened and Dilsey emerged, again in the maroon cape and
the purple gown, and wearing soiled white elbow-length gloves and minus
her headcloth now. She came into the yard and called Luster. She waited
awhile, then she went to the house and around it to the cellar door,
moving close to the wall, and looked into the door. Ben sat on the
steps. Before him Luster squatted on the damp floor. He held a saw in
his left hand, the blade sprung a little by pressure of his hand, and he
was in the act of striking the blade with the worn wooden mallet with
which she had been making beaten biscuit for more than thirty years. The
saw gave forth a single sluggish twang that ceased with lifeless
alacrity, leaving the blade in a thin clean curve between Lusters hand
and the floor. Still, inscrutable, it bellied.

Dats de way he done hit, Luster said. I jes aint foun de right thing
to hit it wid.

Dats whut you doin, is it? Dilsey said. Bring me dat mallet, she
said.

I aint hurt hit, Luster said.

Bring hit here, Dilsey said. Put dat saw whar you got hit first.

He put the saw away and brought the mallet to her. Then Ben wailed
again, hopeless and prolonged. It was nothing. Just sound. It might have
been all time and injustice and sorrow become vocal for an instant by a
conjunction of planets.

Listen at him, Luster said, He been gwine on dat way evy since you
sont us outen de house. I dont know whut got in to him dis mawnin.

Bring him here, Dilsey said.

Come on, Benjy, Luster said. He went back down the steps and took
Bens arm. He came obediently, wailing, that slow hoarse sound that
ships make, that seems to begin before the sound itself has started,
seems to cease before the sound itself has stopped.

Run and git his cap, Dilsey said. Dont make no noise Miss Cahline kin
hear. Hurry, now. We already late.

She gwine hear him anyhow, ef you dont stop him. Luster said.

He stop when we git off de place, Dilsey said. He smellin hit. Dats
whut hit is.

Smell whut, mammy? Luster said.

You go git dat cap, Dilsey said. Luster went on. They stood in the
cellar door, Ben one step below her. The sky was broken now into
scudding patches that dragged their swift shadows up out of the shabby
garden, over the broken fence and across the yard. Dilsey stroked Bens
head, slowly and steadily, smoothing the bang upon his brow. He wailed
quietly, unhurriedly. Hush, Dilsey said, Hush, now. We be gone in a
minute. Hush, now. He wailed quietly and steadily.

Luster returned, wearing a stiff new straw hat with a coloured band and
carrying a cloth cap. The hat seemed to isolate Lusters skull, in the
beholders eye as a spotlight would, in all its individual planes and
angles. So peculiarly individual was its shape that at first glance the
hat appeared to be on the head of someone standing immediately behind
Luster. Dilsey looked at the hat.

Whynt you wear yo old hat? she said.

Couldnt find hit, Luster said.

I bet you couldnt. I bet you fixed hit last night so you couldnt find
hit. You fixin to ruin dat un.

Aw, mammy, Luster said, Hit aint gwine rain.

How you know? You go git dat old hat en put dat new un away.

Aw, mammy.

Den you go git de umbreller.

Aw, mammy.

Take yo choice, Dilsey said. Git yo old hat, er de umbreller. I dont
keer which.

Luster went to the cabin. Ben wailed quietly.

Come on, Dilsey said, Dey kin ketch up wid us. We gwine to hear de
singin. They went around the house, toward the gate. Hush, Dilsey
said from time to time as they went down the drive. They reached the
gate. Dilsey opened it. Luster was coming down the drive behind them,
carrying the umbrella. A woman was with him. Here dey come, Dilsey
said. They passed out the gate. Now, den, she said. Ben ceased. Luster
and his mother overtook them. Frony wore a dress of bright blue silk and
a flowered hat. She was a thin woman, with a flat, pleasant face.

You got six weeks work right dar on yo back, Dilsey said. Whut you
gwine do ef hit rain?

Git wet, I reckon, Frony said. I aint never stopped no rain yit.

Mammy always talkin bout hit gwine rain, Luster said.

Ef I dont worry bout yall, I dont know who is, Dilsey said. Come on,
we already late.

Revun Shegog gwine preach today, Frony said.

Is? Dilsey said. Who him?

He fum Saint Looey, Frony said. Dat big preacher.

Huh, Dilsey said, Whut dey needs is a man kin put de fear of God into
dese here triflin young niggers.

Revun Shegog gwine preach today, Frony said. So dey tells.

They went on along the street. Along its quiet length white people in
bright clumps moved churchward, under the windy bells, walking now and
then in the random and tentative sun. The wind was gusty, out of the
southeast, chill and raw after the warm days.

I wish you wouldnt keep on bringin him to church, mammy, Frony said.
Folks talkin.

Whut folks? Dilsey said.

I hears em, Frony said.

And I knows whut kind of folks, Dilsey said, Trash white folks. Dats
who it is. Thinks he aint good enough fer white church, but nigger
church aint good enough fer him.

Dey talks, jes de same, Frony said.

Den you send um to me, Dilsey said. Tell um de good Lawd dont keer
whether he smart er not. Dont nobody but white trash keer dat.

A street turned oil at right angles, descending, and became a dirt road.
On either hand the land dropped more sharply; a broad flat dotted with
small cabins whose weathered roofs were on a level with the crown of the
road. They were set in small grassless plots littered with broken
things, bricks, planks, crockery, things of a once utilitarian value.
What growth there was consisted of rank weeds and the trees were
mulberries and locusts and sycamorestrees that partook also of the
foul desiccation which surrounded the houses; trees whose very
burgeoning seemed to be the sad and stubborn remnant of September, as if
even spring had passed them by, leaving them to feed upon the rich and
unmistakable smell of negroes in which they grew.

From the doors negroes spoke to them as they passed, to Dilsey usually:

Sis Gibson! How you dis mawnin?

Im well. Is you well?

Im right well, I thank you.

They emerged from the cabins and struggled up the shading levee to the
road-men in staid, hard brown or black, with gold watch chains and now
and then a stick; young men in cheap violent blues or stripes and
swaggering hats; women a little stiffly sibilant, and children in
garments bought second hand of white people, who looked at Ben with the
covertness of nocturnal animals:

I bet you wont go up en tech him.

How come I wont?

I bet you wont. I bet you skeered to.

He wont hurt folks. He des a loony.

How come a loony wont hurt folks?

Dat un wont. I teched him.

I bet you wont now.

Case Miss Dilsey lookin.

You wont no ways.

He dont hurt folks. He des a loony.

And steadily the older people speaking to Dilsey, though, unless they
were quite old, Dilsey permitted Frony to respond.

Mammy aint feelin well dis mawnin.

Dats too bad. But Revun Shegogll cure dat. Hell give her de comfort
en de unburdenin.

The road rose again, to a scene like a painted backdrop. Notched into a
cut of red clay crowned with oaks the road appeared to stop short off,
like a cut ribbon. Beside it a weathered church lifted its crazy steeple
like a painted church, and the whole scene was as flat and without
perspective as a painted cardboard set upon the ultimate edge of the
flat earth, against the windy sunlight of space and April and a
midmorning filled with bells. Toward the church they thronged with slow
sabbath deliberation. The women and children went on in, the men stopped
outside and talked in quiet groups until the bell ceased ringing. Then
they too entered.

The church had been decorated, with sparse flowers from kitchen gardens
and hedgerows, and with streamers of coloured crepe paper. Above the
pulpit hung a battered Christmas bell, the accordian sort that
collapses. The pulpit was empty, though the choir was already in place,
fanning themselves although it was not warm.

Most of the women were gathered on one side of the room. They were
talking. Then the bell struck one time and they dispersed to their seats
and the congregation sat for an instant, expectant. The bell struck
again one time. The choir rose and began to sing and the congregation
turned its head as one, as six small childrenfour girls with tight
pigtails bound with small scraps of cloth like butterflies, and two boys
with close napped heads,entered and marched up the aisle, strung
together in a harness of white ribbons and flowers, and followed by two
men in single file. The second man was huge, of a light coffee colour,
imposing in a frock coat and white tie. His head was magisterial and
profound, his neck rolled above his collar in rich folds. But he was
familiar to them, and so the heads were still reverted when he had
passed, and it was not until the choir ceased singing that they realised
that the visiting clergyman had already entered, and when they saw the
man who had preceded their minister enter the pulpit still ahead of him
an indescribable sound went up, a sigh, a sound of astonishment and
disappointment.

The visitor was undersized, in a shabby alpaca coat. He had a wizened
black face like a small, aged monkey. And all the while that the choir
sang again and while the six children rose and sang in thin, frightened,
tuneless whispers, they watched the insignificant looking man sitting
dwarfed and countrified by the ministers imposing bulk, with something
like consternation. They were still looking at him with consternation
and unbelief when the minister rose and introduced him in rich, rolling
tones whose very unction served to increase the visitors
insignificance.

En dey brung dat all de way fum Saint Looey, Frony whispered.

Ive knowed de Lawd to use cuiser tools dan dat, Dilsey said. Hush,
now, she said to Ben, Dey fixin to sing again in a minute.

When the visitor rose to speak he sounded like a white man. His voice
was level and cold. It sounded too big to have come from him and they
listened at first through curiosity, as they would have to a monkey
talking. They began to watch him as they would a man on a tight rope.
They even forgot his insignificant appearance in the virtuosity with
which he ran and poised and swooped upon the cold inflectionless wire of
his voice, so that at last, when with a sort of swooping glide he came
to rest again beside the reading desk with one arm resting upon it at
shoulder height and his monkey body as reft of all motion as a mummy or
an emptied vessel, the congregation sighed as if it waked from a
collective dream and moved a little in its seats. Behind the pulpit the
choir fanned steadily. Dilsey whispered, Hush, now. Dey fixin to sing
in a minute.

Then a voice said, Brethren.

The preacher had not moved. His arm lay yet across the desk, and he
still held that pose while the voice died in sonorous echoes between the
walls. It was as different as day and dark from his former tone, with a
sad, timbrous quality like an alto horn, sinking into their hearts and
speaking there again when it had ceased in fading and cumulate echoes.

Brethren and sisteren, it said again. The preacher removed his arm and
he began to walk back and forth before the desk, his hands clasped
behind him, a meagre figure, hunched over upon itself like that of one
long immured in striving with the implacable earth, I got the
recollection and the blood of the Lamb! He tramped steadily back and
forth beneath the twisted paper and the Christmas bell, hunched, his
hands clasped behind him. He was like a worn small rock whelmed by the
successive waves of his voice. With his body he seemed to feed the voice
that, succubus like, had fleshed its teeth in him. And the congregation
seemed to watch with its own eyes while the voice consumed him, until he
was nothing and they were nothing and there was not even a voice but
instead their hearts were speaking to one another in chanting measures
beyond the need for words, so that when he came to rest against the
reading desk, his monkey face lifted and his whole attitude that of a
serene, tortured crucifix that transcended its shabbiness and
insignificance and made it of no moment, a long moaning expulsion of
breath rose from them, and a womans single soprano: Yes, Jesus!

As the scudding day passed overhead the dingy windows glowed and faded
in ghostly retrograde. A car passed along the road outside, labouring in
the sand, died away. Dilsey sat bolt upright, her hand on Bens knee.
Two tears slid down her fallen cheeks, in and out of the myriad
coruscations of immolation and abnegation and time.

Brethren, the minister said in a harsh whisper, without moving.

Yes, Jesus! the womans voice said, hushed yet.

Breddren en sistuhn! His voice rang again, with the horns. He removed
his arm and stood erect and raised his hands. I got de ricklickshun en
de blood of de Lamb! They did not mark just when his intonation, his
pronunciation, became negroid, they just sat swaying a little in their
seats as the voice took them into itself.

When de long, coldOh, I tells you, breddren, when de long, coldI
sees de light en I sees de word, po sinner! Dey passed away in Egypt, de
swingin chariots; de generations passed away. Wus a rich man: whar he
now, O breddren? Wus a po man: whar he now, O sistuhn? Oh I tells you,
ef you aint got de milk en de dew of de old salvation when de long, cold
years rolls away!

Yes, Jesus!

I tells you, breddren, en I tells you, sistuhn, deyll come a time. Po
sinner sayin Let me lay down wid de Lawd, lemme lay down my load. Den
whut Jesus gwine say, O breddren? O sistuhn? Is you got de ricklickshun
en de Blood of de Lamb? Case I aint gwine load down heaven!

He fumbled in his coat and took out a handkerchief and mopped his face.
A low concerted sound rose from the congregation: Mmmmmmmmmmmmm! The
womans voice said, Yes, Jesus! Jesus!

Breddren! Look at dem little chillen settin dar. Jesus wus like dat
once. He mammy suffered de glory en de pangs. Sometime maybe she helt
him at de nightfall, whilst de angels singin him to sleep; maybe she
look out de do en see de Roman po-lice passin. He tramped back and
forth, mopping his face. Listen, breddren! I sees de day. May settin
in de do wid Jesus on her lap, de little Jesus. Like dem chillen dar,
de little Jesus. I hears de angels singin de peaceful songs en de glory;
I sees de closin eyes; sees Mary jump up, sees de sojer face: We gwine
to kill! We gwine to kill! We gwine to kill yo little Jesus! I hears de
weepin en de lamentation of de po mammy widout de salvation en de word
of God!

Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm! Jesus! Little Jesus! and another voice, rising:

I sees, O Jesus! Oh I sees! and still another, without words, like
bubbles rising in water.

I sees hit, breddren! I sees hit! Sees de blastin, blindin sight! I
sees Calvary, wid de sacred trees, sees de thief en de murderer en de
least of dese; I hears de boasting en de braggin: Ef you be Jesus, lif
up yo tree en walk! I hears de wailin of women en de evenin
lamentations; I hears de weepin en de cryin en de turnt-away face of
God: dey done kilt Jesus; dey done kilt my Son!

Mmmmmmmmmmmmm. Jesus! I sees, O Jesus!

O blind sinner! Breddren, I tells you; sistuhn, I says to you, when de
Lawd did turn His mighty face, say, Aint gwine overload heaven! I can
see de widowed God shet His do; I sees de whelmin flood roll between; I
sees de darkness en de death everlastin upon de generations. Den, lo!
Breddren! Yes, breddren! Whut I see? Whut I see, O sinner? I sees de
resurrection en de light; sees de meek Jesus sayin Dey kilt Me dat ye
shall live again; I died dat dem whut sees en believes shall never die.
Breddren, O breddren! I sees de doom crack en hears de golden horns
shoutin down de glory, en de arisen dead whut got de blood en de
ricklickshun of de Lamb!

In the midst of the voices and the hands Ben sat, rapt in his sweet blue
gaze. Dilsey sat bolt upright beside, crying rigidly and quietly in the
annealment and the blood of the remembered Lamb.

As they walked through the bright noon, up the sandy road with the
dispersing congregation talking easily again group to group, she
continued to weep, unmindful of the talk.

He sho a preacher, mon! He didnt look like much at first, but hush!

He seed de power en de glory.

Yes, suh. He seed hit. Face to face he seed hit.

Dilsey made no sound, her face did not quiver as the tears took their
sunken and devious courses, walking with her head up, making no effort
to dry them away even.

Whynt you quit dat, mammy? Frony said. Wid all dese people lookin.
We be passin white folks soon.

Ive seed de first en de last, Dilsey said. Never you mind me.

First en last whut? Frony said.

Never you mind, Dilsey said. I seed de beginnin, en now I sees de
endin.

Before they reached the street, though, she stopped and lifted her skirt
and dried her eyes on the hem of her topmost underskirt. Then they went
on. Ben shambled along beside Dilsey, watching Luster who anticked along
ahead, the umbrella in his hand and his new straw hat slanted viciously
in the sunlight, like a big foolish dog watching a small clever one.
They reached the gate and entered. Immediately Ben began to whimper
again, and for a while all of them looked up the drive at the square,
paintless house with its rotting portico.

Whuts gwine on up dar today? Frony said. Something is.

Nothin, Dilsey said. You tend to yo business en let de white folks
tend to deirn.

Somethin is, Frony said. I heard him first thing dis mawnin. Taint
none of my business, dough.

En I knows whut, too, Luster said.

You knows mo dan you got any use fer, Dilsey said. Aint you jes heard
Frony say hit aint none of yo business? You take Benjy on to de back and
keep him quiet twell I put dinner on.

I knows whar Miss Quentin is, Luster said.

Den jes keep hit, Dilsey said. Soon es Quentin need any of yo egvice,
Ill let you know. Yall gawn en play in de back, now.

You know whut gwine happen soon es dey start playin dat ball over
yonder, Luster said.

Dey wont start fer awhile yit. By dat time T.P. be here to take him
ridin. Here, you gimme dat new hat.

Luster gave her the hat and he and Ben went on across the back yard. Ben
was still whimpering, though not loud. Dilsey and Frony went to the
cabin. After a while Dilsey emerged, again in the faded calico dress,
and went to the kitchen. The fire had died down. There was no sound in
the house. She put on the apron and went up stairs. There was no sound
anywhere. Quentins room was as they had left it. She entered and picked
up the undergarment and put the stocking back in the drawer and closed
it. Mrs Compsons door was closed. Dilsey stood beside it for a moment,
listening. Then she opened it and entered, entered a pervading reek of
camphor. The shades were drawn, the room in halflight, and the bed, so
that at first she thought Mrs Compson was asleep and was about to close
the door when the other spoke.

Well? she said, What is it?

Hits me, Dilsey said. You want anything?

Mrs Compson didnt answer. After awhile, without moving her head at all,
she said: Wheres Jason?

He aint come back yit, Dilsey said. Whut you want?

Mrs Compson said nothing. Like so many cold, weak people, when faced at
last by the incontrovertible disaster she exhumed from somewhere a sort
of fortitude, strength. In her case it was an unshakable conviction
regarding the yet unplumbed event. Well, she said presently, Did you
find it?

Find whut? Whut you talkin about?

The note. At least she would have enough consideration to leave a note.
Even Quentin did that.

Whut you talkin about? Dilsey said, Dont you know she all right? I
bet she be walkin right in dis do befo dark.

Fiddlesticks, Mrs Compson said, Its in the blood. Like uncle, like
niece. Or mother. I dont know which would be worse. I dont seem to
care.

Whut you keep on talkin that way fur? Dilsey said. Whut she want to
do anything like that fur?

I dont know. What reason did Quentin have? Under Gods heaven what
reason did he have? It cant be simply to flout and hurt me. Whoever God
is, He would not permit that. Im a lady. You might not believe that
from my offspring, but I am.

You des wait en see, Dilsey said. She be here by night, right dar in
her bed. Mrs Compson said nothing. The camphor-soaked cloth lay upon
her brow. The black robe lay across the foot of the bed. Dilsey stood
with her hand on the door knob.

Well, Mrs Compson said. What do you want? Are you going to fix some
dinner for Jason and Benjamin, or not?

Jason aint come yit, Dilsey said. I gwine fix somethin. You sho you
dont want nothin? Yo bottle still hot enough?

You might hand me my Bible.

I give hit to you dis mawnin, befo I left.

You laid it on the edge of the bed. How long did you expect it to stay
there?

Dilsey crossed to the bed and groped among the shadows beneath the edge
of it and found the Bible, face down. She smoothed the bent pages and
laid the book on the bed again. Mrs Compson didnt open her eyes. Her
hair and the pillow were the same color, beneath the wimple of the
medicated cloth she looked like an old nun praying. Dont put it there
again, she said, without opening her eyes. Thats where you put it
before. Do you want me to have to get out of bed to pick it up?

Dilsey reached the book across her and laid it on the broad side of the
bed. You cant see to read, noways, she said. You want me to raise de
shade a little?

No. Let them alone. Go on and fix Jason something to eat.

Dilsey went out. She closed the door and returned to the kitchen. The
stove was almost cold. While she stood there the clock above the
cupboard struck ten times. One oclock, she said aloud, Jason aint
comin home. Ise seed de first en de last, she said, looking at the cold
stove, I seed de first en de last. She set out some cold food on a
table. As she moved back and forth she sang a hymn. She sang the first
two lines over and over to the complete tune. She arranged the meal and
went to the door and called Luster, and after a time Luster and Ben
entered. Ben was still moaning a little, as to himself.

He aint never quit, Luster said.

Yall come on en eat, Dilsey said. Jason aint coming to dinner. They
sat down at the table. Ben could manage solid food pretty well for
himself, though even now, with cold food before him, Dilsey tied a cloth
about his neck. He and Luster ate. Dilsey moved about the kitchen,
singing the two lines of the hymn which she remembered. Yoll kin gawn
en eat, she said, Jason aint comin home.

He was twenty miles away at that time. When he left the house he drove
rapidly to town, overreaching the slow sabbath groups and the peremptory
bells along the broken air. He crossed the empty square and turned into
a narrow street that was abruptly quieter even yet, and stopped before a
frame house and went up the flower-bordered walk to the porch.

Beyond the screen door people were talking. As he lifted his hand to
knock he heard steps, so he withheld his hand until a big man in black
broadcloth trousers and a stiff-bosomed white shirt without collar
opened the door. He had vigorous untidy iron-grey hair and his grey eyes
were round and shiny like a little boys. He took Jasons hand and drew
him into the house, still shaking it.

Come right in, he said, Come right in.

You ready to go now? Jason said.

Walk right in, the other said, propelling him by the elbow into a room
where a man and a woman sat. You know Myrtles husband, dont you? Jason
Compson, Vernon.

Yes, Jason said. He did not even look at the man, and as the sheriff
drew a chair across the room the man said,

Well go out so you can talk. Come on, Myrtle.

No, no, the sheriff said, You folks keep your seat. I reckon it aint
that serious, Jason? Have a seat.

Ill tell you as we go along, Jason said. Get your hat and coat.

Well go out, the man said, rising.

Keep your seat, the sheriff said. Me and Jason will go out on the
porch.

You get your hat and coat, Jason said. Theyve already got a twelve
hour start. The sheriff led the way back to the porch. A man and a
woman passing spoke to him. He responded with a hearty florid gesture.
Bells were still ringing, from the direction of the section known as
Nigger Hollow. Get your hat, Sheriff, Jason said. The sheriff drew up
two chairs.

Have a seat and tell me what the trouble is.

I told you over the phone, Jason said, standing. I did that to save
time. Am I going to have to go to law to compel you to do your sworn
duty?

You sit down and tell me about it, the sheriff said. Ill take care
of you all right.

Care, hell, Jason said. Is this what you call taking care of me?

Youre the one thats holding us up, the sheriff said. You sit down
and tell me about it.

Jason told him, his sense of injury and impotence feeding upon its own
sound, so that after a time he forgot his haste in the violent
cumulation of his self justification and his outrage. The sheriff
watched him steadily with his cold shiny eyes.

But you dont know they done it, he said. You just think so.

Dont know? Jason said. When I spent two damn days chasing her through
alleys, trying to keep her away from him, after I told her what Id do
to her if I ever caught her with him, and you say I dont know that that
little b

Now, then, the sheriff said, Thatll do. Thats enough of that. He
looked out across the street, his hands in his pockets.

And when I come to you, a commissioned officer of the law, Jason said.

That shows in Mottson this week, the sheriff said.

Yes, Jason said, And if I could find a law officer that gave a
solitary damn about protecting the people that elected him to office,
Id be there too by now. He repeated his story, harshly recapitulant,
seeming to get an actual pleasure out of his outrage and impotence. The
sheriff did not appear to be listening at all.

Jason, he said, What were you doing with three thousand dollars hid
in the house?

What? Jason said. Thats my business where I keep my money. Your
business is to help me get it back.

Did your mother know you had that much on the place?

Look here, Jason said, My house has been robbed. I know who did it
and I know where they are. I come to you as the commissioned officer of
the law, and I ask you once more, are you going to make any effort to
recover my property, or not?

What do you aim to do with that girl, if you catch them?

Nothing, Jason said, Not anything. I wouldnt lay my hand on her. The
bitch that cost me a job, the one chance I ever had to get ahead, that
killed my father and is shortening my mothers life every day and made
my name a laughing stock in the town. I wont do anything to her, he
said. Not anything.

You drove that girl into running off, Jason, the sheriff said.

How I conduct my family is no business of yours, Jason said. Are you
going to help me or not?

You drove her away from home, the sheriff said. And I have some
suspicions about who that money belongs to that I dont reckon Ill ever
know for certain.

Jason stood, slowly wringing the brim of his hat in his hands. He said
quietly: Youre not going to make any effort to catch them for me?

Thats not any of my business, Jason. If you had any actual proof, Id
have to act. But without that I dont figger its any of my business.

Thats your answer, is it? Jason said. Think well, now.

Thats it, Jason.

All right, Jason said. He put his hat on. Youll regret this. I wont
be helpless. This is not Russia, where just because he wears a little
metal badge, a man is immune to law. He went down the steps and got in
his car and started the engine. The sheriff watched him drive away,
turn, and rush past the house toward town.

The bells were ringing again, high in the scudding sunlight in bright
disorderly tatters of sound. He stopped at a filling station and had his
tires examined and the tank filled.

Gwine on a trip, is you? the negro asked him. He didnt answer. Look
like hit gwine fair off, after all, the negro said.

Fair off, hell, Jason said, Itll be raining like hell by twelve
oclock. He looked at the sky, thinking about rain, about the slick clay
roads, himself stalled somewhere miles from town. He thought about it
with a sort of triumph, of the fact that he was going to miss dinner,
that by starting now and so serving his compulsion of haste, he would be
at the greatest possible distance from both towns when noon came. It
seemed to him that, in this, circumstance was giving him a break, so he
said to the negro:

What the hell are you doing? Has somebody paid you to keep this car
standing here as long as you can?

Dis here ti aint got no air a-tall in hit, the negro said.

Then get the hell away from there and let me have that tube, Jason
said.

Hit up now, the negro said, rising. You kin ride now.

Jason got in and started the engine and drove off. He went into second
gear, the engine spluttering and gasping, and he raced the engine,
jamming the throttle down and snapping the choker in and out savagely.
Its goin to rain, he said, Get me half way there, and rain like
hell. And he drove on out of the bells and out of town, thinking of
himself slogging through the mud, hunting a team. And every damn one of
them will be at church. He thought of how hed find a church at last
and take a team and of the owner coming out, shouting at him and of
himself striking the man down. Im Jason Compson. See if you can stop
me. See if you can elect a man to office that can stop me, he said,
thinking of himself entering the courthouse with a file of soldiers and
dragging the sheriff out. Thinks he can sit with his hands folded and
see me lose my job. Ill show him about jobs. Of his niece he did not
think at all, nor of the arbitrary valuation of the money. Neither of
them had had entity or individuality for him for ten years; together
they merely symbolized the job in the bank of which he had been deprived
before he ever got it.

The air brightened, the running shadow patches were not the obverse, and
it seemed to him that the fact that the day was clearing was another
cunning stroke on the part of the foe, the fresh battle toward which he
was carrying ancient wounds. From time to time he passed churches,
unpainted frame buildings with sheet iron steeples, surrounded by
tethered teams and shabby motorcars, and it seemed to him that each of
them was a picket-post where the rear guards of Circumstance peeped
fleetingly back at him. And damn You, too, he said, See if You can
stop me, thinking of himself, his file of soldiers with the manacled
sheriff in the rear, dragging Omnipotence down from His throne, if
necessary; of the embattled legions of both hell and heaven through
which he tore his way and put his hands at last on his fleeing niece.

The wind was out of the southeast. It blew steadily upon his cheek. It
seemed that he could feel the prolonged blow of it sinking through his
skull, and suddenly with an old premonition he clapped the brakes on and
stopped and sat perfectly still. Then he lifted his hand to his neck and
began to curse, and sat there, cursing in a harsh whisper. When it was
necessary for him to drive for any length of time he fortified himself
with a handkerchief soaked in camphor, which he would tie about his
throat when clear of town, thus inhaling the fumes, and he got out and
lifted the seat cushion on the chance that there might be a forgotten
one there. He looked beneath both seats and stood again for a while,
cursing, seeing himself mocked by his own triumphing. He closed his
eyes, leaning on the door. He could return and get the forgotten
camphor, or he could go on. In either case, his head would be splitting,
but at home he could be sure of finding camphor on Sunday, while if he
went on he could not be sure. But if he went back, he would be an hour
and a half later in reaching Mottson. Maybe I can drive slow, he said.
Maybe I can drive slow, thinking of something else

He got in and started. Ill think of something else, he said, so he
thought about Lorraine. He imagined himself in bed with her, only he was
just lying beside her, pleading with her to help him, then he thought of
the money again, and that he had been outwitted by a woman, a girl. If
he could just believe it was the man who had robbed him. But to have
been robbed of that which was to have compensated him for the lost job,
which he had acquired through so much effort and risk, by the very
symbol of the lost job itself, and worst of all, by a bitch of a girl.
He drove on, shielding his face from the steady wind with the corner of
his coat.

He could see the opposed forces of his destiny and his will drawing
swiftly together now, toward a junction that would be irrevocable; he
became cunning. I cant make a blunder, he told himself. There would be
just one right thing, without alternatives: he must do that. He believed
that both of them would know him on sight, while hed have to trust to
seeing her first, unless the man still wore the red tie. And the fact
that he must depend on that red tie seemed to be the sum of the
impending disaster; he could almost smell it, feel it above the
throbbing of his head.

He crested the final hill. Smoke lay in the valley, and roofs, a spire
or two above trees. He drove down the hill and into the town, slowing,
telling himself again of the need for caution, to find where the tent
was located first. He could not see very well now, and he knew that it
was the disaster which kept telling him to go directly and get something
for his head. At a filling station they told him that the tent was not
up yet, but that the show cars were on a siding at the station. He drove
there.

Two gaudily painted pullman cars stood on the track. He reconnoitred
them before he got out. He was trying to breathe shallowly, so that the
blood would not beat so in his skull. He got out and went along the
station wall, watching the cars. A few garments hung out of the windows,
limp and crinkled, as though they had been recently laundered. On the
earth beside the steps of one sat three canvas chairs. But he saw no
sign of life at all until a man in a dirty apron came to the door and
emptied a pan of dishwater with a broad gesture, the sunlight glinting
on the metal belly of the pan, then entered the car again.

Now Ill have to take him by surprise, before he can warn them, he
thought. It never occurred to him that they might not be there, in the
car. That they should not be there, that the whole result should not
hinge on whether he saw them first or they saw him first, would be
opposed to all nature and contrary to the whole rhythm of events. And
more than that: he must see them first, get the money back, then what
they did would be of no importance to him, while otherwise the whole
world would know that he, Jason Compson, had been robbed by Quentin, his
niece, a bitch.

He reconnoitred again. Then he went to the car and mounted the steps,
swiftly and quietly, and paused at the door. The galley was dark, rank
with stale food. The man was a white blur, singing in a cracked, shaky
tenor. An old man, he thought, and not as big as I am. He entered the
car as the man looked up.

Hey? the man said, stopping his song.

Where are they? Jason said. Quick, now. In the sleeping car?

Wheres who? the man said.

Dont lie to me, Jason said. He blundered on in the cluttered
obscurity.

Whats that? the other said, Who you calling a liar? And when Jason
grasped his shoulder he exclaimed, Look out, fellow!

Dont lie, Jason said, Where are they?

Why, you bastard, the man said. His arm was frail and thin in Jasons
grasp. He tried to wrench free, then he turned and fell to scrabbling on
the littered table behind him.

Come on, Jason said, Where are they?

Ill tell you where they are, the man shrieked, Lemme find my butcher
knife.

Here, Jason said, trying to hold the other, Im just asking you a
question.

You bastard, the other shrieked, scrabbling at the table. Jason tried
to grasp him in both arms, trying to prison the puny fury of him. The
mans body felt so old, so frail, yet so fatally single-purposed that
for the first time Jason saw clear and unshadowed the disaster toward
which he rushed.

Quit it! he said, Here! Here! Ill get out. Give me time, and Ill
get out.

Call me a liar, the other wailed, Lemme go. Lemme go just one minute.
Ill show you.

Jason glared wildly about, holding the other. Outside it was now bright
and sunny, swift and bright and empty, and he thought of the people soon
to be going quietly home to Sunday dinner, decorously festive, and of
himself trying to hold the fatal, furious little old man whom he dared
not release long enough to turn his back and run.

Will you quit long enough for me to get out? he said, Will you? But
the other still struggled, and Jason freed one hand and struck him on
the head. A clumsy, hurried blow, and not hard, but the other slumped
immediately and slid clattering among pans and buckets to the floor.
Jason stood above him, panting, listening. Then he turned and ran from
the car. At the door he restrained himself and descended more slowly and
stood there again. His breath made a hah hah hah sound and he stood
there trying to repress it, darting his gaze this way and that, when at
a scuffling sound behind him he turned in time to see the little old man
leaping awkwardly and furiously from the vestibule, a rusty hatchet high
in his hand.

He grasped at the hatchet, feeling no shock but knowing that he was
falling, thinking So this is how itll end, and he believed that he was
about to die and when something crashed against the back of his head he
thought How did he hit me there? Only maybe he hit me a long time ago,
he thought, And I just now felt it, and he thought Hurry. Hurry. Get it
over with, and then a furious desire not to die seized him and he
struggled, hearing the old man wailing and cursing in his cracked voice.

He still struggled when they hauled him to his feet, but they held him
and he ceased.

Am I bleeding much? he said, The back of my head. Am I bleeding? He
was still saying that while he felt himself being propelled rapidly
away, heard the old mans thin furious voice dying away behind him.
Look at my head, he said, Wait, I

Wait, hell, the man who held him said, That damn little waspll kill
you. Keep going. You aint hurt.

He hit me, Jason said. Am I bleeding?

Keep going, the other said. He led Jason on around the corner of the
station, to the empty platform where an express truck stood, where grass
grew rigidly in a plot bordered with rigid flowers and a sign in
electric lights: Keep your [Illustration: Eye] on Mottson, the gap
filled by a human eye with an electric pupil. The man released him.

Now, he said, You get on out of here and stay out. What were you
trying to do? Commit suicide?

I was looking for two people, Jason said. I just asked him where they
were.

Who you looking for?

Its a girl, Jason said. And a man. He had on a red tie in Jefferson
yesterday. With this show. They robbed me.

Oh, the man said. Youre the one, are you. Well, they aint here.

I reckon so, Jason said. He leaned against the wall and put his hand
to the back of his head and looked at his palm. I thought I was
bleeding, he said. I thought he hit me with that hatchet.

You hit your head on the rail, the man said. You better go on. They
aint here.

Yes. He said they were not here. I thought he was lying.

Do you think Im lying? the man said.

No, Jason said. I know theyre not here.

I told him to get the hell out of there, both of them, the man said.
I wont have nothing like that in my show. I run a respectable show,
with a respectable troupe.

Yes, Jason said. You dont know where they went?

No. And I dont want to know. No member of my show can pull a stunt like
that. You herbrother?

No, Jason said. It dont matter. I just wanted to see them. You sure
he didnt hit me? No blood, I mean.

There would have been blood if I hadnt got there when I did. You stay
away from here, now. That little bastardll kill you. That your car
yonder?

Yes.

Well, you get in it and go back to Jefferson. If you find them, it wont
be in my show. I run a respectable show. You say they robbed you?

No, Jason said, It dont make any difference. He went to the car and
got in. What is it I must do? he thought. Then he remembered. He started
the engine and drove slowly up the street until he found a drugstore.
The door was locked. He stood for a while with his hand on the knob and
his head bent a little. Then he turned away and when a man came along
after a while he asked if there was a drugstore open anywhere, but there
was not. Then he asked when the northbound train ran, and the man told
him at two thirty. He crossed the pavement and got in the car again and
sat there. After a while two negro lads passed. He called to them.

Can either of you boys drive a car?

Yes, suh.

Whatll you charge to drive me to Jefferson right away?

They looked at one another, murmuring.

Ill pay a dollar, Jason said.

They murmured again. Couldnt go fer dat, one said.

What will you go for?

Kin you go? one said.

I cant git off, the other said. Whynt you drive him up dar? You aint
got nothin to do.

Yes I is.

Whut you got to do?

They murmured again, laughing.

Ill give you two dollars, Jason said. Either of you.

I cant git away neither, the first said.

All right, Jason said. Go on.

He sat there for sometime. He heard a clock strike the half hour, then
people began to pass, in Sunday and Easter clothes. Some looked at him
as they passed, at the man sitting quietly behind the wheel of a small
car, with his invisible life ravelled out about him like a wornout sock.
After a while a negro in overalls came up.

Is you de one wants to go to Jefferson? he said.

Yes, Jason said. Whatll you charge me?

Fo dollars.

Give you two.

Cant go fer no lessn fo. The man in the car sat quietly. He wasnt
even looking at him. The negro said, You want me er not?

All right, Jason said, Get in.

He moved over and the negro took the wheel. Jason closed his eyes. I can
get something for it at Jefferson, he told himself, easing himself to
the jolting, I can get something there. They drove on, along the streets
where people were turning peacefully into houses and Sunday dinners, and
on out of town. He thought that. He wasnt thinking of home, where Ben
and Luster were eating cold dinner at the kitchen table. Somethingthe
absence of disaster, threat, in any constant evilpermitted him to
forget Jefferson as any place which he had ever seen before, where his
life must resume itself.

When Ben and Luster were done Dilsey sent them outdoors. And see kin
you keep let him alone twell fo oclock. T.P. be here den.

Yessum, Luster said. They went out. Dilsey ate her dinner and cleared
up the kitchen. Then she went to the foot of the stairs and listened,
but there was no sound. She returned through the kitchen and out the
outer door and stopped on the steps. Ben and Luster were not in sight,
but while she stood there she heard another sluggish twang from the
direction of the cellar door and she went to the door and looked down
upon a repetition of the mornings scene.

He done it jes dat way, Luster said. He contemplated the motionless
saw with a kind of hopeful dejection. I aint got de right thing to hit
it wid yit, he said.

En you aint gwine find hit down here, neither, Dilsey said. You take
him on out in de sun. You bofe get pneumonia down here on dis wet flo.

She waited and watched them cross the yard toward a clump of cedar trees
near the fence. Then she went on to her cabin.

Now, dont you git started, Luster said, I had enough trouble wid you
today. There was a hammock made of barrel staves slatted into woven
wires. Luster lay down in the swing, but Ben went on vaguely and
purposelessly. He began to whimper again. Hush, now, Luster said, I
fixin to whup you. He lay back in the swing. Ben had stopped moving,
but Luster could hear him whimpering. Is you gwine hush, er aint you?
Luster said. He got up and followed and came upon Ben squatting before a
small mound of earth. At either end of it an empty bottle of blue glass
that once contained poison was fixed in the ground. In one was a
withered stalk of jimson weed. Ben squatted before it, moaning, a slow,
inarticulate sound. Still moaning he sought vaguely about and found a
twig and put it in the other bottle. Whynt you hush? Luster said,
You want me to give you somethin to sho nough moan about? Sposin I
does dis. He knelt and swept the bottle suddenly up and behind him. Ben
ceased moaning. He squatted, looking at the small depression where the
bottle had sat, then as he drew his lungs full Luster brought the bottle
back into view. Hush! he hissed, Dont you dast to beller! Dont you.
Dar hit is. See? Here. You fixin to start ef you stays here. Come on,
les go see ef dey started knockin ball yit. He took Bens arm and drew
him up and they went to the fence and stood side by side there, peering
between the matted honeysuckle not yet in bloom.

Dar, Luster said, Dar come some. See um?

They watched the foursome play onto the green and out, and move to the
tee and drive. Ben watched, whimpering, slobbering. When the foursome
went on he followed along the fence, bobbing and moaning. One said.

Here, caddie. Bring the bag.

Hush, Benjy, Luster said, but Ben went on at his shambling trot,
clinging to the fence, wailing in his hoarse, hopeless voice. The man
played and went on, Ben keeping pace with him until the fence turned at
right angles, and he clung to the fence, watching the people move on and
away.

Will you hush now? Luster said, Will you hush now? He shook Bens
arm. Ben clung to the fence, wailing steadily and hoarsely. Aint you
gwine stop? Luster said, Or is you? Ben gazed through the fence. All
right, den, Luster said, You want somethin to beller about? He looked
over his shoulder, toward the house. Then he whispered: Caddy! Beller
now. Caddy! Caddy! Caddy!

A moment later, in the slow intervals of Bens voice, Luster heard
Dilsey calling. He took Ben by the arm and they crossed the yard toward
her.

I tole you he warnt gwine stay quiet, Luster said.

You vilyun! Dilsey said, Whut you done to him?

I aint done nothin. I tole you when dem folks start playin, he git
started up.

You come on here, Dilsey said. Hush, Benjy. Hush, now. But he
wouldnt hush. They crossed the yard quickly and went to the cabin and
entered. Run git dat shoe, Dilsey said. Dont you sturb Miss Cahline,
now. Ef she say anything, tell her I got him. Go on, now; you kin sho do
dat right, I reckon. Luster went out. Dilsey led Ben to the bed and
drew him down beside her and she held him, rocking back and forth,
wiping his drooling mouth upon the hem of her skirt. Hush, now, she
said, stroking his head, Hush. Dilsey got you. But he bellowed slowly,
abjectly, without tears; the grave hopeless sound of all voiceless
misery under the sun. Luster returned, carrying a white satin slipper.
It was yellow now, and cracked and soiled, and when they placed it into
Bens hand he hushed for a while. But he still whimpered, and soon he
lifted his voice again.

You reckon you kin find T. P.? Dilsey said.

He say yistiddy he gwine out to St Johns today. Say he be back at fo.

Dilsey rocked back and forth, stroking Bens head.

Dis long time, O Jesus, she said, Dis long time.

I kin drive dat surrey, mammy, Luster said.

You kill bofe yall, Dilsey said, You do hit fer devilment. I knows
you got plenty sense to. But I cant trust you. Hush, now, she said.
Hush. Hush.

Nome I wont, Luster said. I drives wid T. P. Dilsey rocked back and
forth, holding Ben. Miss Cahline say ef you cant quiet him, she gwine
git up en come down en do hit.

Hush, honey, Dilsey said, stroking Bens head. Luster, honey, she
said, Will you think about yo ole mammy en drive dat surrey right?

Yessum, Luster said. I drive hit jes like T. P.

Dilsey stroked Bens head, rocking back and forth. I does de bes I
kin, she said, Lawd knows dat. Go git it, den, she said, rising.
Luster scuttled out. Ben held the slipper, crying. Hush, now. Luster
gone to git de surrey en take you to de graveyard. We aint gwine risk
gittin yo cap, she said. She went to a closet contrived of a calico
curtain hung across a corner of the room and got the felt hat she had
worn. Wes down to worsen dis, ef folks jes knowed, she said. Yous
de Lawds chile, anyway. En I be Hisn too, fo long, praise Jesus.
Here. She put the hat on his head and buttoned his coat. He wailed
steadily. She took the slipper from him and put it away and they went
out. Luster came up, with an ancient white horse in a battered and
lopsided surrey.

You gwine be careful, Luster? she said.

Yessum, Luster said. She helped Ben into the back seat. He had ceased
crying, but now he began to whimper again.

Hits his flower, Luster said. Wait, Ill git him one.

You set right dar, Dilsey said. She went and took the cheek-strap.
Now, hurry en git him one. Luster ran around the house, toward the
garden. He came back with a single narcissus.

Dat un broke, Dilsey said, Whynt you git him a good un?

Hit de onliest one I could find, Luster said. Yall took all of um
Friday to decrate de church. Wait, Ill fix hit. So while Dilsey held
the horse Luster put a splint on the flower stalk with a twig and two
bits of string and gave it to Ben. Then he mounted and took the reins.
Dilsey still held the bridle.

You knows de way now? she said, Up de street, round de square, to de
graveyard, den straight back home.

Yessum, Luster said, Hum up, Queenie.

You gwine be careful, now?

Yessum. Dilsey released the bridle.

Hum up, Queenie, Luster said.

Here, Dilsey said, You han me dat whup.

Aw, mammy, Luster said.

Give hit here, Dilsey said, approaching the wheel. Luster gave it to
her reluctantly.

I wont never git Queenie started now.

Never you mind about dat, Dilsey said. Queenie know mo bout whar she
gwine dan you does. All you got to do is set dar en hold dem reins. You
knows de way, now?

Yessum. Same way T. P. goes evy Sunday.

Den you do de same thing dis Sunday.

Cose I is. Aint I drove fer T. P. mon a hunded times?

Den do hit again, Dilsey said. Gawn, now. En ef you hurts Benjy,
nigger boy, I dont know whut I do. You bound fer de chain gang, but Ill
send you dar fo even chain gang ready fer you.

Yessum, Luster said. Hum up, Queenie.

He flapped the lines on Queenies broad back and the surrey lurched into
motion.

You, Luster! Dilsey said.

Hum up, dar! Luster said. He flapped the lines again. With
subterranean rumblings Queenie jogged slowly down the drive and turned
into the street, where Luster exhorted her into a gait resembling a
prolonged and suspended fall in a forward direction.

Ben quit whimpering. He sat in the middle of the seat, holding the
repaired flower upright in his fist, his eyes serene and ineffable.
Directly before him Lusters bullet head turned backward continually
until the house passed from view, then he pulled to the side of the
street and while Ben watched him he descended and broke a switch from a
hedge. Queenie lowered her head and fell to cropping the grass until
Luster mounted and hauled her head up and harried her into motion again,
then he squared his elbows and with the switch and the reins held high
he assumed a swaggering attitude out of all proportion to the sedate
clopping of Queenies hooves and the organlike basso of her internal
accompaniment. Motors passed them, and pedestrians; once a group of half
grown negroes:

Dar Luster. Whar you gwine, Luster? To de boneyard?

Hi, Luster said, Aint de same boneyard yall headed fer. Hum up,
elefump.

They approached the square, where the Confederate soldier gazed with
empty eyes beneath his marble hand into wind and weather. Luster took
still another notch in himself and gave the impervious Queenie a cut
with the switch, casting his glance about the square. Dar Mr Jasons
car, he said then he spied another group of negroes. Les show dem
niggers how quality does, Benjy, he said, Whut you say? He looked
back. Ben sat, holding the flower in his fist, his gaze empty and
untroubled. Luster hit Queenie again and swung her to the left at the
monument.

For an instant Ben sat in an utter hiatus. Then he bellowed. Bellow on
bellow, his voice mounted, with scarce interval for breath. There was
more than astonishment in it, it was horror; shock; agony eyeless,
tongueless; just sound, and Lusters eyes backrolling for a white
instant. Gret God, he said, Hush! Hush! Gret God! He whirled again
and struck Queenie with the switch. It broke and he cast it away and
with Bens voice mounting toward its unbelievable crescendo Luster
caught up the end of the reins and leaned forward as Jason came jumping
across the square and onto the step.

With a backhanded blow he hurled Luster aside and caught the reins and
sawed Queenie about and doubled the reins back and slashed her across
the hips. He cut her again and again, into a plunging gallop, while
Bens hoarse agony roared about them, and swung her about to the right
of the monument. Then he struck Luster over the head with his fist.

Dont you know any better than to take him to the left? he said. He
reached back and struck Ben, breaking the flower stalk again. Shut up!
he said, Shut up! He jerked Queenie back and jumped down. Get to hell
on home with him. If you ever cross that gate with him again, Ill kill
you!

Yes, suh! Luster said. He took the reins and hit Queenie with the end
of them. Git up! Git up, dar! Benjy, fer Gods sake!

Bens voice roared and roared. Queenie moved again, her feet began to
clop-clop steadily again, and at once Ben hushed. Luster looked quickly
back over his shoulder, then he drove on. The broken flower drooped over
Bens fist and his eyes were empty and blue and serene again as cornice
and faade flowed smoothly once more from left to right; post and tree,
window and doorway, and signboard, each in its ordered place.