A Temporary Matter
THENOTICEINFORMEDTHEM that it was a temporary matter: for five days their electricity
would be cut off for one hour, beginning at eight P .M. A line had gone down in the last
snowstorm, and the repairmen were going to take advantage of the milder evenings to
set it right. The work would affect only the houses on the quiet tree-lined street, within
walking distance of a row of brick-faced stores and a trolley stop, where Shoba and
Shukumar had lived for three years.
“It’s good of them to warn us,” Shoba conceded after reading the notice aloud, more for
her own benefit than Shukumar’s. She let the strap of her leather satchel, plump with
files, slip from her shoulders, and left it in the hallway as she walked into the kitchen.
She wore a navy blue poplin raincoat over gray sweatpants and white sneakers,
looking, at thirty-three, like the type of woman she’d once claimed she would never
resemble.
She’d come from the gym. Her cranberry lipstick was visible only on the outer reaches
of her mouth, and her eyeliner had left charcoal patches beneath her lower lashes. She
used to look this way sometimes, Shukumar thought, on mornings after a party or a
night at a bar, when she’d been too lazy to wash her face, too eager to collapse into his
arms. She dropped a sheaf of mail on the table without a glance. Her eyes were still
fixed on the notice in her other hand. “But they should do this sort of thing during the
day.”
“When I’m here, you mean,” Shukumar said. He put a glass lid on a pot of lamb,
adjusting it so only the slightest bit of steam could escape. Since January he’d been
working at home, trying to complete the final chapters of his dissertation on agrarian
revolts in India. “When do the repairs start?”
“It says March nineteenth. Is today the nineteenth?” Shoba walked over to the framed
corkboard that hung on the wall by the fridge, bare except for a calendar of William
Morris wallpaper patterns. She looked at it as if for the first time, studying the wallpaper
pattern carefully on the top half before allowing her eyes to fall to the numbered grid on
the bottom. A friend had sent the calendar in the mail as a Christmas gift, even though
Shoba and Shukumar hadn’t celebrated Christmas that year.
“Today then,” Shoba announced. “You have a dentist appointment next Friday, by the
way.”
He ran his tongue over the tops of his teeth; he’d forgotten to brush them that morning.
It wasn’t the first time. He hadn’t left the house at all that day, or the day before. The
more Shoba stayed out, the more she began putting in extra hours at work and taking
on additional projects, the more he wanted to stay in, not even leaving to get the mail, or
to buy fruit or wine at the stores by the trolley stop.
Six months ago, in September, Shukumar was at an academic conference in Baltimore
when Shoba went into labor, three weeks before her due date. He hadn’t wanted to go
to the conference, but she had insisted; it was important to make contacts, and he
would be entering the job market next year. She told him that she had his number at the
hotel, and a copy of his schedule and flight numbers, and she had arranged with her
friend Gillian for a ride to the hospital in the event of an emergency. When the cab
pulled away that morning for the airport, Shoba stood waving good-bye in her robe, with
one arm resting on the mound of her belly as if it were a perfectly natural part of her
body.
Each time he thought of that moment, the last moment he saw Shoba pregnant, it was
the cab he remembered most, a station wagon, painted red with blue lettering. It was
cavernous compared to their own car. Although Shukumar was six feet tall, with hands
too big ever to rest comfortably in the pockets of his jeans, he felt dwarfed in the back

seat. As the cab sped down Beacon Street, he imagined a day when he and Shoba
might need to buy a station wagon of their own, to cart their children back and forth from
music lessons and dentist appointments. He imagined himself gripping the wheel, as
Shoba turned around to hand the children juice boxes. Once, these images of
parenthood had troubled Shukumar, adding to his anxiety that he was still a student at
thirty-five. But that early autumn morning, the trees still heavy with bronze leaves, he
welcomed the image for the first time.
A member of the staff had found him somehow among the identical convention rooms
and handed him a stiff square of stationery. It was only a telephone number, but
Shukumar knew it was the hospital. When he returned to Boston it was over. The baby
had been born dead. Shoba was lying on a bed, asleep, in a private room so small there
was barely enough space to stand beside her, in a wing of the hospital they hadn’t been
to on the tour for expectant parents. Her placenta had weakened and she’d had a
cesarean, though not quickly enough. The doctor explained that these things happen.
He smiled in the kindest way it was possible to smile at people known only
professionally. Shoba would be back on her feet in a few weeks. There was nothing to
indicate that she would not be able to have children in the future.
These days Shoba was always gone by the time Shukumar woke up. He would open
his eyes and see the long black hairs she shed on her pillow and think of her, dressed,
sipping her third cup of coffee already, in her office downtown, where she searched for
typographical errors in textbooks and marked them, in a code she had once explained
to him, with an assortment of colored pencils. She would do the same for his
dissertation, she promised, when it was ready. He envied her the specificity of her task,
so unlike the elusive nature of his. He was a mediocre student who had a facility for
absorbing details without curiosity. Until September he had been diligent if not
dedicated, summarizing chapters, outlining arguments on pads of yellow lined paper.
But now he would lie in their bed until he grew bored, gazing at his side of the closet
which Shoba always left partly open, at the row of tweed jackets and corduroy trousers
he would not have to choose from to teach his classes that semester. After the baby
died it was too late to withdraw from his teaching duties. But his adviser had arranged
things so that he had the spring semester to himself. Shukumar was in his sixth year of
graduate school. “That and the summer should give you a good push,” his adviser had
said. “You should be able to wrap things up by next September.”
But nothing was pushing Shukumar. Instead he thought of how he and Shoba had
become experts at avoiding each other in their three-bedroom house, spending as
much time on separate floors as possible. He thought of how he no longer looked
forward to weekends, when she sat for hours on the sofa with her colored pencils and
her files, so that he feared that putting on a record in his own house might be rude. He
thought of how long it had been since she looked into his eyes and smiled, or whispered
his name on those rare occasions they still reached for each other’s bodies before
sleeping.
In the beginning he had believed that it would pass, that he and Shoba would get
through it all somehow. She was only thirty-three. She was strong, on her feet again.
But it wasn’t a consolation. It was often nearly lunchtime when Shukumar would finally
pull himself out of bed and head downstairs to the coffeepot, pouring out the extra bit
Shoba left for him, along with an empty mug, on the countertop.
Shukumar gathered onion skins in his hands and let them drop into the garbage pail, on
top of the ribbons of fat he’d trimmed from the lamb. He ran the water in the sink,
soaking the knife and the cutting board, and rubbed a lemon half along his fingertips to
get rid of the garlic smell, a trick he’d learned from Shoba. It was seven-thirty. Through

the window he saw the sky, like soft black pitch. Uneven banks of snow still lined the
sidewalks, though it was warm enough for people to walk about without hats or gloves.
Nearly three feet had fallen in the last storm, so that for a week people had to walk
single file, in narrow trenches. For a week that was Shukumar’s excuse for not leaving
the house. But now the trenches were widening, and water drained steadily into grates
in the pavement.
“The lamb won’t be done by eight,” Shukumar said. “We may have to eat in the dark.”
“We can light candles,” Shoba suggested. She unclipped her hair, coiled neatly at her
nape during the days, and pried the sneakers from her feet without untying them. “I’m
going to shower before the lights go,” she said, heading for the staircase. “I’llbe down.”
Shukumar moved her satchel and her sneakers to the side of the fridge. She wasn’t
this way before. She used to put her coat on a hanger, her sneakers in the closet, and
she paid bills as soon as they came. But now she treated the house as if it were a hotel.
The fact that the yellow chintz armchair in the living room clashed with the blue-andmaroon Turkish carpet no longer bothered her. On the enclosed porch at the back of the
house, a crisp white bag still sat on the wicker chaise, filled with lace she had once
planned to turn into curtains.
While Shoba showered, Shukumar went into the downstairs bathroom and found a new
toothbrush in its box beneath the sink. The cheap, stiff bristles hurt his gums, and he
spit some blood into the basin. The spare brush was one of many stored in a metal
basket. Shoba had bought them once when they were on sale, in the event that a visitor
decided, at the last minute, to spend the night.
It was typical of her. She was the type to prepare for surprises, good and bad. If she
found a skirt or a purse she liked she bought two. She kept the bonuses from her job in
a separate bank account in her name. It hadn’t bothered him. His own mother had fallen
to pieces when his father died, abandoning the house he grew up in and moving back to
Calcutta, leaving Shukumar to settle it all. He liked that Shoba was different. It
astonished him, her capacity to think ahead. When she used to do the shopping, the
pantry was always stocked with extra bottles of olive and corn oil, depending on
whether they were cooking Italian or Indian. There were countless boxes of pasta in all
shapes and colors, zippered sacks of basmati rice, whole sides of lambs and goats from
the Muslim butchers at Haymarket, chopped up and frozen in countless plastic bags.
Every other Saturday they wound through the maze of stalls Shukumar eventually knew
by heart. He watched in disbelief as she bought more food, trailing behind her with
canvas bags as she pushed through the crowd, arguing under the morning sun with
boys too young to shave but already missing teeth, who twisted up brown paper bags of
artichokes, plums, gingerroot, and yams, and dropped them on their scales, and tossed
them to Shoba one by one. She didn’t mind being jostled, even when she was pregnant.
She was tall, and broad-shouldered, with hips that her obstetrician assured her were
made for childbearing. During the drive back home, as the car curved along the
Charles, they invariably marveled at how much food they’d bought.
It never went to waste. When friends dropped by, Shoba would throw together meals
that appeared to have taken half a day to prepare, from things she had frozen and
bottled, not cheap things in tins but peppers she had marinated herself with rosemary,
and chutneys that she cooked on Sundays, stirring boiling pots of tomatoes and prunes.
Her labeled mason jars lined the shelves of the kitchen, in sealed pyramids, enough,
they’d agreed, to last for their grandchildren to taste. They’d eaten it all by now.
Shukumar had been going through their supplies steadily, preparing meals for the two
of them, measuring out cupfuls of rice, defrosting bags of meat day after day. He
combed through her cookbooks every afternoon, following her penciled instructions to
use two teaspoons of ground coriander seeds instead of one, or red lentils instead of
yellow. Each of the recipes was dated, telling the first time they had eaten the dish

together. April 2, cauliflower with fennel. January 14, chicken with almonds and
sultanas. He had no memory of eating those meals, and yet there they were, recorded
in her neat proofreader’s hand. Shukumar enjoyed cooking now. It was the one thing
that made him feel productive. If it weren’t for him, he knew, Shoba would eat a bowl of
cereal for her dinner.
Tonight, with no lights, they would have to eat together. For months now they’d served
themselves from the stove, and he’d taken his plate into his study, letting the meal grow
cold on his desk before shoving it into his mouth without pause, while Shoba took her
plate to the living room and watched game shows, or proofread files with her arsenal of
colored pencils at hand.
At some point in the evening she visited him. When he heard her approach he would
put away his novel and begin typing sentences. She would rest her hands on his
shoulders and stare with him into the blue glow of the computer screen. “Don’t work too
hard,” she would say after a minute or two, and head off to bed. It was the one time in
the day she sought him out, and yet he’d come to dread it. He knew it was something
she forced herself to do. She would look around the walls of the room, which they had
decorated together last summer with a border of marching ducks and rabbits playing
trumpets and drums. By the end of August there was a cherry crib under the window, a
white changing table with mint-green knobs, and a rocking chair with checkered
cushions. Shukumar had disassembled it all before bringing Shoba back from the
hospital, scraping off the rabbits and ducks with a spatula. For some reason the room
did not haunt him the way it haunted Shoba. In January, when he stopped working at
his carrel in the library, he set up his desk there deliberately, partly because the room
soothed him, and partly because it was a place Shoba avoided.
Shukumar returned to the kitchen and began to open drawers. He tried to locate a
candle among the scissors, the eggbeaters and whisks, the mortar and pestle she’d
bought in a bazaar in Calcutta, and used to pound garlic cloves and cardamom pods,
back when she used to cook. He found a flashlight, but no batteries, and a half-empty
box of birthday candles. Shoba had thrown him a surprise birthday party last May. One
hundred and twenty people had crammed into the house—all the friends and the friends
of friends they now systematically avoided. Bottles of vinho verde had nested in a bed
of ice in the bathtub. Shoba was in her fifth month, drinking ginger ale from a martini
glass. She had made a vanilla cream cake with custard and spun sugar. All night she
kept Shukumar’s long fingers linked with hers as they walked among the guests at the
party.
Since September their only guest had been Shoba’s mother. She came from Arizona
and stayed with them for two months after Shoba returned from the hospital. She
cooked dinner every night, drove herself to the supermarket, washed their clothes, put
them away. She was a religious woman. She set up a small shrine, a framed picture of
a lavender-faced goddess and a plate of marigold petals, on the bedside table in the
guest room, and prayed twice a day for healthy grandchildren in the future. She was
polite to Shukumar without being friendly. She folded his sweaters with an expertise she
had learned from her job in a department store. She replaced a missing button on his
winter coat and knit him a beige and brown scarf, presenting it to him without the least
bit of ceremony, as if he had only dropped it and hadn’t noticed. She never talked to him
about Shoba; once, when he mentioned the baby’s death, she looked up from her
knitting, and said, “But you weren’t even there.”
It struck him as odd that there were no real candles in the house. That Shoba hadn’t
prepared for such an ordinary emergency. He looked now for something to put the
birthday candles in and settled on the soil of a potted ivy that normally sat on the

windowsill over the sink. Even though the plant was inches from the tap, the soil was so
dry that he had to water it first before the candles would stand straight. He pushed aside
the things on the kitchen table, the piles of mail, the unread library books. He
remembered their first meals there, when they were so thrilled to be married, to be living
together in the same house at last, that they would just reach for each other foolishly,
more eager to make love than to eat. He put down two embroidered place mats, a
wedding gift from an uncle in Lucknow, and set out the plates and wineglasses they
usually saved for guests. He put the ivy in the middle, the white-edged, star-shaped
leaves girded by ten little candles. He switched on the digital clock radio and tuned it to
a jazz station.
“What’s all this?” Shoba said when she came downstairs. Her hair was wrapped in a
thick white towel. She undid the towel and draped it over a chair, allowing her hair,
damp and dark, to fall across her back. As she walked absently toward the stove she
took out a few tangles with her fingers. She wore a clean pair of sweatpants, a T-shirt,
an old flannel robe. Her stomach was flat again, her waist narrow before the flare of her
hips, the belt of the robe tied in a floppy knot.
It was nearly eight. Shukumar put the rice on the table and the lentils from the night
before into the microwave oven, punching the numbers on the timer.
“You made rogan josh, ” Shoba observed, looking through the glass lid at the bright
paprika stew.
Shukumar took out a piece of lamb, pinching it quickly between his fingers so as not to
scald himself. He prodded a larger piece with a serving spoon to make sure the meat
slipped easily from the bone. “It’s ready,” he announced.
The microwave had just beeped when the lights went out, and the music disappeared.
“Perfect timing,” Shoba said.
“AllI could find were birthday candles.” He lit up the ivy, keeping the rest of the candles
and a book of matches by his plate.
“It doesn’t matter,” she said, running a finger along the stem of her wineglass. “It looks
lovely.”
In the dimness, he knew how she sat, a bit forward in her chair, ankles crossed against
the lowest rung, left elbow on the table. During his search for the candles, Shukumar
had found a bottle of wine in a crate he had thought was empty. He clamped the bottle
between his knees while he turned in the corkscrew. He worried about spilling, and so
he picked up the glasses and held them close to his lap while he filled them. They
served themselves, stirring the rice with their forks, squinting as they extracted bay
leaves and cloves from the stew. Every few minutes Shukumar lit a few more birthday
candles and drove them into the soil of the pot.
“It’s like India,” Shoba said, watching him tend his makeshift candelabra. “Sometimes
the current disappears for hours at a stretch. I once had to attend an entire rice
ceremony in the dark. The baby just cried and cried. It must have been so hot.”
Their baby had never cried, Shukumar considered. Their baby would never have a rice
ceremony, even though Shoba had already made the guest list, and decided on which
of her three brothers she was going to ask to feed the child its first taste of solid food, at
six months if it was a boy, seven if it was a girl.
“Are you hot?” he asked her. He pushed the blazing ivy pot to the other end of the table,
closer to the piles of books and mail, making it even more difficult for them to see each
other. He was suddenly irritated that he couldn’t go upstairs and sit in front of the
computer.
“No. It’s delicious,” she said, tapping her plate with her fork. “It really is.”
He refilled the wine in her glass. She thanked him.
They weren’t like this before. Now he had to struggle to say something that interested
her, something that made her look up from her plate, or from her proofreading files.

Eventually he gave up trying to amuse her. He learned not to mind the silences.
“I remember during power failures at my grandmother’s house, we all had to say
something,” Shoba continued. He could barely see her face, but from her tone he knew
her eyes were narrowed, as if trying to focus on a distant object. It was a habit of hers.
“Like what?”
“I don’t know. A little poem. A joke. A fact about the world. For some reason my
relatives always wanted me to tell them the names of my friends in America. I don’t
know why the information was so interesting to them. The last time I saw my aunt she
asked after four girls I went to elementary school with in Tucson. I barely remember
them now.”
Shukumar hadn’t spent as much time in India as Shoba had. His parents, who settled in
New Hampshire, used to go back without him. The first time he’d gone as an infant he’d
nearly died of amoebic dysentery. His father, a nervous type, was afraid to take him
again, in case something were to happen, and left him with his aunt and uncle in
Concord. As a teenager he preferred sailing camp or scooping ice cream during the
summers to going to Calcutta. It wasn’t until after his father died, in his last year of
college, that the country began to interest him, and he studied its history from course
books as if it were any other subject. He wished now that he had his own childhood
story of India.
“Let’s do that,” she said suddenly.
“Do what?”
“Say something to each other in the dark.”
“Like what? I don’t know any jokes.”
“No, no jokes.” She thought for a minute. “How about telling each other something
we’ve never told before.”
“I used to play this game in high school,” Shukumar recalled. “When I got drunk.”
“You’re thinking of truth or dare. This is different. Okay, I’llstart.” She took a sip of wine.
“The first time I was alone in your apartment, I looked in your address book to see if
you’d written me in. I think we’d known each other two weeks.”
“Where was I?”
“You went to answer the telephone in the other room. It was your mother, and I figured it
would be a long call. I wanted to know if you’d promoted me from the margins of your
newspaper.”
“Had I?”
“No. But I didn’t give up on you. Now it’s your turn.”
He couldn’t think of anything, but Shoba was waiting for him to speak. She hadn’t
appeared so determined in months. What was there left to say to her? He thought back
to their first meeting, four years earlier at a lecture hall in Cambridge, where a group of
Bengali poets were giving a recital. They’d ended up side by side, on folding wooden
chairs. Shukumar was soon bored; he was unable to decipher the literary diction, and
couldn’t join the rest of the audience as they sighed and nodded solemnly after certain
phrases. Peering at the newspaper folded in his lap, he studied the temperatures of
cities around the world. Ninety-one degrees in Singapore yesterday, fifty-one in
Stockholm. When he turned his head to the left, he saw a woman next to him making a
grocery list on the back of a folder, and was startled to find that she was beautiful.
“Okay,” he said, remembering. “The first time we went out to dinner, to the Portuguese
place, I forgot to tip the waiter. I went back the next morning, found out his name, left
money with the manager.”
“You went all the way back to Somerville just to tip a waiter?”
“I took a cab.”
“Why did you forget to tip the waiter?”
The birthday candles had burned out, but he pictured her face clearly in the dark, the

wide tilting eyes, the full grape-toned lips, the fall at age two from her high chair still
visible as a comma on her chin. Each day, Shukumar noticed, her beauty, which had
once overwhelmed him, seemed to fade. The cosmetics that had seemed superfluous
were necessary now, not to improve her but to define her somehow.
“By the end of the meal I had a funny feeling that I might marry you,” he said, admitting
it to himself as well as to her for the first time. “It must have distracted me.”
The next night Shoba came home earlier than usual. There was lamb left over from the
evening before, and Shukumar heated it up so that they were able to eat by seven. He’d
gone out that day, through the melting snow, and bought a packet of taper candles from
the corner store, and batteries to fit the flashlight. He had the candles ready on the
countertop, standing in brass holders shaped like lotuses, but they ate under the glow of
the copper-shaded ceiling lamp that hung over the table.
When they had finished eating, Shukumar was surprised to see that Shoba was
stacking her plate on top of his, and then carrying them over to the sink. He had
assumed she would retreat to the living room, behind her barricade of files.
“Don’t worry about the dishes,” he said, taking them from her hands.
“It seems silly not to,” she replied, pouring a drop of detergent onto a sponge. “It’s
nearly eight o’clock.”
His heart quickened. All day Shukumar had looked forward to the lights going out. He
thought about what Shoba had said the night before, about looking in his address book.
It felt good to remember her as she was then, how bold yet nervous she’d been when
they first met, how hopeful. They stood side by side at the sink, their reflections fitting
together in the frame of the window. It made him shy, the way he felt the first time they
stood together in a mirror. He couldn’t recall the last time they’d been photographed.
They had stopped attending parties, went nowhere together. The film in his camera still
contained pictures of Shoba, in the yard, when she was pregnant.
After finishing the dishes, they leaned against the counter, drying their hands on either
end of a towel. At eight o’clock the house went black. Shukumar lit the wicks of the
candles, impressed by their long, steady flames.
“Let’s sit outside,” Shoba said. “I think it’s warm still.”
They each took a candle and sat down on the steps. It seemed strange to be sitting
outside with patches of snow still on the ground. But everyone was out of their houses
tonight, the air fresh enough to make people restless. Screen doors opened and closed.
A small parade of neighbors passed by with flashlights.
“We’re going to the bookstore to browse,” a silver-haired man called out. He was
walking with his wife, a thin woman in a windbreaker, and holding a dog on a leash.
They were the Bradfords, and they had tucked a sympathy card into Shoba and
Shukumar’s mailbox back in September. “I hear they’ve got their power.”
“They’d better,” Shukumar said. “Or you’ll be browsing in the dark.”
The woman laughed, slipping her arm through the crook of her husband’s elbow.
“Want to join us?”
“No thanks,” Shoba and Shukumar called out together. It surprised Shukumar that his
words matched hers.
He wondered what Shoba would tell him in the dark. The worst possibilities had already
run through his head. That she’d had an affair. That she didn’t respect him for being
thirty-five and still a student. That she blamed him for being in Baltimore the way her
mother did. But he knew those things weren’t true. She’d been faithful, as had he. She
believed in him. It was she who had insisted he go to Baltimore. What didn’t they know
about each other? He knew she curled her fingers tightly when she slept, that her body
twitched during bad dreams. He knew it was honeydew she favored over cantaloupe.

He knew that when they returned from the hospital the first thing she did when she
walked into the house was pick out objects of theirs and toss them into a pile in the
hallway: books from the shelves, plants from the windowsills, paintings from walls,
photos from tables, pots and pans that hung from the hooks over the stove. Shukumar
had stepped out of her way, watching as she moved methodically from room to room.
When she was satisfied, she stood there staring at the pile she’d made, her lips drawn
back in such distaste that Shukumar had thought she would spit. Then she’d started to
cry.
He began to feel cold as he sat there on the steps. He felt that he needed her to talk
first, in order to reciprocate.
“That time when your mother came to visit us,” she said finally. “When I said one night
that I had to stay late at work, I went out with Gillian and had a martini.”
He looked at her profile, the slender nose, the slightly masculine set of her jaw. He
remembered that night well; eating with his mother, tired from teaching two classes
back to back, wishing Shoba were there to say more of the right things because he
came up with only the wrong ones. It had been twelve years since his father had died,
and his mother had come to spend two weeks with him and Shoba, so they could honor
his father’s memory together. Each night his mother cooked something his father had
liked, but she was too upset to eat the dishes herself, and her eyes would well up as
Shoba stroked her hand. “It’s so touching,” Shoba had said to him at the time. Now he
pictured Shoba with Gillian, in a bar with striped velvet sofas, the one they used to go to
after the movies, making sure she got her extra olive, asking Gillian for a cigarette. He
imagined her complaining, and Gillian sympathizing about visits from in-laws. It was
Gillian who had driven Shoba to the hospital.
“Your turn,” she said, stopping his thoughts.
At the end of their street Shukumar heard sounds of a drill and the electricians shouting
over it. He looked at the darkened facades of the houses lining the street. Candles
glowed in the windows of one. In spite of the warmth, smoke rose from the chimney.
“I cheated on my Oriental Civilization exam in college,” he said. “It was my last
semester, my last set of exams. My father had died a few months before. I could see
the blue book of the guy next to me. He was an American guy, a maniac. He knew Urdu
and Sanskrit. I couldn’t remember if the verse we had to identify was an example of a
ghazal or not. I looked at his answer and copied it down.”
It had happened over fifteen years ago. He felt relief now, having told her.
She turned to him, looking not at his face, but at his shoes—old moccasins he wore as if
they were slippers, the leather at the back permanently flattened. He wondered if it
bothered her, what he’d said. She took his hand and pressed it. “You didn’t have to tell
me why you did it,” she said, moving closer to him.
They sat together until nine o’clock, when the lights came on. They heard some people
across the street clapping from their porch, and televisions being turned on. The
Bradfords walked back down the street, eating ice-cream cones and waving. Shoba and
Shukumar waved back. Then they stood up, his hand still in hers, and went inside.
Somehow, without saying anything, it had turned into this. Into an exchange of
confessions — the little ways they’d hurt or disappointed each other, and themselves.
The following day Shukumar thought for hours about what to say to her. He was torn
between admitting that he once ripped out a photo of a woman in one of the fashion
magazines she used to subscribe to and carried it in his books for a week, or saying
that he really hadn’t lost the sweater-vest she bought him for their third wedding
anniversary but had exchanged it for cash at Filene’s, and that he had gotten drunk
alone in the middle of the day at a hotel bar. For their first anniversary, Shoba had

cooked a ten-course dinner just for him. The vest depressed him. “My wife gave me a
sweater-vest for our anniversary,” he complained to the bartender, his head heavy with
cognac. “What do you expect?” the bartender had replied. “You’re married.”
As for the picture of the woman, he didn’t know why he’d ripped it out. She wasn’t as
pretty as Shoba. She wore a white sequined dress, and had a sullen face and lean,
mannish legs. Her bare arms were raised, her fists around her head, as if she were
about to punch herself in the ears. It was an advertisement for stockings. Shoba had
been pregnant at the time, her stomach suddenly immense, to the point where
Shukumar no longer wanted to touch her. The first time he saw the picture he was lying
in bed next to her, watching her as she read. When he noticed the magazine in the
recycling pile he found the woman and tore out the page as carefully as he could. For
about a week he allowed himself a glimpse each day. He felt an intense desire for the
woman, but it was a desire that turned to disgust after a minute or two. It was the
closest he’d come to infidelity.
He told Shoba about the sweater on the third night, the picture on the fourth. She said
nothing as he spoke, expressed no protest or reproach. She simply listened, and then
she took his hand, pressing it as she had before. On the third night, she told him that
once after a lecture they’d attended, she let him speak to the chairman of his
department without telling him that he had a dab of pâté on his chin. She’d been irritated
with him for some reason, and so she’d let him go on and on, about securing his
fellowship for the following semester, without putting a finger to her own chin as a
signal. The fourth night, she said that she never liked the one poem he’d ever published
in his life, in a literary magazine in Utah. He’d written the poem after meeting Shoba.
She added that she found the poem sentimental.
Something happened when the house was dark. They were able to talk to each other
again. The third night after supper they’d sat together on the sofa, and once it was dark
he began kissing her awkwardly on her forehead and her face, and though it was dark
he closed his eyes, and knew that she did, too. The fourth night they walked carefully
upstairs, to bed, feeling together for the final step with their feet before the landing, and
making love with a desperation they had forgotten. She wept without sound, and
whispered his name, and traced his eyebrows with her finger in the dark. As he made
love to her he wondered what he would say to her the next night, and what she would
say, the thought of it exciting him. “Hold me,” he said, “hold me in your arms.” By the
time the lights came back on downstairs, they’d fallen asleep.
The morning of the fifth night Shukumar found another notice from the electric
company in the mailbox. The line had been repaired ahead of schedule, it said. He was
disappointed. He had planned on making shrimp malai for Shoba, but when he arrived
at the store he didn’t feel like cooking anymore. It wasn’t the same, he thought, knowing
that the lights wouldn’t go out. In the store the shrimp looked gray and thin. The coconut
milk tin was dusty and overpriced. Still, he bought them, along with a beeswax candle
and two bottles of wine.
She came home at seven-thirty. “I suppose this is the end of our game,” he said when
he saw her reading the notice.
She looked at him. “You can still light candles if you want.” She hadn’t been to the gym
tonight. She wore a suit beneath the raincoat. Her makeup had been retouched
recently.
When she went upstairs to change, Shukumar poured himself some wine and put on a
record, a Thelonius Monk album he knew she liked.
When she came downstairs they ate together. She didn’t thank him or compliment him.
They simply ate in a darkened room, in the glow of a beeswax candle. They had

survived a difficult time. They finished off the shrimp. They finished off the first bottle of
wine and moved on to the second. They sat together until the candle had nearly burned
away. She shifted in her chair, and Shukumar thought that she was about to say
something. But instead she blew out the candle, stood up, turned on the light switch,
and sat down again.
“Shouldn’t we keep the lights off?” Shukumar asked.
She set her plate aside and clasped her hands on the table. “I want you to see my face
when I tell you this,” she said gently.
His heart began to pound. The day she told him she was pregnant, she had used the
very same words, saying them in the same gentle way, turning off the basketball game
he’d been watching on television. He hadn’t been prepared then. Now he was.
Only he didn’t want her to be pregnant again. He didn’t want to have to pretend to be
happy.
“I’ve been looking for an apartment and I’ve found one,” she said, narrowing her eyes
on something, it seemed, behind his left shoulder. It was nobody’s fault, she continued.
They’d been through enough. She needed some time alone. She had money saved up
for a security deposit. The apartment was on Beacon Hill, so she could walk to work.
She had signed the lease that night before coming home.
She wouldn’t look at him, but he stared at her. It was obvious that she’d rehearsed the
lines. All this time she’d been looking for an apartment, testing the water pressure,
asking a Realtor if heat and hot water were included in the rent. It sickened Shukumar,
knowing that she had spent these past evenings preparing for a life without him. He was
relieved and yet he was sickened. This was what she’d been trying to tell him for the
past four evenings. This was the point of her game.
Now it was his turn to speak. There was something he’d sworn he would never tell her,
and for six months he had done his best to block it from his mind. Before the ultrasound
she had asked the doctor not to tell her the sex of their child, and Shukumar had
agreed. She had wanted it to be a surprise.
Later, those few times they talked about what had happened, she said at least they’d
been spared that knowledge. In a way she almost took pride in her decision, for it
enabled her to seek refuge in a mystery. He knew that she assumed it was a mystery
for him, too. He’d arrived too late from Baltimore—when it was all over and she was
lying on the hospital bed. But he hadn’t. He’d arrived early enough to see their baby,
and to hold him before they cremated him. At first he had recoiled at the suggestion, but
the doctor said holding the baby might help him with the process of grieving. Shoba was
asleep. The baby had been cleaned off, his bulbous lids shut tight to the world.
“Our baby was a boy,” he said. “His skin was more red than brown. He had black hair
on his head. He weighed almost five pounds. His fingers were curled shut, just like
yours in the night.”
Shoba looked at him now, her face contorted with sorrow. He had cheated on a college
exam, ripped a picture of a woman out of a magazine. He had returned a sweater and
got drunk in the middle of the day instead. These were the things he had told her. He
had held his son, who had known life only within her, against his chest in a darkened
room in an unknown wing of the hospital. He had held him until a nurse knocked and
took him away, and he promised himself that day that he would never tell Shoba,
because he still loved her then, and it was the one thing in her life that she had wanted
to be a surprise.
Shukumar stood up and stacked his plate on top of hers. He carried the plates to the
sink, but instead of running the tap he looked out the window. Outside the evening was
still warm, and the Bradfords were walking arm in arm. As he watched the couple the
room went dark, and he spun around. Shoba had turned the lights off. She came back
to the table and sat down, and after a moment Shukumar joined her. They wept

together, for the things they now knew.

When Mr.Pirzada Came to Dine
INTHEAUTUMNOF 1971 a man used to come to our house, bearing confections in his
pocket and hopes of ascertaining the life or death of his family. His name was Mr.
Pirzada, and he came from Dacca, now the capital of Bangladesh, but then a part of
Pakistan. That year Pakistan was engaged in civil war. The eastern frontier, where
Dacca was located, was fighting for autonomy from the ruling regime in the west. In
March, Dacca had been invaded, torched, and shelled by the Pakistani army. Teachers
were dragged onto streets and shot, women dragged into barracks and raped. By the
end of the summer, three hundred thousand people were said to have died. In Dacca
Mr. Pirzada had a three-story home, a lectureship in botany at the university, a wife of
twenty years, and seven daughters between the ages of six and sixteen whose names
all began with the letter A. “Their mother’s idea,” he explained one day, producing from
his wallet a black-and-white picture of seven girls at a picnic, their braids tied with
ribbons, sitting cross-legged in a row, eating chicken curry off of banana leaves. “How
am I to distinguish? Ayesha, Amira, Amina, Aziza, you see the difficulty.”
Each week Mr. Pirzada wrote letters to his wife, and sent comic books to each of his
seven daughters, but the postal system, along with most everything else in Dacca, had
collapsed, and he had not heard word of them in over six months. Mr. Pirzada,
meanwhile, was in America for the year, for he had been awarded a grant from the
government of Pakistan to study the foliage of New England. In spring and summer he
had gathered data in Vermont and Maine, and in autumn he moved to a university north
of Boston, where we lived, to write a short book about his discoveries. The grant was a
great honor, but when converted into dollars it was not generous. As a result, Mr.
Pirzada lived in a room in a graduate dormitory, and did not own a proper stove or a
television set. And so he came to our house to eat dinner and watch the evening news.
At first I knew nothing of the reason for his visits. I was ten years old, and was not
surprised that my parents, who were from India, and had a number of Indian
acquaintances at the university, should ask Mr. Pirzada to share our meals. It was a
small campus, with narrow brick walkways and white pillared buildings, located on the
fringes of what seemed to be an even smaller town. The supermarket did not carry
mustard oil, doctors did not make house calls, neighbors never dropped by without an
invitation, and of these things, every so often, my parents complained. In search of
compatriots, they used to trail their fingers, at the start of each new semester, through
the columns of the university directory, circling surnames familiar to their part of the
world. It was in this manner that they discovered Mr. Pirzada, and phoned him, and
invited him to our home.
I have no memory of his first visit, or of his second or his third, but by the end of
September I had grown so accustomed to Mr. Pirzada’s presence in our living room that
one evening, as I was dropping ice cubes into the water pitcher, I asked my mother to
hand me a fourth glass from a cupboard still out of my reach. She was busy at the
stove, presiding over a skillet of fried spinach with radishes, and could not hear me
because of the drone of the exhaust fan and the fierce scrapes of her spatula. I turned
to my father, who was leaning against the refrigerator, eating spiced cashews from a
cupped fist.
“What is it, Lilia?”
“A glass for the Indian man.”
“Mr. Pirzada won’t be coming today. More importantly, Mr. Pirzada is no longer
considered Indian,” my father announced, brushing salt from the cashews out of his trim
black beard. “Not since Partition. Our country was divided. 1947.”
When I said I thought that was the date of India’s independence from Britain, my father

said, “That too. One moment we were free and then we were sliced up,” he explained,
drawing an X with his finger on the countertop, “like a pie. Hindus here, Muslims there.
Dacca no longer belongs to us.” He told me that during Partition Hindus and Muslims
had set fire to each other’s homes. For many, the idea of eating in the other’s company
was still unthinkable.
It made no sense to me. Mr. Pirzada and my parents spoke the same language,
laughed at the same jokes, looked more or less the same. They ate pickled mangoes
with their meals, ate rice every night for supper with their hands. Like my parents, Mr.
Pirzada took off his shoes before entering a room, chewed fennel seeds after meals as
a digestive, drank no alcohol, for dessert dipped austere biscuits into successive cups
of tea. Nevertheless my father insisted that I understand the difference, and he led me
to a map of the world taped to the wall over his desk. He seemed concerned that Mr.
Pirzada might take offense if I accidentally referred to him as an Indian, though I could
not really imagine Mr. Pirzada being offended by much of anything. “Mr. Pirzada is
Bengali, but he is a Muslim,” my father informed me. “Therefore he lives in East
Pakistan, not India.” His finger trailed across the Atlantic, through Europe, the
Mediterranean, the Middle East, and finally to the sprawling orange diamond that my
mother once told me resembled a woman wearing a sari with her left arm extended.
Various cities had been circled with lines drawn between them to indicate my parents’
travels, and the place of their birth, Calcutta, was signified by a small silver star. I had
been there only once and had no memory of the trip. “As you see, Lilia, it is a different
country, a different color,” my father said. Pakistan was yellow, not orange. I noticed
that there were two distinct parts to it, one much larger than the other, separated by an
expanse of Indian territory; it was as if California and Connecticut constituted a nation
apart from the U.S.
My father rapped his knuckles on top of my head. “You are, of course, aware of the
current situation? Aware of East Pakistan’s fight for sovereignty?”
I nodded, unaware of the situation.
We returned to the kitchen, where my mother was draining a pot of boiled rice into a
colander. My father opened up the can on the counter and eyed me sharply over the
frames of his glasses as he ate some more cashews. “What exactly do they teach you
at school? Do you study history? Geography?”
“Liliahas plenty to learn at school,” my mother said. “We live here now, she was born
here.” She seemed genuinely proud of the fact, as if it were a reflection of my character.
In her estimation, I knew, I was assured a safe life, an easy life, a fine education, every
opportunity. I would never have to eat rationed food, or obey curfews, or watch riots
from my rooftop, or hide neighbors in water tanks to prevent them from being shot, as
she and my father had. “Imagine having to place her in a decent school. Imagine her
having to read during power failures by the light of kerosene lamps. Imagine the
pressures, the tutors, the constant exams.” She ran a hand through her hair, bobbed to
a suitable length for her part-time job as a bank teller. “How can you possibly expect her
to know about Partition? Put those nuts away.”
“But what does she learn about the world?” My father rattled the cashew can in his
hand. “What is she learning?”
We learned American history, of course, and American geography. That year, and every
year, it seemed, we began by studying the Revolutionary War. We were taken in school
buses on field trips to visit Plymouth Rock, and to walk the Freedom Trail, and to climb
to the top of the Bunker Hill Monument. We made dioramas out of colored construction
paper depicting George Washington crossing the choppy waters of the Delaware River,
and we made puppets of King George wearing white tights and a black bow in his hair.
During tests we were given blank maps of the thirteen colonies, and asked to fillin
names, dates, capitals. I could do it with my eyes closed.

The next evening Mr. Pirzada arrived, as usual, at six o’clock. Though they were no
longer strangers, upon first greeting each other, he and my father maintained the habit
of shaking hands.
“Come in, sir. Lilia, Mr. Pirzada’s coat, please.”
He stepped into the foyer, impeccably suited and scarved, with a silk tie knotted at his
collar. Each evening he appeared in ensembles of plums, olives, and chocolate browns.
He was a compact man, and though his feet were perpetually splayed, and his belly
slightly wide, he nevertheless maintained an efficient posture, as if balancing in either
hand two suitcases of equal weight. His ears were insulated by tufts of graying hair that
seemed to block out the unpleasant traffic of life. He had thickly lashed eyes shaded
with a trace of camphor, a generous mustache that turned up playfully at the ends, and
a mole shaped like a flattened raisin in the very center of his left cheek. On his head he
wore a black fez made from the wool of Persian lambs, secured by bobby pins, without
which I was never to see him. Though my father always offered to fetch him in our car,
Mr. Pirzada preferred to walk from his dormitory to our neighborhood, a distance of
about twenty minutes on foot, studying trees and shrubs on his way, and when he
entered our house his knuckles were pink with the effects of crisp autumn air.
“Another refugee, I am afraid, on Indian territory.”
“They are estimating nine million at the last count,” my father said.
Mr. Pirzada handed me his coat, for it was my job to hang it on the rack at the bottom of
the stairs. It was made of finely checkered gray-and-blue wool, with a striped lining and
horn buttons, and carried in its weave the faint smell of limes. There were no
recognizable tags inside, only a hand-stitched label with the phrase “Z. Sayeed, Suitors”
embroidered on it in cursive with glossy black thread. On certain days a birch or maple
leaf was tucked into a pocket. He unlaced his shoes and lined them against the
baseboard; a golden paste clung to the toes and heels, the result of walking through our
damp, unraked lawn. Relieved of his trappings, he grazed my throat with his short,
restless fingers, the way a person feels for solidity behind a wall before driving in a nail.
Then he followed my father to the living room, where the television was tuned to the
local news. As soon as they were seated my mother appeared from the kitchen with a
plate of mincemeat kebabs with coriander chutney. Mr. Pirzada popped one into his
mouth.
“One can only hope,” he said, reaching for another, “that Dacca’s refugees are as
heartily fed. Which reminds me.” He reached into his suit pocket and gave me a small
plastic egg filled with cinnamon hearts. “For the lady of the house,” he said with an
almost imperceptible splay-footed bow.
“Really, Mr. Pirzada,” my mother protested. “Night after night. You spoil her.”
“I only spoil children who are incapable of spoiling.”
It was an awkward moment for me, one which I awaited in part with dread, in part with
delight. I was charmed by the presence of Mr. Pirzada’s rotund elegance, and flattered
by the faint theatricality of his attentions, yet unsettled by the superb ease of his
gestures, which made me feel, for an instant, like a stranger in my own home. It had
become our ritual, and for several weeks, before we grew more comfortable with one
another, it was the only time he spoke to me directly. I had no response, offered no
comment, betrayed no visible reaction to the steady stream of honey-filled lozenges, the
raspberry truffles, the slender rolls of sour pastilles. I could not even thank him, for
once, when I did, for an especially spectacular peppermint lollipop wrapped in a spray of
purple cellophane, he had demanded, “What is this thank-you? The lady at the bank
thanks me, the cashier at the shop thanks me, the librarian thanks me when I return an
overdue book, the overseas operator thanks me as she tries to connect me to Dacca
and fails. If I am buried in this country I will be thanked, no doubt, at my funeral.”

It was inappropriate, in my opinion, to consume the candy Mr. Pirzada gave me in a
casual manner. I coveted each evening’s treasure as I would a jewel, or a coin from a
buried kingdom, and I would place it in a small keepsake box made of carved
sandalwood beside my bed, in which, long ago in India, my father’s mother used to
store the ground areca nuts she ate after her morning bath. It was my only memento of
a grandmother I had never known, and until Mr. Pirzada came to our lives I could find
nothing to put inside it. Every so often before brushing my teeth and laying out my
clothes for school the next day, I opened the lid of the box and ate one of his treats.
That night, like every night, we did not eat at the dining table, because it did not
provide an unobstructed view of the television set. Instead we huddled around the
coffee table, without conversing, our plates perched on our knees. From the kitchen my
mother brought forth the succession of dishes: lentils with fried onions, green beans
with coconut, fish cooked with raisins in a yogurt sauce. I followed with the water
glasses, and the plate of lemon wedges, and the chili peppers, purchased on monthly
trips to Chinatown and stored by the pound in the freezer, which they liked to snap open
and crush into their food.
Before eating Mr. Pirzada always did a curious thing. He took out a plain silver watch
without a band, which he kept in his breast pocket, held it briefly to one of his tufted
ears, and wound it with three swift flicks of his thumb and forefinger. Unlike the watch
on his wrist, the pocket watch, he had explained to me, was set to the local time in
Dacca, eleven hours ahead. For the duration of the meal the watch rested on his folded
paper napkin on the coffee table. He never seemed to consult it.
Now that I had learned Mr. Pirzada was not an Indian, I began to study him with extra
care, to try to figure out what made him different. I decided that the pocket watch was
one of those things. When I saw it that night, as he wound it and arranged it on the
coffee table, an uneasiness possessed me; life, I realized, was being lived in Dacca
first. I imagined Mr. Pirzada’s daughters rising from sleep, tying ribbons in their hair,
anticipating breakfast, preparing for school. Our meals, our actions, were only a shadow
of what had already happened there, a lagging ghost of where Mr. Pirzada really
belonged.
At six-thirty, which was when the national news began, my father raised the volume
and adjusted the antennas. Usually I occupied myself with a book, but that night my
father insisted that I pay attention. On the screen I saw tanks rolling through dusty
streets, and fallen buildings, and forests of unfamiliar trees into which East Pakistani
refugees had fled, seeking safety over the Indian border. I saw boats with fan-shaped
sails floating on wide coffee-colored rivers, a barricaded university, newspaper offices
burnt to the ground. I turned to look at Mr. Pirzada; the images flashed in miniature
across his eyes. As he watched he had an immovable expression on his face,
composed but alert, as if someone were giving him directions to an unknown
destination.
During the commercial my mother went to the kitchen to get more rice, and my father
and Mr. Pirzada deplored the policies of a general named Yahyah Khan. They
discussed intrigues I did not know, a catastrophe I could not comprehend. “See,
children your age, what they do to survive,” my father said as he served me another
piece of fish. But I could no longer eat. I could only steal glances at Mr. Pirzada, sitting
beside me in his olive green jacket, calmly creating a well in his rice to make room for a
second helping of lentils. He was not my notion of a man burdened by such grave
concerns. I wondered if the reason he was always so smartly dressed was in
preparation to endure with dignity whatever news assailed him, perhaps even to attend
a funeral at a moment’s notice. I wondered, too, what would happen if suddenly his
seven daughters were to appear on television, smiling and waving and blowing kisses to
Mr. Pirzada from a balcony. I imagined how relieved he would be. But this never

happened.
That night when I placed the plastic egg filled with cinnamon hearts in the box beside
my bed, I did not feel the ceremonious satisfaction I normally did. I tried not to think
about Mr. Pirzada, in his lime-scented overcoat, connected to the unruly, sweltering
world we had viewed a few hours ago in our bright, carpeted living room. And yet for
several moments that was all I could think about. My stomach tightened as I worried
whether his wife and seven daughters were now members of the drifting, clamoring
crowd that had flashed at intervals on the screen. In an effort to banish the image I
looked around my room, at the yellow canopied bed with matching flounced curtains, at
framed class pictures mounted on white and violet papered walls, at the penciled
inscriptions by the closet door where my father recorded my height on each of my
birthdays. But the more I tried to distract myself, the more I began to convince myself
that Mr. Pirzada’s family was in all likelihood dead. Eventually I took a square of white
chocolate out of the box, and unwrapped it, and then I did something I had never done
before. I put the chocolate in my mouth, letting it soften until the last possible moment,
and then as I chewed it slowly, I prayed that Mr. Pirzada’s family was safe and sound. I
had never prayed for anything before, had never been taught or told to, but I decided,
given the circumstances, that it was something I should do. That night when I went to
the bathroom I only pretended to brush my teeth, for I feared that I would somehow
rinse the prayer out as well. I wet the brush and rearranged the tube of paste to prevent
my parents from asking any questions, and fell asleep with sugar on my tongue.
No one at school talked about the war followed so faithfully in my living room. We
continued to study the American Revolution, and learned about the injustices of taxation
without representation, and memorized passages from the Declaration of
Independence. During recess the boys would divide in two groups, chasing each other
wildly around the swings and seesaws, Redcoats against the colonies. In the classroom
our teacher, Mrs. Kenyon, pointed frequently to a map that emerged like a movie screen
from the top of the chalkboard, charting the route of the Mayflower, or showing us the
location of the Liberty Bell. Each week two members of the class gave a report on a
particular aspect of the Revolution, and so one day I was sent to the school library with
my friend Dora to learn about the surrender at Yorktown. Mrs. Kenyon handed us a slip
of paper with the names of three books to look up in the card catalogue. We found them
right away, and sat down at a low round table to read and take notes. But I could not
concentrate. I returned to the blond-wood shelves, to a section I had noticed labeled
“Asia.” I saw books about China, India, Indonesia, Korea. Eventually I found a book
titled Pakistan: A Land and Its People. I sat on a footstool and opened the book. The
laminated jacket crackled in my grip. I began turning the pages, filled with photos of
rivers and rice fields and men in military uniforms. There was a chapter about Dacca,
and I began to read about its rainfall, and its jute production. I was studying a population
chart when Dora appeared in the aisle.
“What are you doing back here? Mrs. Kenyon’s in the library. She came to check up on
us.”
I slammed the book shut, too loudly. Mrs. Kenyon emerged, the aroma of her perfume
filling up the tiny aisle, and lifted the book by the tip of its spine as if it were a hair
clinging to my sweater. She glanced at the cover, then at me.
“Is this book a part of your report, Lilia?”
“No, Mrs. Kenyon.”
“Then I see no reason to consult it,” she said, replacing it in the slim gap on the shelf.
“Do you?”
***

As weeks passed it grew more and more rare to see any footage from Dacca on the
news. The report came after the first set of commercials, sometimes the second. The
press had been censored, removed, restricted, rerouted. Some days, many days, only a
death toll was announced, prefaced by a reiteration of the general situation. More poets
were executed, more villages set ablaze. In spite of it all, night after night, my parents
and Mr. Pirzada enjoyed long, leisurely meals. After the television was shut off, and the
dishes washed and dried, they joked, and told stories, and dipped biscuits in their tea.
When they tired of discussing political matters they discussed, instead, the progress of
Mr. Pirzada’s book about the deciduous trees of New England, and my father’s
nomination for tenure, and the peculiar eating habits of my mother’s American
coworkers at the bank. Eventually I was sent upstairs to do my homework, but through
the carpet I heard them as they drank more tea, and listened to cassettes of Kishore
Kumar, and played Scrabble on the coffee table, laughing and arguing long into the
night about the spellings of English words. I wanted to join them, wanted, above all, to
console Mr. Pirzada somehow. But apart from eating a piece of candy for the sake of
his family and praying for their safety, there was nothing I could do. They played
Scrabble until the eleven o’clock news, and then, sometime around midnight, Mr.
Pirzada walked back to his dormitory. For this reason I never saw him leave, but each
night as I drifted off to sleep I would hear them, anticipating the birth of a nation on the
other side of the world.
One day in October Mr. Pirzada asked upon arrival, “What are these large orange
vegetables on people’s doorsteps? A type of squash?”
“Pumpkins,” my mother replied. “Lilia,remind me to pick one up at the supermarket.”
“And the purpose? It indicates what?”
“You make a jack-o’-lantern,” I said, grinning ferociously. “Like this. To scare people
away.”
“I see,” Mr. Pirzada said, grinning back. “Very useful.”
The next day my mother bought a ten-pound pumpkin, fat and round, and placed it on
the dining table. Before supper, while my father and Mr. Pirzada were watching the local
news, she told me to decorate it with markers, but I wanted to carve it properly like
others I had noticed in the neighborhood.
“Yes, let’s carve it,” Mr. Pirzada agreed, and rose from the sofa. “Hang the news
tonight.” Asking no questions, he walked into the kitchen, opened a drawer, and
returned, bearing a long serrated knife. He glanced at me for approval. “Shall I?”
I nodded. For the first time we all gathered around the dining table, my mother, my
father, Mr. Pirzada, and I. While the television aired unattended we covered the tabletop
with newspapers. Mr. Pirzada draped his jacket over the chair behind him, removed a
pair of opal cuff links, and rolled up the starched sleeves of his shirt.
“First go around the top, like this,” I instructed, demonstrating with my index finger.
He made an initial incision and drew the knife around. When he had come full circle he
lifted the cap by the stem; it loosened effortlessly, and Mr. Pirzada leaned over the
pumpkin for a moment to inspect and inhale its contents. My mother gave him a long
metal spoon with which he gutted the interior until the last bits of string and seeds were
gone. My father, meanwhile, separated the seeds from the pulp and set them out to dry
on a cookie sheet, so that we could roast them later on. I drew two triangles against the
ridged surface for the eyes, which Mr. Pirzada dutifully carved, and crescents for
eyebrows, and another triangle for the nose. The mouth was all that remained, and the
teeth posed a challenge. I hesitated.
“Smile or frown?” I asked.
“You choose,” Mr. Pirzada said.

As a compromise I drew a kind of grimace, straight across, neither mournful nor friendly.
Mr. Pirzada began carving, without the least bit of intimidation, as if he had been carving
jack-o’-lanterns his whole life. He had nearly finished when the national news began.
The reporter mentioned Dacca, and we all turned to listen: An Indian official announced
that unless the world helped to relieve the burden of East Pakistani refugees, India
would have to go to war against Pakistan. The reporter’s face dripped with sweat as he
relayed the information. He did not wear a tie or a jacket, dressed instead as if he
himself were about to take part in the battle. He shielded his scorched face as he
hollered things to the cameraman. The knife slipped from Mr. Pirzada’s hand and made
a gash dipping toward the base of the pumpkin.
“Please forgive me.” He raised a hand to one side of his face, as if someone had
slapped him there. “I am—it is terrible. I will buy another. We will try again.”
“Not at all, not at all,” my father said. He took the knife from Mr. Pirzada, and carved
around the gash, evening it out, dispensing altogether with the teeth I had drawn. What
resulted was a disproportionately large hole the size of a lemon, so that our jack-o’lantern wore an expression of placid astonishment, the eyebrows no longer fierce,
floating in frozen surprise above a vacant, geometric gaze.
For Halloween I was a witch. Dora, my trick-or-treating partner, was a witch too. We
wore black capes fashioned from dyed pillowcases and conical hats with wide
cardboard brims. We shaded our faces green with a broken eye shadow that belonged
to Dora’s mother, and my mother gave us two burlap sacks that had once contained
basmati rice, for collecting candy. That year our parents decided that we were old
enough to roam the neighborhood unattended. Our plan was to walk from my house to
Dora’s, from where I was to call to say I had arrived safely, and then Dora’s mother
would drive me home. My father equipped us with flashlights, and I had to wear my
watch and synchronize it with his. We were to return no later than nine o’clock.
When Mr. Pirzada arrived that evening he presented me with a box of chocolatecovered mints.
“In here,” I told him, and opened up the burlap sack. “Trick or treat!”
“I understand that you don’t really need my contribution this evening,” he said,
depositing the box. He gazed at my green face, and the hat secured by a string under
my chin. Gingerly he lifted the hem of the cape, under which I was wearing a sweater
and a zipped fleece jacket. “Willyou be warm enough?”
I nodded, causing the hat to tip to one side.
He set it right. “Perhaps it is best to stand still.”
The bottom of our staircase was lined with baskets of miniature candy, and when Mr.
Pirzada removed his shoes he did not place them there as he normally did, but inside
the closet instead. He began to unbutton his coat, and I waited to take it from him, but
Dora called me from the bathroom to say that she needed my help drawing a mole on
her chin. When we were finally ready my mother took a picture of us in front of the
fireplace, and then I opened the front door to leave. Mr. Pirzada and my father, who had
not gone into the living room yet, hovered in the foyer. Outside it was already dark. The
air smelled of wet leaves, and our carved jack-o’-lantern flickered impressively against
the shrubbery by the door. In the distance came the sounds of scampering feet, and the
howls of the older boys who wore no costume at all other than a rubber mask, and the
rustling apparel of the youngest children, some so young that they were carried from
door to door in the arms of their parents.
“Don’t go into any of the houses you don’t know,” my father warned.
Mr. Pirzada knit his brows together. “Is there any danger?”
“No, no,” my mother assured him. “Allthe children will be out. It’s a tradition.”

“Perhaps I should accompany them?” Mr. Pirzada suggested. He looked suddenly tired
and small, standing there in his splayed, stockinged feet, and his eyes contained a
panic I had never seen before. In spite of the cold I began to sweat inside my
pillowcase.
“Really, Mr. Pirzada,” my mother said, “Liliawill be perfectly safe with her friend.”
“But if it rains? If they lose their way?”
“Don’t worry,” I said. It was the first time I had uttered those words to Mr. Pirzada, two
simple words I had tried but failed to tell him for weeks, had said only in my prayers. It
shamed me now that I had said them for my own sake.
He placed one of his stocky fingers on my cheek, then pressed it to the back of his own
hand, leaving a faint green smear. “Ifthe lady insists,” he conceded, and offered a small
bow.
We left, stumbling slightly in our black pointy thrift-store shoes, and when we turned at
the end of the driveway to wave good-bye, Mr. Pirzada was standing in the frame of the
doorway, a short figure between my parents, waving back.
“Why did that man want to come with us?” Dora asked.
“His daughters are missing.” As soon as I said it, I wished I had not. I felt that my saying
it made it true, that Mr. Pirzada’s daughters really were missing, and that he would
never see them again.
“You mean they were kidnapped?” Dora continued. “From a park or something?”
“I didn’t mean they were missing. I meant, he misses them. They live in a different
country, and he hasn’t seen them in a while, that’s all.”
We went from house to house, walking along pathways and pressing doorbells. Some
people had switched off all their lights for effect, or strung rubber bats in their windows.
At the McIntyres’ a coffin was placed in front of the door, and Mr. McIntyre rose from it
in silence, his face covered with chalk, and deposited a fistful of candy corns into our
sacks. Several people told me that they had never seen an Indian witch before. Others
performed the transaction without comment. As we paved our way with the parallel
beams of our flashlights we saw eggs cracked in the middle of the road, and cars
covered with shaving cream, and toilet paper garlanding the branches of trees. By the
time we reached Dora’s house our hands were chapped from carrying our bulging
burlap bags, and our feet were sore and swollen. Her mother gave us bandages for our
blisters and served us warm cider and caramel popcorn. She reminded me to call my
parents to tell them I had arrived safely, and when I did I could hear the television in the
background. My mother did not seem particularly relieved to hear from me. When I
replaced the phone on the receiver it occurred to me that the television wasn’t on at
Dora’s house at all. Her father was lying on the couch, reading a magazine, with a glass
of wine on the coffee table, and there was saxophone music playing on the stereo.
After Dora and I had sorted through our plunder, and counted and sampled and traded
until we were satisfied, her mother drove me back to my house. I thanked her for the
ride, and she waited in the driveway until I made it to the door. In the glare of her
headlights I saw that our pumpkin had been shattered, its thick shell strewn in chunks
across the grass. I felt the sting of tears in my eyes, and a sudden pain in my throat, as
if it had been stuffed with the sharp tiny pebbles that crunched with each step under my
aching feet. I opened the door, expecting the three of them to be standing in the foyer,
waiting to receive me, and to grieve for our ruined pumpkin, but there was no one. In the
living room Mr. Pirzada, my father, and mother were sitting side by side on the sofa. The
television was turned off, and Mr. Pirzada had his head in his hands.
What they heard that evening, and for many evenings after that, was that India and
Pakistan were drawing closer and closer to war. Troops from both sides lined the
border, and Dacca was insisting on nothing short of independence. The war was to be
waged on East Pakistani soil. The United States was siding with West Pakistan, the

Soviet Union with India and what was soon to be Bangladesh. War was declared
officially on December 4, and twelve days later, the Pakistani army, weakened by
having to fight three thousand miles from its source of supplies, surrendered in Dacca.
All of these facts I know only now, for they are available to me in any history book, in
any library. But then it remained, for the most part, a remote mystery with haphazard
clues. What I remember during those twelve days of the war was that my father no
longer asked me to watch the news with them, and that Mr. Pirzada stopped bringing
me candy, and that my mother refused to serve anything other than boiled eggs with
rice for dinner. I remember some nights helping my mother spread a sheet and blankets
on the couch so that Mr. Pirzada could sleep there, and high-pitched voices hollering in
the middle of the night when my parents called our relatives in Calcutta to learn more
details about the situation. Most of all I remember the three of them operating during
that time as if they were a single person, sharing a single meal, a single body, a single
silence, and a single fear.
In January, Mr. Pirzada flew back to his three-story home in Dacca, to discover what
was left of it. We did not see much of him in those final weeks of the year; he was busy
finishing his manuscript, and we went to Philadelphia to spend Christmas with friends of
my parents. Just as I have no memory of his first visit, I have no memory of his last. My
father drove him to the airport one afternoon while I was at school. For a long time we
did not hear from him. Our evenings went on as usual, with dinners in front of the news.
The only difference was that Mr. Pirzada and his extra watch were not there to
accompany us. According to reports Dacca was repairing itself slowly, with a newly
formed parliamentary government. The new leader, Sheikh Mujib Rahman, recently
released from prison, asked countries for building materials to replace more than one
million houses that had been destroyed in the war. Countless refugees returned from
India, greeted, we learned, by unemployment and the threat of famine. Every now and
then I studied the map above my father’s desk and pictured Mr. Pirzada on that small
patch of yellow, perspiring heavily, I imagined, in one of his suits, searching for his
family. Of course, the map was outdated by then.
Finally, several months later, we received a card from Mr. Pirzada commemorating the
Muslim New Year, along with a short letter. He was reunited, he wrote, with his wife and
children. All were well, having survived the events of the past year at an estate
belonging to his wife’s grandparents in the mountains of Shillong. His seven daughters
were a bit taller, he wrote, but otherwise they were the same, and he still could not keep
their names in order. At the end of the letter he thanked us for our hospitality, adding
that although he now understood the meaning of the words “thank you” they still were
not adequate to express his gratitude. To celebrate the good news my mother prepared
a special dinner that evening, and when we sat down to eat at the coffee table we
toasted our water glasses, but I did not feel like celebrating. Though I had not seen him
for months, it was only then that I felt Mr. Pirzada’s absence. It was only then, raising
my water glass in his name, that I knew what it meant to miss someone who was so
many miles and hours away, just as he had missed his wife and daughters for so many
months. He had no reason to return to us, and my parents predicted, correctly, that we
would never see him again. Since January, each night before bed, I had continued to
eat, for the sake of Mr. Pirzada’s family, a piece of candy I had saved from Halloween.
That night there was no need to. Eventually, I threw them away.

Interpreter of Maladies
ATTHETEAS TALL Mr. and Mrs. Das bickered about who should take Tina to the toilet.
Eventually Mrs. Das relented when Mr. Das pointed out that he had given the girl her
bath the night before. In the rearview mirror Mr. Kapasi watched as Mrs. Das emerged
slowly from his bulky white Ambassador, dragging her shaved, largely bare legs across
the back seat. She did not hold the little girl’s hand as they walked to the rest room.
They were on their way to see the Sun Temple at Konarak. It was a dry, bright
Saturday, the mid-July heat tempered by a steady ocean breeze, ideal weather for
sightseeing. Ordinarily Mr. Kapasi would not have stopped so soon along the way, but
less than five minutes after he’d picked up the family that morning in front of Hotel
Sandy Villa, the little girl had complained. The first thing Mr. Kapasi had noticed when
he saw Mr. and Mrs. Das, standing with their children under the portico of the hotel, was
that they were very young, perhaps not even thirty. In addition to Tina they had two
boys, Ronny and Bobby, who appeared very close in age and had teeth covered in a
network of flashing silver wires. The family looked Indian but dressed as foreigners did,
the children in stiff, brightly colored clothing and caps with translucent visors. Mr. Kapasi
was accustomed to foreign tourists; he was assigned to them regularly because he
could speak English. Yesterday he had driven an elderly couple from Scotland, both
with spotted faces and fluffy white hair so thin it exposed their sunburnt scalps. In
comparison, the tanned, youthful faces of Mr. and Mrs. Das were all the more striking.
When he’d introduced himself, Mr. Kapasi had pressed his palms together in greeting,
but Mr. Das squeezed hands like an American so that Mr. Kapasi felt it in his elbow.
Mrs. Das, for her part, had flexed one side of her mouth, smiling dutifully at Mr. Kapasi,
without displaying any interest in him.
As they waited at the tea stall, Ronny, who looked like the older of the two boys,
clambered suddenly out of the back seat, intrigued by a goat tied to a stake in the
ground.
“Don’t touch it,” Mr. Das said. He glanced up from his paperback tour book, which said
“INDIA”in yellow letters and looked as if it had been published abroad. His voice,
somehow tentative and a little shrill, sounded as though it had not yet settled into
maturity.
“I want to give it a piece of gum,” the boy called back as he trotted ahead.
Mr. Das stepped out of the car and stretched his legs by squatting briefly to the ground.
A clean-shaven man, he looked exactly like a magnified version of Ronny. He had a
sapphire blue visor, and was dressed in shorts, sneakers, and a T-shirt. The camera
slung around his neck, with an impressive telephoto lens and numerous buttons and
markings, was the only complicated thing he wore. He frowned, watching as Ronny
rushed toward the goat, but appeared to have no intention of intervening. “Bobby, make
sure that your brother doesn’t do anything stupid.”
“I don’t feel like it,” Bobby said, not moving. He was sitting in the front seat beside Mr.
Kapasi, studying a picture of the elephant god taped to the glove compartment.
“No need to worry,” Mr. Kapasi said. “They are quite tame.” Mr. Kapasi was forty-six
years old, with receding hair that had gone completely silver, but his butterscotch
complexion and his unlined brow, which he treated in spare moments to dabs of lotusoil balm, made it easy to imagine what he must have looked like at an earlier age. He
wore gray trousers and a matching jacket-style shirt, tapered at the waist, with short
sleeves and a large pointed collar, made of a thin but durable synthetic material. He had
specified both the cut and the fabric to his tailor—it was his preferred uniform for giving
tours because it did not get crushed during his long hours behind the wheel. Through
the windshield he watched as Ronny circled around the goat, touched it quickly on its

side, then trotted back to the car.
“You left India as a child?” Mr. Kapasi asked when Mr. Das had settled once again into
the passenger seat.
“Oh, Mina and I were both born in America,” Mr. Das announced with an air of sudden
confidence. “Born and raised. Our parents live here now. They retired. We visit them
every couple years.” He turned to watch as the little girl ran toward the car, the wide
purple bows of her sundress flopping on her narrow brown shoulders. She was holding
to her chest a doll with yellow hair that looked as if it had been chopped, as a punitive
measure, with a pair of dull scissors. “This is Tina’s first trip to India, isn’t it, Tina?”
“I don’t have to go to the bathroom anymore,” Tina announced.
“Where’s Mina?” Mr. Das asked.
Mr. Kapasi found it strange that Mr. Das should refer to his wife by her first name when
speaking to the little girl. Tina pointed to where Mrs. Das was purchasing something
from one of the shirtless men who worked at the tea stall. Mr. Kapasi heard one of the
shirtless men sing a phrase from a popular Hindi love song as Mrs. Das walked back to
the car, but she did not appear to understand the words of the song, for she did not
express irritation, or embarrassment, or react in any other way to the man’s
declarations.
He observed her. She wore a red-and-white-checkered skirt that stopped above her
knees, slip-on shoes with a square wooden heel, and a close-fitting blouse styled like a
man’s undershirt. The blouse was decorated at chest-level with a calico appliqué in the
shape of a strawberry. She was a short woman, with small hands like paws, her frosty
pink fingernails painted to match her lips, and was slightly plump in her figure. Her hair,
shorn only a little longer than her husband’s, was parted far to one side. She was
wearing large dark brown sunglasses with a pinkish tint to them, and carried a big straw
bag, almost as big as her torso, shaped like a bowl, with a water bottle poking out of it.
She walked slowly, carrying some puffed rice tossed with peanuts and chili peppers in a
large packet made from newspapers. Mr. Kapasi turned to Mr. Das.
“Where in America do you live?”
“New Brunswick, New Jersey.”
“Next to New York?”
“Exactly. I teach middle school there.”
“What subject?”
“Science. In fact, every year I take my students on a trip to the Museum of Natural
History in New York City. In a way we have a lot in common, you could say, you and I.
How long have you been a tour guide, Mr. Kapasi?”
“Five years.”
Mrs. Das reached the car. “How long’s the trip?” she asked, shutting the door.
“About two and a half hours,” Mr. Kapasi replied.
At this Mrs. Das gave an impatient sigh, as if she had been traveling her whole life
without pause. She fanned herself with a folded Bombay film magazine written in
English.
“I thought that the Sun Temple is only eighteen miles north of Puri,” Mr. Das said,
tapping on the tour book.
“The roads to Konarak are poor. Actually it is a distance of fifty-two miles,” Mr. Kapasi
explained.
Mr. Das nodded, readjusting the camera strap where it had begun to chafe the back of
his neck.
Before starting the ignition, Mr. Kapasi reached back to make sure the cranklike locks
on the inside of each of the back doors were secured. As soon as the car began to
move the little girl began to play with the lock on her side, clicking it with some effort
forward and backward, but Mrs. Das said nothing to stop her. She sat a bit slouched at

one end of the back seat, not offering her puffed rice to anyone. Ronny and Tina sat on
either side of her, both snapping bright green gum.
“Look,” Bobby said as the car began to gather speed. He pointed with his finger to the
tall trees that lined the road. “Look.”
“Monkeys!” Ronny shrieked. “Wow!”
They were seated in groups along the branches, with shining black faces, silver bodies,
horizontal eyebrows, and crested heads. Their long gray tails dangled like a series of
ropes among the leaves. A few scratched themselves with black leathery hands, or
swung their feet, staring as the car passed.
“We call them the hanuman,” Mr. Kapasi said. “They are quite common in the area.”
As soon as he spoke, one of the monkeys leaped into the middle of the road, causing
Mr. Kapasi to brake suddenly. Another bounced onto the hood of the car, then sprang
away. Mr. Kapasi beeped his horn. The children began to get excited, sucking in their
breath and covering their faces partly with their hands. They had never seen monkeys
outside of a zoo, Mr. Das explained. He asked Mr. Kapasi to stop the car so that he
could take a picture.
While Mr. Das adjusted his telephoto lens, Mrs. Das reached into her straw bag and
pulled out a bottle of colorless nail polish, which she proceeded to stroke on the tip of
her index finger.
The little girl stuck out a hand. “Mine too. Mommy, do mine too.”
“Leave me alone,” Mrs. Das said, blowing on her nail and turning her body slightly.
“You’re making me mess up.”
The little girl occupied herself by buttoning and unbuttoning a pinafore on the doll’s
plastic body.
“Allset,” Mr. Das said, replacing the lens cap.
The car rattled considerably as it raced along the dusty road, causing them all to pop up
from their seats every now and then, but Mrs. Das continued to polish her nails. Mr.
Kapasi eased up on the accelerator, hoping to produce a smoother ride. When he
reached for the gearshift the boy in front accommodated him by swinging his hairless
knees out of the way. Mr. Kapasi noted that this boy was slightly paler than the other
children. “Daddy, why is the driver sitting on the wrong side in this car, too?” the boy
asked.
“They all do that here, dummy,” Ronny said.
“Don’t call your brother a dummy,” Mr. Das said. He turned to Mr. Kapasi. “In America,
you know … it confuses them.”
“Oh yes, I am well aware,” Mr. Kapasi said. As delicately as he could, he shifted gears
again, accelerating as they approached a hill in the road. “I see it on Dallas, the
steering wheels are on the left-hand side.”
“What’s Dallas? ” Tina asked, banging her now naked doll on the seat behind Mr.
Kapasi.
“It went off the air,” Mr. Das explained. “It’s a television show.”
They were all like siblings, Mr. Kapasi thought as they passed a row of date trees. Mr.
and Mrs. Das behaved like an older brother and sister, not parents. It seemed that they
were in charge of the children only for the day; it was hard to believe they were regularly
responsible for anything other than themselves. Mr. Das tapped on his lens cap, and his
tour book, dragging his thumbnail occasionally across the pages so that they made a
scraping sound. Mrs. Das continued to polish her nails. She had still not removed her
sunglasses. Every now and then Tina renewed her plea that she wanted her nails done,
too, and so at one point Mrs. Das flicked a drop of polish on the little girl’s finger before
depositing the bottle back inside her straw bag.
“Isn’t this an air-conditioned car?” she asked, still blowing on her hand. The window on
Tina’s side was broken and could not be rolled down.

“Quit complaining,” Mr. Das said. “It isn’t so hot.”
“I told you to get a car with air-conditioning,” Mrs. Das continued. “Why do you do this,
Raj, just to save a few stupid rupees. What are you saving us, fifty cents?”
Their accents sounded just like the ones Mr. Kapasi heard on American television
programs, though not like the ones on Dallas.
“Doesn’t it get tiresome, Mr. Kapasi, showing people the same thing every day?” Mr.
Das asked, rolling down his own window all the way. “Hey, do you mind stopping the
car. I just want to get a shot of this guy.”
Mr. Kapasi pulled over to the side of the road as Mr. Das took a picture of a barefoot
man, his head wrapped in a dirty turban, seated on top of a cart of grain sacks pulled by
a pair of bullocks. Both the man and the bullocks were emaciated. In the back seat Mrs.
Das gazed out another window, at the sky, where nearly transparent clouds passed
quickly in front of one another.
“I look forward to it, actually,” Mr. Kapasi said as they continued on their way. “The Sun
Temple is one of my favorite places. In that way it is a reward for me. I give tours on
Fridays and Saturdays only. I have another job during the week.”
“Oh? Where?” Mr. Das asked.
“I work in a doctor’s office.”
“You’re a doctor?”
“I am not a doctor. I work with one. As an interpreter.”
“What does a doctor need an interpreter for?”
“He has a number of Gujarati patients. My father was Gujarati, but many people do not
speak Gujarati in this area, including the doctor. And so the doctor asked me to work in
his office, interpreting what the patients say.”
“Interesting. I’ve never heard of anything like that,” Mr. Das said.
Mr. Kapasi shrugged. “It is a job like any other.”
“But so romantic,” Mrs. Das said dreamily, breaking her extended silence. She lifted her
pinkish brown sunglasses and arranged them on top of her head like a tiara. For the first
time, her eyes met Mr. Kapasi’s in the rearview mirror: pale, a bit small, their gaze fixed
but drowsy.
Mr. Das craned to look at her. “What’s so romantic about it?”
“I don’t know. Something.” She shrugged, knitting her brows together for an instant.
“Would you like a piece of gum, Mr. Kapasi?” she asked brightly. She reached into her
straw bag and handed him a small square wrapped in green-and-white-striped paper.
As soon as Mr. Kapasi put the gum in his mouth a thick sweet liquid burst onto his
tongue.
“Tellus more about your job, Mr. Kapasi,” Mrs. Das said.
“What would you like to know, madame?”
“I don’t know,” again she shrugged, munching on some puffed rice and licking the
mustard oil from the corners of her mouth. “Tellus a typical situation.” She settled back
in her seat, her head tilted in a patch of sun, and closed her eyes. “I want to picture
what happens.”
“Very well. The other day a man came in with a pain in his throat.”
“Did he smoke cigarettes?”
“No. It was very curious. He complained that he felt as if there were long pieces of straw
stuck in his throat. When I told the doctor he was able to prescribe the proper
medication.”
“That’s so neat.”
“Yes,” Mr. Kapasi agreed after some hesitation.
“So these patients are totally dependent on you,” Mrs. Das said. She spoke slowly, as if
she were thinking aloud. “In a way, more dependent on you than the doctor.”
“How do you mean? How could it be?”

“Well, for example, you could tell the doctor that the pain felt like a burning, not straw.
The patient would never know what you had told the doctor, and the doctor wouldn’t
know that you had told the wrong thing. It’s a big responsibility.”
“Yes, a big responsibility you have there, Mr. Kapasi,” Mr. Das agreed.
Mr. Kapasi had never thought of his job in such complimentary terms. To him it was a
thankless occupation. He found nothing noble in interpreting people’s maladies,
assiduously translating the symptoms of so many swollen bones, countless cramps of
bellies and bowels, spots on people’s palms that changed color, shape, or size. The
doctor, nearly half his age, had an affinity for bell-bottom trousers and made humorless
jokes about the Congress party. Together they worked in a stale little infirmary where
Mr. Kapasi’s smartly tailored clothes clung to him in the heat, in spite of the blackened
blades of a ceiling fan churning over their heads.
The job was a sign of his failings. In his youth he’d been a devoted scholar of foreign
languages, the owner of an impressive collection of dictionaries. He had dreamed of
being an interpreter for diplomats and dignitaries, resolving conflicts between people
and nations, settling disputes of which he alone could understand both sides. He was a
self-educated man. In a series of notebooks, in the evenings before his parents settled
his marriage, he had listed the common etymologies of words, and at one point in his
life he was confident that he could converse, if given the opportunity, in English, French,
Russian, Portuguese, and Italian, not to mention Hindi, Bengali, Oriya, and Gujarati.
Now only a handful of European phrases remained in his memory, scattered words for
things like saucers and chairs. English was the only non-Indian language he spoke
fluently anymore. Mr. Kapasi knew it was not a remarkable talent. Sometimes he feared
that his children knew better English than he did, just from watching television. Still, it
came in handy for the tours.
He had taken the job as an interpreter after his first son, at the age of seven, contracted
typhoid—that was how he had first made the acquaintance of the doctor. At the time Mr.
Kapasi had been teaching English in a grammar school, and he bartered his skills as an
interpreter to pay the increasingly exorbitant medical bills. In the end the boy had died
one evening in his mother’s arms, his limbs burning with fever, but then there was the
funeral to pay for, and the other children who were born soon enough, and the newer,
bigger house, and the good schools and tutors, and the fine shoes and the television,
and the countless other ways he tried to console his wife and to keep her from crying in
her sleep, and so when the doctor offered to pay him twice as much as he earned at the
grammar school, he accepted. Mr. Kapasi knew that his wife had little regard for his
career as an interpreter. He knew it reminded her of the son she’d lost, and that she
resented the other lives he helped, in his own small way, to save. If ever she referred to
his position, she used the phrase “doctor’s assistant,” as if the process of interpretation
were equal to taking someone’s temperature, or changing a bedpan. She never asked
him about the patients who came to the doctor’s office, or said that his job was a big
responsibility.
For this reason it flattered Mr. Kapasi that Mrs. Das was so intrigued by his job. Unlike
his wife, she had reminded him of its intellectual challenges. She had also used the
word “romantic.” She did not behave in a romantic way toward her husband, and yet
she had used the word to describe him. He wondered if Mr. and Mrs. Das were a bad
match, just as he and his wife were. Perhaps they, too, had little in common apart from
three children and a decade of their lives. The signs he recognized from his own
marriage were there—the bickering, the indifference, the protracted silences. Her
sudden interest in him, an interest she did not express in either her husband or her
children, was mildly intoxicating. When Mr. Kapasi thought once again about how she
had said “romantic,” the feeling of intoxication grew.
He began to check his reflection in the rearview mirror as he drove, feeling grateful that

he had chosen the gray suit that morning and not the brown one, which tended to sag a
little in the knees. From time to time he glanced through the mirror at Mrs. Das. In
addition to glancing at her face he glanced at the strawberry between her breasts, and
the golden brown hollow in her throat. He decided to tell Mrs. Das about another patient,
and another: the young woman who had complained of a sensation of raindrops in her
spine, the gentleman whose birthmark had begun to sprout hairs. Mrs. Das listened
attentively, stroking her hair with a small plastic brush that resembled an oval bed of
nails, asking more questions, for yet another example. The children were quiet, intent
on spotting more monkeys in the trees, and Mr. Das was absorbed by his tour book, so
it seemed like a private conversation between Mr. Kapasi and Mrs. Das. In this manner
the next half hour passed, and when they stopped for lunch at a roadside restaurant
that sold fritters and omelette sandwiches, usually something Mr. Kapasi looked forward
to on his tours so that he could sit in peace and enjoy some hot tea, he was
disappointed. As the Das family settled together under a magenta umbrella fringed with
white and orange tassels, and placed their orders with one of the waiters who marched
about in tricornered caps, Mr. Kapasi reluctantly headed toward a neighboring table.
“Mr. Kapasi, wait. There’s room here,” Mrs. Das called out. She gathered Tina onto her
lap, insisting that he accompany them. And so, together, they had bottled mango juice
and sandwiches and plates of onions and potatoes deep-fried in graham-flour batter.
After finishing two omelette sandwiches Mr. Das took more pictures of the group as they
ate.
“How much longer?” he asked Mr. Kapasi as he paused to load a new roll of film in the
camera.
“About half an hour more.”
By now the children had gotten up from the table to look at more monkeys perched in a
nearby tree, so there was a considerable space between Mrs. Das and Mr. Kapasi. Mr.
Das placed the camera to his face and squeezed one eye shut, his tongue exposed at
one corner of his mouth. “This looks funny. Mina, you need to lean in closer to Mr.
Kapasi.”
She did. He could smell a scent on her skin, like a mixture of whiskey and rosewater.
He worried suddenly that she could smell his perspiration, which he knew had collected
beneath the synthetic material of his shirt. He polished off his mango juice in one gulp
and smoothed his silver hair with his hands. A bit of the juice dripped onto his chin. He
wondered if Mrs. Das had noticed.
She had not. “What’s your address, Mr. Kapasi?” she inquired, fishing for something
inside her straw bag.
“You would like my address?”
“So we can send you copies,” she said. “Of the pictures.” She handed him a scrap of
paper which she had hastily ripped from a page of her film magazine. The blank portion
was limited, for the narrow strip was crowded by lines of text and a tiny picture of a hero
and heroine embracing under a eucalyptus tree.
The paper curled as Mr. Kapasi wrote his address in clear, careful letters. She would
write to him, asking about his days interpreting at the doctor’s office, and he would
respond eloquently, choosing only the most entertaining anecdotes, ones that would
make her laugh out loud as she read them in her house in New Jersey. In time she
would reveal the disappointment of her marriage, and he his. In this way their friendship
would grow, and flourish. He would possess a picture of the two of them, eating fried
onions under a magenta umbrella, which he would keep, he decided, safely tucked
between the pages of his Russian grammar. As his mind raced, Mr. Kapasi experienced
a mild and pleasant shock. It was similar to a feeling he used to experience long ago
when, after months of translating with the aid of a dictionary, he would finally read a
passage from a French novel, or an Italian sonnet, and understand the words, one after

another, unencumbered by his own efforts. In those moments Mr. Kapasi used to
believe that all was right with the world, that all struggles were rewarded, that all of life’s
mistakes made sense in the end. The promise that he would hear from Mrs. Das now
filled him with the same belief.
When he finished writing his address Mr. Kapasi handed her the paper, but as soon as
he did so he worried that he had either misspelled his name, or accidentally reversed
the numbers of his postal code. He dreaded the possibility of a lost letter, the
photograph never reaching him, hovering somewhere in Orissa, close but ultimately
unattainable. He thought of asking for the slip of paper again, just to make sure he had
written his address accurately, but Mrs. Das had already dropped it into the jumble of
her bag.
They reached Konarak at two-thirty. The temple, made of sandstone, was a massive
pyramid-like structure in the shape of a chariot. It was dedicated to the great master of
life, the sun, which struck three sides of the edifice as it made its journey each day
across the sky. Twenty-four giant wheels were carved on the north and south sides of
the plinth. The whole thing was drawn by a team of seven horses, speeding as if
through the heavens. As they approached, Mr. Kapasi explained that the temple had
been built between A.D. 1243 and 1255, with the efforts of twelve hundred artisans, by
the great ruler of the Ganga dynasty, King Narasimhadeva the First, to commemorate
his victory against the Muslim army.
“It says the temple occupies about a hundred and seventy acres of land,” Mr. Das said,
reading from his book.
“It’s like a desert,” Ronny said, his eyes wandering across the sand that stretched on all
sides beyond the temple.
“The Chandrabhaga River once flowed one mile north of here. It is dry now,” Mr.
Kapasi said, turning off the engine.
They got out and walked toward the temple, posing first for pictures by the pair of lions
that flanked the steps. Mr. Kapasi led them next to one of the wheels of the chariot,
higher than any human being, nine feet in diameter.
“‘The wheels are supposed to symbolize the wheel of life,’”Mr. Das read. “‘They depict
the cycle of creation, preservation, and achievement of realization.’ Cool.” He turned the
page of his book. “‘Each wheel is divided into eight thick and thin spokes, dividing the
day into eight equal parts. The rims are carved with designs of birds and animals,
whereas the medallions in the spokes are carved with women in luxurious poses,
largely erotic in nature.’”
What he referred to were the countless friezes of entwined naked bodies, making love
in various positions, women clinging to the necks of men, their knees wrapped eternally
around their lovers’ thighs. In addition to these were assorted scenes from daily life, of
hunting and trading, of deer being killed with bows and arrows and marching warriors
holding swords in their hands.
It was no longer possible to enter the temple, for it had filled with rubble years ago, but
they admired the exterior, as did all the tourists Mr. Kapasi brought there, slowly
strolling along each of its sides. Mr. Das trailed behind, taking pictures. The children ran
ahead, pointing to figures of naked people, intrigued in particular by the Nagamithunas,
the half-human, half-serpentine couples who were said, Mr. Kapasi told them, to live in
the deepest waters of the sea. Mr. Kapasi was pleased that they liked the temple,
pleased especially that it appealed to Mrs. Das. She stopped every three or four paces,
staring silently at the carved lovers, and the processions of elephants, and the topless
female musicians beating on two-sided drums.
Though Mr. Kapasi had been to the temple countless times, it occurred to him, as he,

too, gazed at the topless women, that he had never seen his own wife fully naked. Even
when they had made love she kept the panels of her blouse hooked together, the string
of her petticoat knotted around her waist. He had never admired the backs of his wife’s
legs the way he now admired those of Mrs. Das, walking as if for his benefit alone. He
had, of course, seen plenty of bare limbs before, belonging to the American and
European ladies who took his tours. But Mrs. Das was different. Unlike the other
women, who had an interest only in the temple, and kept their noses buried in a
guidebook, or their eyes behind the lens of a camera, Mrs. Das had taken an interest in
him.
Mr. Kapasi was anxious to be alone with her, to continue their private conversation, yet
he felt nervous to walk at her side. She was lost behind her sunglasses, ignoring her
husband’s requests that she pose for another picture, walking past her children as if
they were strangers. Worried that he might disturb her, Mr. Kapasi walked ahead, to
admire, as he always did, the three life-sized bronze avatars of Surya, the sun god,
each emerging from its own niche on the temple facade to greet the sun at dawn, noon,
and evening. They wore elaborate headdresses, their languid, elongated eyes closed,
their bare chests draped with carved chains and amulets. Hibiscus petals, offerings from
previous visitors, were strewn at their gray-green feet. The last statue, on the northern
wall of the temple, was Mr. Kapasi’s favorite. This Surya had a tired expression, weary
after a hard day of work, sitting astride a horse with folded legs. Even his horse’s eyes
were drowsy. Around his body were smaller sculptures of women in pairs, their hips
thrust to one side.
“Who’s that?” Mrs. Das asked. He was startled to see that she was standing beside him.
“He is the Astachala-Surya,” Mr. Kapasi said. “The setting sun.”
“So in a couple of hours the sun will set right here?” She slipped a foot out of one of her
square-heeled shoes, rubbed her toes on the back of her other leg.
“That is correct.”
She raised her sunglasses for a moment, then put them back on again. “Neat.”
Mr. Kapasi was not certain exactly what the word suggested, but he had a feeling it was
a favorable response. He hoped that Mrs. Das had understood Surya’s beauty, his
power. Perhaps they would discuss it further in their letters. He would explain things to
her, things about India, and she would explain things to him about America. In its own
way this correspondence would fulfillhis dream, of serving as an interpreter between
nations. He looked at her straw bag, delighted that his address lay nestled among its
contents. When he pictured her so many thousands of miles away he plummeted, so
much so that he had an overwhelming urge to wrap his arms around her, to freeze with
her, even for an instant, in an embrace witnessed by his favorite Surya. But Mrs. Das
had already started walking.
“When do you return to America?” he asked, trying to sound placid.
“In ten days.”
He calculated: A week to settle in, a week to develop the pictures, a few days to
compose her letter, two weeks to get to India by air. According to his schedule, allowing
room for delays, he would hear from Mrs. Das in approximately six weeks’ time.
The family was silent as Mr. Kapasi drove them back, a little past four-thirty, to Hotel
Sandy Villa. The children had bought miniature granite versions of the chariot’s wheels
at a souvenir stand, and they turned them round in their hands. Mr. Das continued to
read his book. Mrs. Das untangled Tina’s hair with her brush and divided it into two little
ponytails.
Mr. Kapasi was beginning to dread the thought of dropping them off. He was not
prepared to begin his six-week wait to hear from Mrs. Das. As he stole glances at her in

the rear-view mirror, wrapping elastic bands around Tina’s hair, he wondered how he
might make the tour last a little longer. Ordinarily he sped back to Puri using a shortcut,
eager to return home, scrub his feet and hands with sandalwood soap, and enjoy the
evening newspaper and a cup of tea that his wife would serve him in silence. The
thought of that silence, something to which he’d long been resigned, now oppressed
him. It was then that he suggested visiting the hills at Udayagiri and Khandagiri, where a
number of monastic dwellings were hewn out of the ground, facing one another across
a defile. It was some miles away, but well worth seeing, Mr. Kapasi told them.
“Oh yeah, there’s something mentioned about it in this book,” Mr. Das said. “Built by a
Jain king or something.”
“Shall we go then?” Mr. Kapasi asked. He paused at a turn in the road. “It’s to the left.”
Mr. Das turned to look at Mrs. Das. Both of them shrugged.
“Left, left,” the children chanted.
Mr. Kapasi turned the wheel, almost delirious with relief. He did not know what he would
do or say to Mrs. Das once they arrived at the hills. Perhaps he would tell her what a
pleasing smile she had. Perhaps he would compliment her strawberry shirt, which he
found irresistibly becoming. Perhaps, when Mr. Das was busy taking a picture, he would
take her hand.
He did not have to worry. When they got to the hills, divided by a steep path thick with
trees, Mrs. Das refused to get out of the car. All along the path, dozens of monkeys
were seated on stones, as well as on the branches of the trees. Their hind legs were
stretched out in front and raised to shoulder level, their arms resting on their knees.
“My legs are tired,” she said, sinking low in her seat. “I’llstay here.”
“Why did you have to wear those stupid shoes?” Mr. Das said. “You won’t be in the
pictures.”
“Pretend I’m there.”
“But we could use one of these pictures for our Christmas card this year. We didn’t get
one of all five of us at the Sun Temple. Mr. Kapasi could take it.”
“I’mnot coming. Anyway, those monkeys give me the creeps.”
“But they’re harmless,” Mr. Das said. He turned to Mr. Kapasi. “Aren’t they?”
“They are more hungry than dangerous,” Mr. Kapasi said. “Do not provoke them with
food, and they will not bother you.”
Mr. Das headed up the defile with the children, the boys at his side, the little girl on his
shoulders. Mr. Kapasi watched as they crossed paths with a Japanese man and
woman, the only other tourists there, who paused for a final photograph, then stepped
into a nearby car and drove away. As the car disappeared out of view some of the
monkeys called out, emitting soft whooping sounds, and then walked on their flat black
hands and feet up the path. At one point a group of them formed a little ring around Mr.
Das and the children. Tina screamed in delight. Ronny ran in circles around his father.
Bobby bent down and picked up a fat stick on the ground. When he extended it, one of
the monkeys approached him and snatched it, then briefly beat the ground.
“I’lljoin them,” Mr. Kapasi said, unlocking the door on his side. “There is much to
explain about the caves.”
“No. Stay a minute,” Mrs. Das said. She got out of the back seat and slipped in beside
Mr. Kapasi. “Raj has his dumb book anyway.” Together, through the windshield, Mrs.
Das and Mr. Kapasi watched as Bobby and the monkey passed the stick back and forth
between them.
“A brave little boy,” Mr. Kapasi commented.
“It’s not so surprising,” Mrs. Das said.
“No?”
“He’s not his.”
“I beg your pardon?”

“Raj’s. He’s not Raj’s son.”
Mr. Kapasi felt a prickle on his skin. He reached into his shirt pocket for the small tin of
lotus-oil balm he carried with him at all times, and applied it to three spots on his
forehead. He knew that Mrs. Das was watching him, but he did not turn to face her.
Instead he watched as the figures of Mr. Das and the children grew smaller, climbing up
the steep path, pausing every now and then for a picture, surrounded by a growing
number of monkeys.
“Are you surprised?” The way she put it made him choose his words with care.
“It’s not the type of thing one assumes,” Mr. Kapasi replied slowly. He put the tin of
lotus-oil balm back in his pocket.
“No, of course not. And no one knows, of course. No one at all. I’ve kept it a secret for
eight whole years.” She looked at Mr. Kapasi, tilting her chin as if to gain a fresh
perspective. “But now I’ve told you.”
Mr. Kapasi nodded. He felt suddenly parched, and his forehead was warm and slightly
numb from the balm. He considered asking Mrs. Das for a sip of water, then decided
against it.
“We met when we were very young,” she said. She reached into her straw bag in
search of something, then pulled out a packet of puffed rice. “Want some?”
“No, thank you.”
She put a fistful in her mouth, sank into the seat a little, and looked away from Mr.
Kapasi, out the window on her side of the car. “We married when we were still in
college. We were in high school when he proposed. We went to the same college, of
course. Back then we couldn’t stand the thought of being separated, not for a day, not
for a minute. Our parents were best friends who lived in the same town. My entire life I
saw him every weekend, either at our house or theirs. We were sent upstairs to play
together while our parents joked about our marriage. Imagine! They never caught us at
anything, though in a way I think it was all more or less a setup. The things we did those
Friday and Saturday nights, while our parents sat downstairs drinking tea … I could tell
you stories, Mr. Kapasi.”
As a result of spending all her time in college with Raj, she continued, she did not make
many close friends. There was no one to confide in about him at the end of a difficult
day, or to share a passing thought or a worry. Her parents now lived on the other side of
the world, but she had never been very close to them, anyway. After marrying so young
she was overwhelmed by it all, having a child so quickly, and nursing, and warming up
bottles of milk and testing their temperature against her wrist while Raj was at work,
dressed in sweaters and corduroy pants, teaching his students about rocks and
dinosaurs. Raj never looked cross or harried, or plump as she had become after the first
baby.
Always tired, she declined invitations from her one or two college girlfriends, to have
lunch or shop in Manhattan. Eventually the friends stopped calling her, so that she was
left at home all day with the baby, surrounded by toys that made her trip when she
walked or wince when she sat, always cross and tired. Only occasionally did they go out
after Ronny was born, and even more rarely did they entertain. Raj didn’t mind; he
looked forward to coming home from teaching and watching television and bouncing
Ronny on his knee. She had been outraged when Raj told her that a Punjabi friend,
someone whom she had once met but did not remember, would be staying with them
for a week for some job interviews in the New Brunswick area.
Bobby was conceived in the afternoon, on a sofa littered with rubber teething toys,
after the friend learned that a London pharmaceutical company had hired him, while
Ronny cried to be freed from his playpen. She made no protest when the friend touched
the small of her back as she was about to make a pot of coffee, then pulled her against
his crisp navy suit. He made love to her swiftly, in silence, with an expertise she had

never known, without the meaningful expressions and smiles Raj always insisted on
afterward. The next day Raj drove the friend to JFK. He was married now, to a Punjabi
girl, and they lived in London still, and every year they exchanged Christmas cards with
Raj and Mina, each couple tucking photos of their families into the envelopes. He did
not know that he was Bobby’s father. He never would.
“I beg your pardon, Mrs. Das, but why have you told me this information?” Mr. Kapasi
asked when she had finally finished speaking, and had turned to face him once again.
“For God’s sake, stop calling me Mrs. Das. I’m twenty-eight. You probably have children
my age.”
“Not quite.” It disturbed Mr. Kapasi to learn that she thought of him as a parent. The
feeling he had had toward her, that had made him check his reflection in the rearview
mirror as they drove, evaporated a little.
“I told you because of your talents.” She put the packet of puffed rice back into her bag
without folding over the top.
“I don’t understand,” Mr. Kapasi said.
“Don’t you see? For eight years I haven’t been able to express this to anybody, not to
friends, certainly not to Raj. He doesn’t even suspect it. He thinks I’m still in love with
him. Well, don’t you have anything to say?”
“About what?”
“About what I’ve just told you. About my secret, and about how terrible it makes me feel.
I feel terrible looking at my children, and at Raj, always terrible. I have terrible urges, Mr.
Kapasi, to throw things away. One day I had the urge to throw everything I own out the
window, the television, the children, everything. Don’t you think it’s unhealthy?”
He was silent.
“Mr. Kapasi, don’t you have anything to say? I thought that was your job.”
“My job is to give tours, Mrs. Das.”
“Not that. Your other job. As an interpreter.”
“But we do not face a language barrier. What need is there for an interpreter?”
“That’s not what I mean. I would never have told you otherwise. Don’t you realize what it
means for me to tell you?”
“What does it mean?”
“It means that I’m tired of feeling so terrible all the time. Eight years, Mr. Kapasi, I’ve
been in pain eight years. I was hoping you could help me feel better, say the right thing.
Suggest some kind of remedy.”
He looked at her, in her red plaid skirt and strawberry T-shirt, a woman not yet thirty,
who loved neither her husband nor her children, who had already fallen out of love with
life. Her confession depressed him, depressed him all the more when he thought of Mr.
Das at the top of the path, Tina clinging to his shoulders, taking pictures of ancient
monastic cells cut into the hills to show his students in America, unsuspecting and
unaware that one of his sons was not his own. Mr. Kapasi felt insulted that Mrs. Das
should ask him to interpret her common, trivial little secret. She did not resemble the
patients in the doctor’s office, those who came glassy-eyed and desperate, unable to
sleep or breathe or urinate with ease, unable, above all, to give words to their pains.
Still, Mr. Kapasi believed it was his duty to assist Mrs. Das. Perhaps he ought to tell her
to confess the truth to Mr. Das. He would explain that honesty was the best policy.
Honesty, surely, would help her feel better, as she’d put it. Perhaps he would offer to
preside over the discussion, as a mediator. He decided to begin with the most obvious
question, to get to the heart of the matter, and so he asked, “Is it really pain you feel,
Mrs. Das, or is it guilt?”
She turned to him and glared, mustard oil thick on her frosty pink lips. She opened her
mouth to say something, but as she glared at Mr. Kapasi some certain knowledge
seemed to pass before her eyes, and she stopped. It crushed him; he knew at that

moment that he was not even important enough to be properly insulted. She opened the
car door and began walking up the path, wobbling a little on her square wooden heels,
reaching into her straw bag to eat handfuls of puffed rice. It fell through her fingers,
leaving a zigzagging trail, causing a monkey to leap down from a tree and devour the
little white grains. In search of more, the monkey began to follow Mrs. Das. Others
joined him, so that she was soon being followed by about half a dozen of them, their
velvety tails dragging behind.
Mr. Kapasi stepped out of the car. He wanted to holler, to alert her in some way, but he
worried that if she knew they were behind her, she would grow nervous. Perhaps she
would lose her balance. Perhaps they would pull at her bag or her hair. He began to jog
up the path, taking a fallen branch in his hand to scare away the monkeys. Mrs. Das
continued walking, oblivious, trailing grains of puffed rice. Near the top of the incline,
before a group of cells fronted by a row of squat stone pillars, Mr. Das was kneeling on
the ground, focusing the lens of his camera. The children stood under the arcade, now
hiding, now emerging from view.
“Wait for me,” Mrs. Das called out. “I’mcoming.”
Tina jumped up and down. “Here comes Mommy!”
“Great,” Mr. Das said without looking up. “Just in time. We’ll get Mr. Kapasi to take a
picture of the five of us.”
Mr. Kapasi quickened his pace, waving his branch so that the monkeys scampered
away, distracted, in another direction.
“Where’s Bobby?” Mrs. Das asked when she stopped.
Mr. Das looked up from the camera. “I don’t know. Ronny, where’s Bobby?”
Ronny shrugged. “I thought he was right here.”
“Where is he?” Mrs. Das repeated sharply. “What’s wrong with all of you?”
They began calling his name, wandering up and down the path a bit. Because they
were calling, they did not initially hear the boy’s screams. When they found him, a little
farther down the path under a tree, he was surrounded by a group of monkeys, over a
dozen of them, pulling at his T-shirt with their long black fingers. The puffed rice Mrs.
Das had spilled was scattered at his feet, raked over by the monkeys’ hands. The boy
was silent, his body frozen, swift tears running down his startled face. His bare legs
were dusty and red with welts from where one of the monkeys struck him repeatedly
with the stick he had given to it earlier.
“Daddy, the monkey’s hurting Bobby,” Tina said.
Mr. Das wiped his palms on the front of his shorts. In his nervousness he accidentally
pressed the shutter on his camera; the whirring noise of the advancing film excited the
monkeys, and the one with the stick began to beat Bobby more intently. “What are we
supposed to do? What if they start attacking?”
“Mr. Kapasi,” Mrs. Das shrieked, noticing him standing to one side. “Do something, for
God’s sake, do something!”
Mr. Kapasi took his branch and shooed them away, hissing at the ones that remained,
stomping his feet to scare them. The animals retreated slowly, with a measured gait,
obedient but unintimidated. Mr. Kapasi gathered Bobby in his arms and brought him
back to where his parents and siblings were standing. As he carried him he was
tempted to whisper a secret into the boy’s ear. But Bobby was stunned, and shivering
with fright, his legs bleeding slightly where the stick had broken the skin. When Mr.
Kapasi delivered him to his parents, Mr. Das brushed some dirt off the boy’s T-shirt and
put the visor on him the right way. Mrs. Das reached into her straw bag to find a
bandage which she taped over the cut on his knee. Ronny offered his brother a fresh
piece of gum. “He’s fine. Just a little scared, right, Bobby?” Mr. Das said, patting the top
of his head.
“God, let’s get out of here,” Mrs. Das said. She folded her arms across the strawberry

on her chest. “This place gives me the creeps.”
“Yeah. Back to the hotel, definitely,” Mr. Das agreed.
“Poor Bobby, ” Mrs. Das said. “Come here a second. Let Mommy fix your hair.” Again
she reached into her straw bag, this time for her hairbrush, and began to run it around
the edges of the translucent visor. When she whipped out the hairbrush, the slip of
paper with Mr. Kapasi’s address on it fluttered away in the wind. No one but Mr. Kapasi
noticed. He watched as it rose, carried higher and higher by the breeze, into the trees
where the monkeys now sat, solemnly observing the scene below. Mr. Kapasi observed
it too, knowing that this was the picture of the Das family he would preserve forever in
his mind.

A Real Durwan
BOORIMA, sweeper of the stairwell, had not slept in two nights. So the morning before
the third night she shook the mites out of her bedding. She shook the quilts once
underneath the letter boxes where she lived, then once again at the mouth of the alley,
causing the crows who were feeding on vegetable peels to scatter in several directions.
As she started up the four flights to the roof, Boori Ma kept one hand placed over the
knee that swelled at the start of every rainy season. That meant that her bucket, quilts,
and the bundle of reeds which served as her broom all had to be braced under one arm.
Lately Boori Ma had been thinking that the stairs were getting steeper; climbing them
felt more like climbing a ladder than a staircase. She was sixty-four years old, with hair
in a knot no larger than a walnut, and she looked almost as narrow from the front as she
did from the side.
In fact, the only thing that appeared three-dimensional about Boori Ma was her voice:
brittle with sorrows, as tart as curds, and shrill enough to grate meat from a coconut. It
was with this voice that she enumerated, twice a day as she swept the stairwell, the
details of her plight and losses suffered since her deportation to Calcutta after Partition.
At that time, she maintained, the turmoil had separated her from a husband, four
daughters, a two-story brick house, a rosewood almari, and a number of coffer boxes
whose skeleton keys she still wore, along with her life savings, tied to the free end of
her sari.
Aside from her hardships, the other thing Boori Ma liked to chronicle was easier times.
And so, by the time she reached the second-floor landing, she had already drawn to the
whole building’s attention the menu of her third daughter’s wedding night. “We married
her to a school principal. The rice was cooked in rosewater. The mayor was invited.
Everybody washed their fingers in pewter bowls.” Here she paused, evened out her
breath, and readjusted the supplies under her arm. She took the opportunity also to
chase a cockroach out of the banister poles, then continued: “Mustard prawns were
steamed in banana leaves. Not a delicacy was spared. Not that this was an
extravagance for us. At our house, we ate goat twice a week. We had a pond on our
property, full of fish.”
By now Boori Ma could see some light from the roof spilling into the stairwell. And
though it was only eight o’clock, the sun was already strong enough to warm the last of
the cement steps under her feet. It was a very old building, the kind with bathwater that
still had to be stored in drums, windows without glass, and privy scaffolds made of
bricks.
“A man came to pick our dates and guavas. Another clipped hibiscus. Yes, there I
tasted life. Here I eat my dinner from a rice pot.” At this point in the recital Boori Ma’s
ears started to burn; a pain chewed through her swollen knee. “Have I mentioned that I
crossed the border with just two bracelets on my wrist? Yet there was a day when my
feet touched nothing but marble. Believe me, don’t believe me, such comforts you
cannot even dream them.”
Whether there was any truth to Boori Ma’s litanies no one could be sure. For one thing,
every day, the perimeters of her former estate seemed to double, as did the contents of
her almari and coffer boxes. No one doubted she was a refugee; the accent in her
Bengali made that clear. Still, the residents of this particular flat-building could not
reconcile Boori Ma’s claims to prior wealth alongside the more likely account of how she
had crossed the East Bengal border, with the thousands of others, on the back of a
truck, between sacks of hemp. And yet there were days when Boori Ma insisted that
she had come to Calcutta on a bullock cart.
“Which was it, by truck or by cart?” the children sometimes asked her on their way to

play cops and robbers in the alley. To which Boori Ma would reply, shaking the free end
of her sari so that the skeleton keys rattled, “Why demand specifics? Why scrape lime
from a betel leaf? Believe me, don’t believe me. My life is composed of such griefs you
cannot even dream them.”
So she garbled facts. She contradicted herself. She embellished almost everything. But
her rants were so persuasive, her fretting so vivid, that it was not so easy to dismiss her.
What kind of landowner ended up sweeping stairs? That was what Mr. Dalal of the third
floor always wondered as he passed Boori Ma on his way to and from the office, where
he filed receipts for a wholesale distributor of rubber tubes, pipes, and valve fittings in
the plumbing district of College Street.
Bechareh, she probably constructs tales as a way of mourning the loss of her family,
was the collective surmise of most of the wives.
And “Boori Ma’s mouth is full of ashes, but she is the victim of changing times” was the
refrain of old Mr. Chatterjee. He had neither strayed from his balcony nor opened a
newspaper since Independence, but in spite of this fact, or maybe because of it, his
opinions were always highly esteemed.
The theory eventually circulated that Boori Ma had once worked as hired help for a
prosperous zamindar back east, and was therefore capable of exaggerating her past
at such elaborate lengths and heights. Her throaty impostures hurt no one. All agreed
that she was a superb entertainer. In exchange for her lodging below the letter boxes,
Boori Ma kept their crooked stairwell spotlessly clean. Most of all, the residents liked
that Boori Ma, who slept each night behind the collapsible gate, stood guard between
them and the outside world.
No one in this particular flat-building owned much worth stealing. The second-floor
widow, Mrs. Misra, was the only one with a telephone. Still, the residents were thankful
that Boori Ma patrolled activities in the alley, screened the itinerant peddlers who came
to sell combs and shawls from door to door, was able to summon a rickshaw at a
moment’s calling, and could, with a few slaps of her broom, rout any suspicious
character who strayed into the area in order to spit, urinate, or cause some other
trouble.
In short, over the years, Boori Ma’s services came to resemble those of a real durwan.
Though under normal circumstances this was no job for a woman, she honored the
responsibility, and maintained a vigil no less punctilious than if she were the gatekeeper
of a house on Lower Circular Road, or Jodhpur Park, or any other fancy neighborhood.
On the rooftop Boori Ma hung her quilts over the clothesline. The wire, strung diagonally
from one corner of the parapet to the other, stretched across her view of television
antennas, billboards, and the distant arches of Howrah Bridge. Boori Ma consulted the
horizon on all four sides. Then she ran the tap at the base of the cistern. She washed
her face, rinsed her feet, and rubbed two fingers over her teeth. After this she started to
beat the quilts on each side with her broom. Every now and then she stopped and
squinted at the cement, hoping to identify the culprit of her sleepless nights. She was so
absorbed in this process that it was some moments before she noticed Mrs. Dalal of the
third floor, who had come to set a tray of salted lemon peels out to dry in the sun.
“Whatever is inside this quilt is keeping me awake at night,” Boori Ma said. “Tellme,
where do you see them?”
Mrs. Dalal had a soft spot for Boori Ma; occasionally she gave the old woman some
ginger paste with which to flavor her stews. “I don’t see anything,” Mrs. Dalal said after a
while. She had diaphanous eyelids and very slender toes with rings on them.
“Then they must have wings,” Boori Ma concluded. She put down her broom and
observed one cloud passing behind another. “They fly away before I can squash them.

But just see my back. I must be purple from their bites.”
Mrs. Dalal lifted the drape of Boori Ma’s sari, a cheap white weave with a border the
color of a dirty pond. She examined the skin above and below her blouse, cut in a style
no longer sold in shops. Then she said, “Boori Ma, you are imagining things.”
“I tell you, these mites are eating me alive.”
“It could be a case of prickly heat,” Mrs. Dalal suggested.
At this Boori Ma shook the free end of her sari and made her skeleton keys rattle. She
said, “I know prickly heat. This is not prickly heat. I haven’t slept in three, perhaps four
days. Who can count? I used to keep a clean bed. Our linens were muslin. Believe me,
don’t believe me, our mosquito nets were as soft as silk. Such comforts you cannot
even dream them.”
“I cannot dream them,” Mrs. Dalal echoed. She lowered her diaphanous eyelids and
sighed. “I cannot dream them, Boori Ma. I live in two broken rooms, married to a man
who sells toilet parts.” Mrs. Dalal turned away and looked at one of the quilts. She ran a
finger over part of the stitching. Then she asked:
“Boori Ma, how long have you slept on this bedding?”
Boori Ma put a finger to her lips before replying that she could not remember.
“Then why no mention of it until today? Do you think it’s beyond us to provide you with
clean quilts? An oilcloth, for that matter?” She looked insulted.
“There is no need,” Boori Ma said. “They are clean now. I beat them with my broom.”
“I am hearing no arguments,” Mrs. Dalal said. “You need a new bed. Quilts, a pillow. A
blanket when winter comes.” As she spoke Mrs. Dalal kept track of the necessary items
by touching her thumb to the pads of her fingers.
“On festival days the poor came to our house to be fed,” Boori Ma said. She was filling
her bucket from the coal heap on the other side of the roof.
“I will have a word with Mr. Dalal when he returns from the office,” Mrs. Dalal called
back as she headed down the stairs. “Come in the afternoon. I will give you some
pickles and some powder for your back.”
“It’s not prickly heat,” Boori Ma said.
It was true that prickly heat was common during the rainy season. But Boori Ma
preferred to think that what irritated her bed, what stole her sleep, what burned like
peppers across her thinning scalp and skin, was of a less mundane origin.
She was ruminating on these things as she swept the stairwell—she always worked
from top to bottom—when it started to rain. It came slapping across the roof like a boy in
slippers too big for him and washed Mrs. Dalal’s lemon peels into the gutter. Before
pedestrians could open their umbrellas, it rushed down collars, pockets, and shoes. In
that particular flat-building and all the neighboring buildings, creaky shutters were
closed and tied with petticoat strings to the window bars.
At the time, Boori Ma was working all the way down on the second-floor landing. She
looked up the ladderlike stairs, and as the sound of falling water tightened around her
she knew her quilts were turning into yogurt.
But then she recalled her conversation with Mrs. Dalal. And so she continued, at the
same pace, to sweep the dust, cigarette ends, and lozenge wrappers from the rest of
the steps, until she reached the letter boxes at the bottom. To keep out the wind, she
rummaged through her baskets for some newspapers and crammed them into the
diamond-shaped openings of the collapsible gate. Then on her bucket of coals she set
her lunch to boil, and monitored the flame with a plaited palm fan.
That afternoon, as was her habit, Boori Ma reknotted her hair, untied the loose end of
her sari, and counted out her life savings. She had just woken from a nap of twenty
minutes, which she had taken on a temporary bed made from newspapers. The rain

had stopped and now the sour smell that rises from wet mango leaves was hanging low
over the alley.
On certain afternoons Boori Ma visited her fellow residents. She enjoyed drifting in and
out of the various households. The residents, for their part, assured Boori Ma that she
was always welcome; they never drew the latch bars across their doors except at night.
They went about their business, scolding children or adding up expenses or picking
stones out of the evening rice. From time to time she was handed a glass of tea, the
cracker tin was passed in her direction, and she helped children shoot chips across the
carom board. Knowing not to sit on the furniture, she crouched, instead, in doorways
and hallways, and observed gestures and manners in the same way a person tends to
watch traffic in a foreign city.
On this particular afternoon Boori Ma decided to accept Mrs. Dalal’s invitation. Her
back still itched, even after napping on the newspapers, and she was beginning to want
some prickly-heat powder after all. She picked up her broom—she never felt quite
herself without it—and was about to climb upstairs, when a rickshaw pulled up to the
collapsible gate.
It was Mr. Dalal. The years he had spent filing receipts had left him with purple
crescents under his eyes. But today his gaze was bright. The tip of his tongue played
between his teeth, and in the clamp of his thighs he held two small ceramic basins.
“Boori Ma, I have a job for you. Help me carry these basins upstairs.” He pressed a
folded handkerchief to his forehead and throat and gave the rickshaw driver a coin.
Then he and Boori Ma carried the basins all the way up to the third floor. It wasn’t until
they were inside the flat that he finally announced, to Mrs. Dalal, to Boori Ma, and to a
few other residents who had followed them out of curiosity, the following things: That his
hours filing receipts for a distributor of rubber tubes, pipes, and valve fittings had ended.
That the distributor himself, who craved fresher air, and whose profits had doubled, was
opening a second branch in Burdwan. And that, following an assessment of his
sedulous performance over the years, the distributor was promoting Mr. Dalal to
manage the College Street branch. In his excitement on his way home through the
plumbing district, Mr. Dalal had bought two basins.
“What are we supposed to do with two basins in a two-room flat?” Mrs. Dalal
demanded. She had already been sulking over her lemon peels. “Who ever heard of it?
I still cook on kerosene. You refuse to apply for a phone. And I have yet to see the
fridge you promised when we married. You expect two basins to make up for all that?”
The argument that followed was loud enough to be heard all the way down to the letter
boxes. It was loud enough, and long enough, to rise above a second spell of rain that
fell after dark. It was loud enough even to distract Boori Ma as she swept the stairwell
from top to bottom for the second time that day, and for this reason she spoke neither of
her hardships, nor of easier times. She spent the night on a bed of newspapers.
The argument between Mr. and Mrs. Dalal was still more or less in effect early the next
morning, when a barefoot team of workmen came to install the basins. After a night of
tossing and pacing, Mr. Dalal had decided to install one basin in the sitting room of their
flat, and the other one in the stairwell of the building, on the first-floor landing. “This way
everyone can use it,” he explained from door to door. The residents were delighted; for
years they had all brushed their teeth with stored water poured from mugs.
Mr. Dalal, meanwhile, was thinking: A sink in the stairwell is sure to impress visitors.
Now that he was a company manager, who could say who might visit the building?
The workmen toiled for several hours. They ran up and down the stairs and ate their
lunches squatting against the banister poles. They hammered, shouted, spat, and
cursed. They wiped their sweat with the ends of their turbans. In general, they made it
impossible for Boori Ma to sweep the stairwell that day.
To occupy the time, Boori Ma retired to the rooftop. She shuffled along the parapets, but

her hips were sore from sleeping on newspapers. After consulting the horizon on all four
sides, she tore what was left of her quilts into several strips and resolved to polish the
banister poles at a later time.
By early evening the residents gathered to admire the day’s labors. Even Boori Ma was
urged to rinse her hands under the clear running water. She sniffed. “Our bathwater was
scented with petals and attars. Believe me, don’t believe me, it was a luxury you cannot
dream.”
Mr. Dalal proceeded to demonstrate the basin’s various features. He turned each
faucet completely on and completely off. Then he turned on both faucets at the same
time, to illustrate the difference in water pressure. Lifting a small lever between the
faucets allowed water to collect in the basin, if desired.
“The last word in elegance,” Mr. Dalal concluded.
“A sure sign of changing times,” Mr. Chatterjee reputedly admitted from his balcony.
Among the wives, however, resentment quickly brewed. Standing in line to brush their
teeth in the mornings, each grew frustrated with having to wait her turn, for having to
wipe the faucets after every use, and for not being able to leave her own soap and
toothpaste tube on the basin’s narrow periphery. The Dalals had their own sink; why did
the rest of them have to share?
“Is it beyond us to buy sinks of our own?” one of them finally burst out one morning.
“Are the Dalals the only ones who can improve the conditions of this building?” asked
another.
Rumors began spreading: that, following their argument, Mr. Dalal had consoled his
wife by buying her two kilos of mustard oil, a Kashmiri shawl, a dozen cakes of
sandalwood soap; that Mr. Dalal had filed an application for a telephone line; that Mrs.
Dalal did nothing but wash her hands in her basin all day. As if this weren’t enough, the
next morning, a taxi bound for Howrah Station crammed its wheels into the alley; the
Dalals were going to Simla for ten days.
“Boori Ma, I haven’t forgotten. We will bring you back a sheep’s-hair blanket made in the
mountains,” Mrs. Dalal said through the open window of the taxi. She was holding a
leather purse in her lap which matched the turquoise border of her sari.
“We will bring two!” cried Mr. Dalal, who was sitting beside his wife, checking his
pockets to make sure his wallet was in place.
Of all the people who lived in that particular flat-building, Boori Ma was the only one who
stood by the collapsible gate and wished them a safe journey.
As soon as the Dalals were gone, the other wives began planning renovations of their
own. One decided to barter a stack of her wedding bracelets and commissioned a
white-washer to freshen the walls of the stairwell. Another pawned her sewing machine
and summoned an exterminator. A third went to the silversmith and sold back a set of
pudding bowls; she intended to have the shutters painted yellow.
Workers began to occupy this particular flat-building night and day. To avoid the traffic,
Boori Ma took to sleeping on the rooftop. So many people passed in and out of the
collapsible gate, so many others clogged the alley at all times, that there was no point in
keeping track of them.
After a few days Boori Ma moved her baskets and her cooking bucket to the rooftop as
well. There was no need to use the basin downstairs, for she could just as easily wash,
as she always had, from the cistern tap. She still planned to polish the banister poles
with the strips she had torn from her quilts. She continued to sleep on her newspapers.
More rains came. Below the dripping awning, a newspaper pressed over her head,
Boori Ma squatted and watched the monsoon ants as they marched along the
clothesline, carrying eggs in their mouths. Damper winds soothed her back. Her
newspapers were running low.
Her mornings were long, her afternoons longer. She could not remember her last glass

of tea. Thinking neither of her hardships nor of earlier times, she wondered when the
Dalals would return with her new bedding.
She grew restless on the roof, and so for some exercise, Boori Ma started circling the
neighborhood in the afternoons. Reed broom in hand, sari smeared with newsprint ink,
she wandered through markets and began spending her life savings on small treats:
today a packet of puffed rice, tomorrow some cashews, the day after that, a cup of
sugarcane juice. One day she walked as far as the bookstalls on College Street. The
next day she walked even farther, to the produce markets in Bow Bazaar. It was there,
while she was standing in a shopping arcade surveying jackfruits and persimmons, that
she felt something tugging on the free end of her sari. When she looked, the rest of her
life savings and her skeleton keys were gone.
The residents were waiting for Boori Ma when she returned that afternoon at the
collapsible gate. Baleful cries rang up and down the stairwell, all echoing the same
news: the basin on the stairwell had been stolen. There was a big hole in the recently
whitewashed wall, and a tangle of rubber tubes and pipes was sticking out of it. Chunks
of plaster littered the landing. Boori Ma gripped her reed broom and said nothing.
In their haste the residents practically carried Boori Ma up the stairs to the roof, where
they planted her on one side of the clothesline and started screaming at her from the
other.
“This is all her doing,” one of them hollered, pointing at Boori Ma. “She informed the
robbers. Where was she when she was supposed to guard the gate?”
“For days she has been wandering the streets, speaking to strangers,” another
reported.
“We shared our coal, gave her a place to sleep. How could she betray us this way?” a
third wanted to know.
Though none of them spoke directly to Boori Ma, she replied, “Believe me, believe me. I
did not inform the robbers.”
“For years we have put up with your lies,” they retorted. “You expect us, now, to
believe you?”
Their recriminations persisted. How would they explain it to the Dalals? Eventually they
sought the advice of Mr. Chatterjee. They found him sitting on his balcony, watching a
traffic jam.
One of the second-floor residents said, “Boori Ma has endangered the security of this
building. We have valuables. The widow Mrs. Misra lives alone with her phone. What
should we do?”
Mr. Chatterjee considered their arguments. As he thought things over, he adjusted the
shawl that was wrapped around his shoulders and gazed at the bamboo scaffolding that
now surrounded his balcony. The shutters behind him, colorless for as long as he could
remember, had been painted yellow. Finally he said:
“Boori Ma’s mouth is full of ashes. But that is nothing new. What is new is the face of
this building. What a building like this needs is a real durwan. ”
So the residents tossed her bucket and rags, her baskets and reed broom, down the
stairwell, past the letter boxes, through the collapsible gate, and into the alley. Then
they tossed out Boori Ma. All were eager to begin their search for a real durwan.
From the pile of belongings Boori Ma kept only her broom. “Believe me, believe me,”
she said once more as her figure began to recede. She shook the free end of her sari,
but nothing rattled.

Sexy
ITWAS AWIFE’S WORS TNIGHTMARE. After nine years of marriage, Laxmi told Miranda, her
cousin’s husband had fallen in love with another woman. He sat next to her on a plane,
on a flight from Delhi to Montreal, and instead of flying home to his wife and son, he got
off with the woman at Heathrow. He called his wife, and told her he’d had a
conversation that had changed his life, and that he needed time to figure things out.
Laxmi’s cousin had taken to her bed.
“Not that I blame her,” Laxmi said. She reached for the Hot Mix she munched
throughout the day, which looked to Miranda like dusty orange cereal. “Imagine. An
English girl, half his age.” Laxmi was only a few years older than Miranda, but she was
already married, and kept a photo of herself and her husband, seated on a white stone
bench in front of the Taj Mahal, tacked to the inside of her cubicle, which was next to
Miranda’s. Laxmi had been on the phone for at least an hour, trying to calm her cousin
down. No one noticed; they worked for a public radio station, in the fund-raising
department, and were surrounded by people who spent all day on the phone, soliciting
pledges.
“I feel worst for the boy,” Laxmi added. “He’s been at home for days. My cousin said
she can’t even take him to school.”
“It sounds awful,” Miranda said. Normally Laxmi’s phone conversations—mainly to her
husband, about what to cook for dinner—distracted Miranda as she typed letters, asking
members of the radio station to increase their annual pledge in exchange for a tote bag
or an umbrella. She could hear Laxmi clearly, her sentences peppered every now and
then with an Indian word, through the laminated wall between their desks. But that
afternoon Miranda hadn’t been listening. She’d been on the phone herself, with Dev,
deciding where to meet later that evening.
“Then again, a few days at home won’t hurt him.” Laxmi ate some more Hot Mix, then
put it away in a drawer. “He’s something of a genius. He has a Punjabi mother and a
Bengali father, and because he learns French and English at school he already speaks
four languages. I think he skipped two grades.”
Dev was Bengali, too. At first Miranda thought it was a religion. But then he pointed it
out to her, a place in India called Bengal, in a map printed in an issue of The
Economist. He had brought the magazine specially to her apartment, for she did not
own an atlas, or any other books with maps in them. He’d pointed to the city where he’d
been born, and another city where his father had been born. One of the cities had a box
around it, intended to attract the reader’s eye. When Miranda asked what the box
indicated, Dev rolled up the magazine, and said, “Nothing you’ll ever need to worry
about,” and he tapped her playfully on the head.
Before leaving her apartment he’d tossed the magazine in the garbage, along with the
ends of the three cigarettes he always smoked in the course of his visits. But after she
watched his car disappear down Commonwealth Avenue, back to his house in the
suburbs, where he lived with his wife, Miranda retrieved it, and brushed the ashes off
the cover, and rolled it in the opposite direction to get it to lie flat. She got into bed, still
rumpled from their lovemaking, and studied the borders of Bengal. There was a bay
below and mountains above. The map was connected to an article about something
called the Gramin Bank. She turned the page, hoping for a photograph of the city where
Dev was born, but all she found were graphs and grids. Still, she stared at them,
thinking the whole while about Dev, about how only fifteen minutes ago he’d propped
her feet on top of his shoulders, and pressed her knees to her chest, and told her that
he couldn’t get enough of her.
She’d met him a week ago, at Filene’s. She was there on her lunch break, buying

discounted pantyhose in the Basement. Afterward she took the escalator to the main
part of the store, to the cosmetics department, where soaps and creams were displayed
like jewels, and eye shadows and powders shimmered like butterflies pinned behind
protective glass. Though Miranda had never bought anything other than a lipstick, she
liked walking through the cramped, confined maze, which was familiar to her in a way
the rest of Boston still was not. She liked negotiating her way past the women planted at
every turn, who sprayed cards with perfume and waved them in the air; sometimes she
would find a card days afterward, folded in her coat pocket, and the rich aroma, still
faintly preserved, would warm her as she waited on cold mornings for the T.
That day, stopping to smell one of the more pleasing cards, Miranda noticed a man
standing at one of the counters. He held a slip of paper covered in a precise, feminine
hand. A saleswoman took one look at the paper and began to open drawers. She
produced an oblong cake of soap in a black case, a hydrating mask, a vial of cell
renewal drops, and two tubes of face cream. The man was tanned, with black hair that
was visible on his knuckles. He wore a flamingo pink shirt, a navy blue suit, a camel
overcoat with gleaming leather buttons. In order to pay he had taken off pigskin gloves.
Crisp bills emerged from a burgundy wallet. He didn’t wear a wedding ring.
“What can I get you, honey?” the saleswoman asked Miranda. She looked over the
tops of her tortoiseshell glasses, assessing Miranda’s complexion.
Miranda didn’t know what she wanted. All she knew was that she didn’t want the man to
walk away. He seemed to be lingering, waiting, along with the saleswoman, for her to
say something. She stared at some bottles, some short, others tall, arranged on an oval
tray, like a family posing for a photograph.
“A cream,” Miranda said eventually.
“How old are you?”
“Twenty-two.”
The saleswoman nodded, opening a frosted bottle. “This may seem a bit heavier than
what you’re used to, but I’d start now. All your wrinkles are going to form by twenty-five.
After that they just start showing.”
While the saleswoman dabbed the cream on Miranda’s face, the man stood and
watched. While Miranda was told the proper way to apply it, in swift upward strokes
beginning at the base of her throat, he spun the lipstick carousel. He pressed a pump
that dispensed cellulite gel and massaged it into the back of his ungloved hand. He
opened a jar, leaned over, and drew so close that a drop of cream flecked his nose.
Miranda smiled, but her mouth was obscured by a large brush that the saleswoman was
sweeping over her face. “This is blusher Number Two,” the woman said. “Gives you
some color.”
Miranda nodded, glancing at her reflection in one of the angled mirrors that lined the
counter. She had silver eyes and skin as pale as paper, and the contrast with her hair,
as dark and glossy as an espresso bean, caused people to describe her as striking, if
not pretty. She had a narrow, egg-shaped head that rose to a prominent point. Her
features, too, were narrow, with nostrils so slim that they appeared to have been
pinched with a clothespin. Now her face glowed, rosy at the cheeks, smoky below the
brow bone. Her lips glistened.
The man was glancing in a mirror, too, quickly wiping the cream from his nose. Miranda
wondered where he was from. She thought he might be Spanish, or Lebanese. When
he opened another jar, and said, to no one in particular, “This one smells like
pineapple,” she detected only the hint of an accent.
“Anything else for you today?” the saleswoman asked, accepting Miranda’s credit card.
“No thanks.”
The woman wrapped the cream in several layers of red tissue. “You’llbe very happy
with this product.” Miranda’s hand was unsteady as she signed the receipt. The man

hadn’t budged.
“I threw in a sample of our new eye gel,” the saleswoman added, handing Miranda a
small shopping bag. She looked at Miranda’s credit card before sliding it across the
counter. “Bye-bye, Miranda.”
Miranda began walking. At first she sped up. Then, noticing the doors that led to
Downtown Crossing, she slowed down.
“Part of your name is Indian,” the man said, pacing his steps with hers.
She stopped, as did he, at a circular table piled with sweaters, flanked with pinecones
and velvet bows. “Miranda?”
“Mira. I have an aunt named Mira.”
His name was Dev. He worked in an investment bank back that way, he said, tilting his
head in the direction of South Station. He was the first man with a mustache, Miranda
decided, she found handsome.
They walked together toward Park Street station, past the kiosks that sold cheap belts
and handbags. A fierce January wind spoiled the part in her hair. As she fished for a
token in her coat pocket, her eyes fell to his shopping bag. “And those are for her?”
“Who?”
“Your Aunt Mira.”
“They’re for my wife.” He uttered the words slowly, holding Miranda’s gaze. “She’s going
to India for a few weeks.” He rolled his eyes. “She’s addicted to this stuff.”
Somehow, without the wife there, it didn’t seem so wrong. At first Miranda and Dev
spent every night together, almost. He explained that he couldn’t spend the whole night
at her place, because his wife called every day at six in the morning, from India, where it
was four in the afternoon. And so he left her apartment at two, three, often as late as
four in the morning, driving back to his house in the suburbs. During the day he called
her every hour, it seemed, from work, or from his cell phone. Once he learned Miranda’s
schedule he left her a message each evening at five-thirty, when she was on the T
coming back to her apartment, just so, he said, she could hear his voice as soon as she
walked through the door. “I’mthinking about you,” he’d say on the tape. “I can’t wait to
see you.” He told her he liked spending time in her apartment, with its kitchen counter
no wider than a breadbox, and scratchy floors that sloped, and a buzzer in the lobby
that always made a slightly embarrassing sound when he pressed it. He said he
admired her for moving to Boston, where she knew no one, instead of remaining in
Michigan, where she’d grown up and gone to college. When Miranda told him it was
nothing to admire, that she’d moved to Boston precisely for that reason, he shook his
head. “I know what it’s like to be lonely,” he said, suddenly serious, and at that moment
Miranda felt that he understood her—understood how she felt some nights on the T,
after seeing a movie on her own, or going to a bookstore to read magazines, or having
drinks with Laxmi, who always had to meet her husband at Alewife station in an hour or
two. In less serious moments Dev said he liked that her legs were longer than her torso,
something he’d observed the first time she walked across a room naked. “You’re the
first,” he told her, admiring her from the bed. “The first woman I’ve known with legs this
long.”
Dev was the first to tell her that. Unlike the boys she dated in college, who were simply
taller, heavier versions of the ones she dated in high school, Dev was the first always to
pay for things, and hold doors open, and reach across a table in a restaurant to kiss her
hand. He was the first to bring her a bouquet of flowers so immense she’d had to split it
up into all six of her drinking glasses, and the first to whisper her name again and again
when they made love. Within days of meeting him, when she was at work, Miranda
began to wish that there were a picture of her and Dev tacked to the inside of her

cubicle, like the one of Laxmi and her husband in front of the Taj Mahal. She didn’t tell
Laxmi about Dev. She didn’t tell anyone. Part of her wanted to tell Laxmi, if only
because Laxmi was Indian, too. But Laxmi was always on the phone with her cousin
these days, who was still in bed, whose husband was still in London, and whose son
still wasn’t going to school. “You must eat something,” Laxmi would urge. “You mustn’t
lose your health.” When she wasn’t speaking to her cousin, she spoke to her husband,
shorter conversations, in which she ended up arguing about whether to have chicken or
lamb for dinner. “I’msorry,” Miranda heard her apologize at one point. “This whole thing
just makes me a little paranoid.”
Miranda and Dev didn’t argue. They went to movies at the Nickelodeon and kissed the
whole time. They ate pulled pork and cornbread in Davis Square, a paper napkin tucked
like a cravat into the collar of Dev’s shirt. They sipped sangria at the bar of a Spanish
restaurant, a grinning pig’s head presiding over their conversation. They went to the
MFA and picked out a poster of water lilies for her bedroom. One Saturday, following an
afternoon concert at Symphony Hall, he showed her his favorite place in the city, the
Mapparium at the Christian Science center, where they stood inside a room made of
glowing stained-glass panels, which was shaped like the inside of a globe, but looked
like the outside of one. In the middle of the room was a transparent bridge, so that they
felt as if they were standing in the center of the world. Dev pointed to India, which was
red, and far more detailed than the map in The Economist. He explained that many of
the countries, like Siam and Italian Somaliland, no longer existed in the same way; the
names had changed by now. The ocean, as blue as a peacock’s breast, appeared in
two shades, depending on the depth of the water. He showed her the deepest spot on
earth, seven miles deep, above the Mariana Islands. They peered over the bridge and
saw the Antarctic archipelago at their feet, craned their necks and saw a giant metal
star overhead. As Dev spoke, his voice bounced wildly off the glass, sometimes loud,
sometimes soft, sometimes seeming to land in Miranda’s chest, sometimes eluding her
ear altogether. When a group of tourists walked onto the bridge, she could hear them
clearing their throats, as if through microphones. Dev explained that it was because of
the acoustics.
Miranda found London, where Laxmi’s cousin’s husband was, with the woman he’d
met on the plane. She wondered which of the cities in India Dev’s wife was in. The
farthest Miranda had ever been was to the Bahamas once when she was a child. She
searched but couldn’t find it on the glass panels. When the tourists left and she and Dev
were alone again, he told her to stand at one end of the bridge. Even though they were
thirty feet apart, Dev said, they’d be able to hear each other whisper.
“I don’t believe you,” Miranda said. It was the first time she’d spoken since they’d
entered. She felt as if speakers were embedded in her ears.
“Go ahead,” he urged, walking backward to his end of the bridge. His voice dropped to a
whisper. “Say something.” She watched his lips forming the words; at the same time
she heard them so clearly that she felt them under her skin, under her winter coat, so
near and full of warmth that she felt herself go hot.
“Hi,”she whispered, unsure of what else to say.
“You’re sexy,” he whispered back.
At work the following week, Laxmi told Miranda that it wasn’t the first time her cousin’s
husband had had an affair. “She’s decided to let him come to his senses,” Laxmi said
one evening as they were getting ready to leave the office. “She says it’s for the boy.
She’s willing to forgive him for the boy.” Miranda waited as Laxmi shut off her computer.
“He’llcome crawling back, and she’ll let him,” Laxmi said, shaking her head. “Not me. If
my husband so much as looked at another woman I’d change the locks.” She studied

the picture tacked to her cubicle. Laxmi’s husband had his arm draped over her
shoulder, his knees leaning in toward her on the bench. She turned to Miranda.
“Wouldn’t you?”
She nodded. Dev’s wife was coming back from India the next day. That afternoon he’d
called Miranda at work, to say he had to go to the airport to pick her up. He promised
he’d call as soon as he could.
“What’s the Taj Mahal like?” she asked Laxmi.
“The most romantic spot on earth.” Laxmi’s face brightened at the memory. “An
everlasting monument to love.”
While Dev was at the airport, Miranda went to Filene’s Basement to buy herself things
she thought a mistress should have. She found a pair of black high heels with buckles
smaller than a baby’s teeth. She found a satin slip with scalloped edges and a kneelength silk robe. Instead of the pantyhose she normally wore to work, she found sheer
stockings with a seam. She searched through piles and wandered through racks,
pressing back hanger after hanger, until she found a cocktail dress made of a slinky
silvery material that matched her eyes, with little chains for straps. As she shopped she
thought about Dev, and about what he’d told her in the Mapparium. It was the first time
a man had called her sexy, and when she closed her eyes she could still feel his
whisper drifting through her body, under her skin. In the fitting room, which was just one
big room with mirrors on the walls, she found a spot next to an older woman with a
shiny face and coarse frosted hair. The woman stood barefoot in her underwear, pulling
the black net of a body stocking taut between her fingers.
“Always check for snags,” the woman advised.
Miranda pulled out the satin slip with scalloped edges. She held it to her chest.
The woman nodded with approval. “Oh yes.”
“And this?” She held up the silver cocktail dress.
“Absolutely,” the woman said. “He’llwant to rip it right off you.”
Miranda pictured the two of them at a restaurant in the South End they’d been to, where
Dev had ordered foie gras and a soup made with champagne and raspberries. She
pictured herself in the cocktail dress, and Dev in one of his suits, kissing her hand
across the table. Only the next time Dev came to visit her, on a Sunday afternoon
several days since the last time they’d seen each other, he was in gym clothes. After his
wife came back, that was his excuse: on Sundays he drove into Boston and went
running along the Charles. The first Sunday she opened the door in the knee-length
robe, but Dev didn’t even notice it; he carried her over to the bed, wearing sweatpants
and sneakers, and entered her without a word. Later, she slipped on the robe when she
walked across the room to get him a saucer for his cigarette ashes, but he complained
that she was depriving him of the sight of her long legs, and demanded that she remove
it. So the next Sunday she didn’t bother. She wore jeans. She kept the lingerie at the
back of a drawer, behind her socks and everyday underwear. The silver cocktail dress
hung in her closet, the tag dangling from the seam. Often, in the morning, the dress
would be in a heap on the floor; the chain straps always slipped off the metal hanger.
Still, Miranda looked forward to Sundays. In the mornings she went to a deli and bought
a baguette and little containers of things Dev liked to eat, like pickled herring, and potato
salad, and tortes of pesto and mascarpone cheese. They ate in bed, picking up the
herring with their fingers and ripping the baguette with their hands. Dev told her stories
about his childhood, when he would come home from school and drink mango juice
served to him on a tray, and then play cricket by a lake, dressed all in white. He told her
about how, at eighteen, he’d been sent to a college in upstate New York during
something called the Emergency, and about how it took him years to be able to follow

American accents in movies, in spite of the fact that he’d had an English-medium
education. As he talked he smoked three cigarettes, crushing them in a saucer by the
side of her bed. Sometimes he asked her questions, like how many lovers she’d had
(three) and how old she’d been the first time (nineteen). After lunch they made love, on
sheets covered with crumbs, and then Dev took a nap for twelve minutes. Miranda had
never known an adult who took naps, but Dev said it was something he’d grown up
doing in India, where it was so hot that people didn’t leave their homes until the sun
went down. “Plus it allows us to sleep together,” he murmured mischievously, curving
his arm like a big bracelet around her body.
Only Miranda never slept. She watched the clock on her bedside table, or pressed her
face against Dev’s fingers, intertwined with hers, each with its half-dozen hairs at the
knuckle. After six minutes she turned to face him, sighing and stretching, to test if he
was really sleeping. He always was. His ribs were visible through his skin as he
breathed, and yet he was beginning to develop a paunch. He complained about the hair
on his shoulders, but Miranda thought him perfect, and refused to imagine him any
other way.
At the end of twelve minutes Dev would open his eyes as if he’d been awake all along,
smiling at her, full of a contentment she wished she felt herself. “The best twelve
minutes of the week.” He’d sigh, running a hand along the backs of her calves. Then
he’d spring out of bed, pulling on his sweatpants and lacing up his sneakers. He would
go to the bathroom and brush his teeth with his index finger, something he told her all
Indians knew how to do, to get rid of the smoke in his mouth. When she kissed him
good-bye she smelled herself sometimes in his hair. But she knew that his excuse, that
he’d spent the afternoon jogging, allowed him to take a shower when he got home, first
thing.
Apart from Laxmi and Dev, the only Indians whom Miranda had known were a family in
the neighborhood where she’d grown up, named the Dixits. Much to the amusement of
the neighborhood children, including Miranda, but not including the Dixit children, Mr.
Dixit would jog each evening along the flat winding streets of their development in his
everyday shirt and trousers, his only concession to athletic apparel a pair of cheap
Keds. Every weekend, the family—mother, father, two boys, and a girl—piled into their
car and went away, to where nobody knew. The fathers complained that Mr. Dixit did
not fertilize his lawn properly, did not rake his leaves on time, and agreed that the Dixits’
house, the only one with vinyl siding, detracted from the neighborhood’s charm. The
mothers never invited Mrs. Dixit to join them around the Armstrongs’ swimming pool.
Waiting for the school bus with the Dixit children standing to one side, the other children
would say “The Dixits dig shit,” under their breath, and then burst into laughter.
One year, all the neighborhood children were invited to the birthday party of the Dixit
girl. Miranda remembered a heavy aroma of incense and onions in the house, and a pile
of shoes heaped by the front door. But most of all she remembered a piece of fabric,
about the size of a pillowcase, which hung from a wooden dowel at the bottom of the
stairs. It was a painting of a naked woman with a red face shaped like a knight’s shield.
She had enormous white eyes that tilted toward her temples, and mere dots for pupils.
Two circles, with the same dots at their centers, indicated her breasts. In one hand she
brandished a dagger. With one foot she crushed a struggling man on the ground.
Around her body was a necklace composed of bleeding heads, strung together like a
popcorn chain. She stuck her tongue out at Miranda.
“It is the goddess Kali,” Mrs. Dixit explained brightly, shifting the dowel slightly in order
to straighten the image. Mrs. Dixit’s hands were painted with henna, an intricate pattern
of zigzags and stars. “Come please, time for cake.”

Miranda, then nine years old, had been too frightened to eat the cake. For months
afterward she’d been too frightened even to walk on the same side of the street as the
Dixits’ house, which she had to pass twice daily, once to get to the bus stop, and once
again to come home. For a while she even held her breath until she reached the next
lawn, just as she did when the school bus passed a cemetery.
It shamed her now. Now, when she and Dev made love, Miranda closed her eyes and
saw deserts and elephants, and marble pavilions floating on lakes beneath a full moon.
One Saturday, having nothing else to do, she walked all the way to Central Square, to
an Indian restaurant, and ordered a plate of tandoori chicken. As she ate she tried to
memorize phrases printed at the bottom of the menu, for things like “delicious” and
“water” and “check, please.” The phrases didn’t stick in her mind, and so she began to
stop from time to time in the foreign-language section of a bookstore in Kenmore
Square, where she studied the Bengali alphabet in the Teach Yourself series. Once she
went so far as to try to transcribe the Indian part of her name, “Mira,”into her Filofax,
her hand moving in unfamiliar directions, stopping and turning and picking up her pen
when she least expected to. Following the arrows in the book, she drew a bar from left
to right from which the letters hung; one looked more like a number than a letter,
another looked like a triangle on its side. It had taken her several tries to get the letters
of her name to resemble the sample letters in the book, and even then she wasn’t sure
if she’d written Mira or Mara. It was a scribble to her, but somewhere in the world, she
realized with a shock, it meant something.
During the week it wasn’t so bad. Work kept her busy, and she and Laxmi had begun
having lunch together at a new Indian restaurant around the corner, during which Laxmi
reported the latest status of her cousin’s marriage. Sometimes Miranda tried to change
the topic; it made her feel the way she once felt in college, when she and her boyfriend
at the time had walked away from a crowded house of pancakes without paying for their
food, just to see if they could get away with it. But Laxmi spoke of nothing else. “IfI were
her I’d fly straight to London and shoot them both,” she announced one day. She
snapped a papadum in half and dipped it into chutney. “I don’t know how she can just
wait this way.”
Miranda knew how to wait. In the evenings she sat at her dining table and coated her
nails with clear nail polish, and ate salad straight from the salad bowl, and watched
television, and waited for Sunday. Saturdays were the worst because by Saturday it
seemed that Sunday would never come. One Saturday when Dev called, late at night,
she heard people laughing and talking in the background, so many that she asked him if
he was at a concert hall. But he was only calling from his house in the suburbs. “I can’t
hear you that well,” he said. “We have guests. Miss me?” She looked at the television
screen, a sitcom that she’d muted with the remote control when the phone rang. She
pictured him whispering into his cell phone, in a room upstairs, a hand on the doorknob,
the hallway filled with guests. “Miranda, do you miss me?” he asked again. She told him
that she did.
The next day, when Dev came to visit, Miranda asked him what his wife looked like.
She was nervous to ask, waiting until he’d smoked the last of his cigarettes, crushing it
with a firm twist into the saucer. She wondered if they’d quarrel. But Dev wasn’t
surprised by the question. He told her, spreading some smoked whitefish on a cracker,
that his wife resembled an actress in Bombay named Madhuri Dixit.
For an instant Miranda’s heart stopped. But no, the Dixit girl had been named
something else, something that began with P. Still, she wondered if the actress and the
Dixit girl were related. She’d been plain, wearing her hair in two braids all through high
school.

A few days later Miranda went to an Indian grocery in Central Square which also rented
videos. The door opened to a complicated tinkling of bells. It was dinnertime, and she
was the only customer. A video was playing on a television hooked up in a corner of the
store: a row of young women in harem pants were thrusting their hips in synchrony on a
beach.
“Can I help you?” the man standing at the cash register asked. He was eating a
samosa, dipping it into some dark brown sauce on a paper plate. Below the glass
counter at his waist were trays of more plump samosas, and what looked like pale,
diamond-shaped pieces of fudge covered with foil, and some bright orange pastries
floating in syrup. “You like some video?”
Miranda opened up her Filofax, where she had written “Mottery Dixit.”She looked up
at the videos on the shelves behind the counter. She saw women wearing skirts that sat
low on the hips and tops that tied like bandannas between their breasts. Some leaned
back against a stone wall, or a tree. They were beautiful, the way the women dancing
on the beach were beautiful, with kohl-rimmed eyes and long black hair. She knew then
that Madhuri Dixit was beautiful, too.
“We have subtitled versions, miss,” the man continued. He wiped his fingertips quickly
on his shirt and pulled out three titles.
“No,” Miranda said. “Thank you, no.” She wandered through the store, studying shelves
lined with unlabeled packets and tins. The freezer case was stuffed with bags of pita
bread and vegetables she didn’t recognize. The only thing she recognized was a rack
lined with bags and bags of the Hot Mix that Laxmi was always eating. She thought
about buying some for Laxmi, then hesitated, wondering how to explain what she’d
been doing in an Indian grocery.
“Very spicy,” the man said, shaking his head, his eyes traveling across Miranda’s body.
“Too spicy for you.”
By February, Laxmi’s cousin’s husband still hadn’t come to his senses. He had returned
to Montreal, argued bitterly with his wife for two weeks, packed two suitcases, and flown
back to London. He wanted a divorce.
Miranda sat in her cubicle and listened as Laxmi kept telling her cousin that there were
better men in the world, just waiting to come out of the woodwork. The next day the
cousin said she and her son were going to her parents’ house in California, to try to
recuperate. Laxmi convinced her to arrange a weekend layover in Boston. “A quick
change of place will do you good,” Laxmi insisted gently, “besides which, I haven’t seen
you in years.”
Miranda stared at her own phone, wishing Dev would call. It had been four days since
their last conversation. She heard Laxmi dialing directory assistance, asking for the
number of a beauty salon. “Something soothing,” Laxmi requested. She scheduled
massages, facials, manicures, and pedicures. Then she reserved a table for lunch at
the Four Seasons. In her determination to cheer up her cousin, Laxmi had forgotten
about the boy. She rapped her knuckles on the laminated wall.
“Are you busy Saturday?”
The boy was thin. He wore a yellow knapsack strapped across his back, gray
herringbone trousers, a red V-necked sweater, and black leather shoes. His hair was
cut in a thick fringe over his eyes, which had dark circles under them. They were the
first thing Miranda noticed. They made him look haggard, as if he smoked a great deal
and slept very little, in spite of the fact that he was only seven years old. He clasped a
large sketch pad with a spiral binding. His name was Rohin.

“Ask me a capital,” he said, staring up at Miranda.
She stared back at him. It was eight-thirty on a Saturday morning. She took a sip of
coffee. “A what?”
“It’s a game he’s been playing,” Laxmi’s cousin explained. She was thin like her son,
with a long face and the same dark circles under her eyes. A rust-colored coat hung
heavy on her shoulders. Her black hair, with a few strands of gray at the temples, was
pulled back like a ballerina’s. “You ask him a country and he tells you the capital.”
“You should have heard him in the car,” Laxmi said. “He’s already memorized all of
Europe.”
“It’s not a game,” Rohin said. “I’mhaving a competition with a boy at school. We’re
competing to memorize all the capitals. I’m going to beat him.”
Miranda nodded. “Okay. What’s the capital of India?”
“That’s no good.” He marched away, his arms swinging like a toy soldier. Then he
marched back to Laxmi’s cousin and tugged at a pocket of her overcoat. “Ask me a hard
one.”
“Senegal,” she said.
“Dakar!” Rohin exclaimed triumphantly, and began running in larger and larger circles.
Eventually he ran into the kitchen. Miranda could hear him opening and closing the
fridge.
“Rohin, don’t touch without asking,” Laxmi’s cousin called out wearily. She managed a
smile for Miranda. “Don’t worry, he’ll fall asleep in a few hours. And thanks for watching
him.”
“Back at three,” Laxmi said, disappearing with her cousin down the hallway. “We’re
double-parked.”
Miranda fastened the chain on the door. She went to the kitchen to find Rohin, but he
was now in the living room, at the dining table, kneeling on one of the director’s chairs.
He unzipped his knapsack, pushed Miranda’s basket of manicure supplies to one side
of the table, and spread his crayons over the surface. Miranda stood over his shoulder.
She watched as he gripped a blue crayon and drew the outline of an airplane.
“It’s lovely,” she said. When he didn’t reply, she went to the kitchen to pour herself more
coffee.
“Some for me, please,” Rohin called out.
She returned to the living room. “Some what?”
“Some coffee. There’s enough in the pot. I saw.”
She walked over to the table and sat opposite him. At times he nearly stood up to reach
for a new crayon. He barely made a dent in the director’s chair.
“You’re too young for coffee.”
Rohin leaned over the sketch pad, so that his tiny chest and shoulders almost touched
it, his head tilted to one side. “The stewardess let me have coffee,” he said. “She made
it with milk and lots of sugar.” He straightened, revealing a woman’s face beside the
plane, with long wavy hair and eyes like asterisks. “Her hair was more shiny,” he
decided, adding, “My father met a pretty woman on a plane, too.” He looked at Miranda.
His face darkened as he watched her sip. “Can’t I have just a little coffee? Please?”
She wondered, in spite of his composed, brooding expression, if he were the type to
throw a tantrum. She imagined his kicking her with his leather shoes, screaming for
coffee, screaming and crying until his mother and Laxmi came back to fetch him. She
went to the kitchen and prepared a cup for him as he’d requested. She selected a mug
she didn’t care for, in case he dropped it.
“Thank you,” he said when she put it on the table. He took short sips, holding the mug
securely with both hands.
Miranda sat with him while he drew, but when she attempted to put a coat of clear
polish on her nails he protested. Instead he pulled out a paperback world almanac from

his knapsack and asked her to quiz him. The countries were arranged by continent, six
to a page, with the capitals in boldface, followed by a short entry on the population,
government, and other statistics. Miranda turned to a page in the Africa section and
went down the list.
“Mali,”she asked him.
“Bamako,” he replied instantly.
“Malawi.”
“Lilongwe.”
She remembered looking at Africa in the Mapparium. She remembered the fat part of it
was green.
“Go on,” Rohin said.
“Mauritania.”
“Nouakchott.”
“Mauritius.”
He paused, squeezed his eyes shut, then opened them, defeated. “I can’t remember.”
“Port Louis,” she told him.
“Port Louis.” He began to say it again and again, like a chant under his breath.
When they reached the last of the countries in Africa, Rohin said he wanted to watch
cartoons, telling Miranda to watch them with him. When the cartoons ended, he followed
her to the kitchen, and stood by her side as she made more coffee. He didn’t follow her
when she went to the bathroom a few minutes later, but when she opened the door she
was startled to find him standing outside.
“Do you need to go?”
He shook his head but walked into the bathroom anyway. He put the cover of the toilet
down, climbed on top of it, and surveyed the narrow glass shelf over the sink which held
Miranda’s toothbrush and makeup.
“What’s this for?” he asked, picking up the sample of eye gel she’d gotten the day she
met Dev.
“Puffiness.”
“What’s puffiness?”
“Here,” she explained, pointing.
“After you’ve been crying?”
“I guess so.”
Rohin opened the tube and smelled it. He squeezed a drop of it onto a finger, then
rubbed it on his hand. “It stings.” He inspected the back of his hand closely, as if
expecting it to change color. “My mother has puffiness. She says it’s a cold, but really
she cries, sometimes for hours. Sometimes straight through dinner. Sometimes she
cries so hard her eyes puff up like bullfrogs.”
Miranda wondered if she ought to feed him. In the kitchen she discovered a bag of rice
cakes and some lettuce. She offered to go out, to buy something from the deli, but
Rohin said he wasn’t very hungry, and accepted one of the rice cakes. “You eat one
too,” he said. They sat at the table, the rice cakes between them. He turned to a fresh
page in his sketch pad. “You draw.”
She selected a blue crayon. “What should I draw?”
He thought for a moment. “I know,” he said. He asked her to draw things in the living
room: the sofa, the director’s chairs, the television, the telephone. “This way I can
memorize it.”
“Memorize what?”
“Our day together.” He reached for another rice cake.
“Why do you want to memorize it?”
“Because we’re never going to see each other, ever again.”
The precision of the phrase startled her. She looked at him, feeling slightly depressed.

Rohin didn’t look depressed. He tapped the page. “Go on.”
And so she drew the items as best as she could—the sofa, the director’s chairs, the
television, the telephone. He sidled up to her, so close that it was sometimes difficult to
see what she was doing. He put his small brown hand over hers. “Now me.”
She handed him the crayon.
He shook his head. “No, now draw me.”
“I can’t,” she said. “It won’t look like you.”
The brooding look began to spread across Rohin’s face again, just as it had when she’d
refused him coffee. “Please?”
She drew his face, outlining his head and the thick fringe of hair. He sat perfectly still,
with a formal, melancholy expression, his gaze fixed to one side. Miranda wished she
could draw a good likeness. Her hand moved in conjunction with her eyes, in unknown
ways, just as it had that day in the bookstore when she’d transcribed her name in
Bengali letters. It looked nothing like him. She was in the middle of drawing his nose
when he wriggled away from the table.
“I’mbored,” he announced, heading toward her bedroom. She heard him opening the
door, opening the drawers of her bureau and closing them.
When she joined him he was inside the closet. After a moment he emerged, his hair
disheveled, holding the silver cocktail dress. “This was on the floor.”
“It falls off the hanger.”
Rohin looked at the dress and then at Miranda’s body. “Put it on.”
“Excuse me?”
“Put it on.”
There was no reason to put it on. Apart from in the fitting room at Filene’s she had never
worn it, and as long as she was with Dev she knew she never would. She knew they
would never go to restaurants, where he would reach across a table and kiss her hand.
They would meet in her apartment, on Sundays, he in his sweatpants, she in her jeans.
She took the dress from Rohin and shook it out, even though the slinky fabric never
wrinkled. She reached into the closet for a free hanger.
“Please put it on,” Rohin asked, suddenly standing behind her. He pressed his face
against her, clasping her waist with both his thin arms. “Please?”
“Allright,” she said, surprised by the strength of his grip.
He smiled, satisfied, and sat on the edge of her bed.
“You have to wait out there,” she said, pointing to the door. “I’llcome out when I’m
ready.”
“But my mother always takes her clothes off in front of me.”
“She does?”
Rohin nodded. “She doesn’t even pick them up afterward. She leaves them all on the
floor by the bed, all tangled.
“One day she slept in my room,” he continued. “She said it felt better than her bed, now
that my father’s gone.”
“I’mnot your mother,” Miranda said, lifting him by the armpits off her bed. When he
refused to stand, she picked him up. He was heavier than she expected, and he clung
to her, his legs wrapped firmly around her hips, his head resting against her chest. She
set him down in the hallway and shut the door. As an extra precaution she fastened the
latch. She changed into the dress, glancing into the full-length mirror nailed to the back
of the door. Her ankle socks looked silly, and so she opened a drawer and found the
stockings. She searched through the back of the closet and slipped on the high heels
with the tiny buckles. The chain straps of the dress were as light as paper clips against
her collarbone. It was a bit loose on her. She could not zip it herself.
Rohin began knocking. “May I come in now?”
She opened the door. Rohin was holding his almanac in his hands, muttering something

under his breath. His eyes opened wide at the sight of her. “I need help with the zipper,”
she said. She sat on the edge of the bed.
Rohin fastened the zipper to the top, and then Miranda stood up and twirled. Rohin put
down the almanac. “You’re sexy,” he declared.
“What did you say?”
“You’re sexy.”
Miranda sat down again. Though she knew it meant nothing, her heart skipped a beat.
Rohin probably referred to all women as sexy. He’d probably heard the word on
television, or seen it on the cover of a magazine. She remembered the day in the
Mapparium, standing across the bridge from Dev. At the time she thought she knew
what his words meant. At the time they’d made sense.
Miranda folded her arms across her chest and looked Rohin in the eyes. “Tellme
something.”
He was silent.
“What does it mean?”
“What?”
“That word. ‘Sexy.’ What does it mean?”
He looked down, suddenly shy. “I can’t tell you.”
“Why not?”
“It’s a secret.” He pressed his lips together, so hard that a bit of them went white.
“Tellme the secret. I want to know.”
Rohin sat on the bed beside Miranda and began to kick the edge of the mattress with
the backs of his shoes. He giggled nervously, his thin body flinching as if it were being
tickled.
“Tellme,” Miranda demanded. She leaned over and gripped his ankles, holding his feet
still.
Rohin looked at her, his eyes like slits. He struggled to kick the mattress again, but
Miranda pressed against him. He fell back on the bed, his back straight as a board. He
cupped his hands around his mouth, and then he whispered, “It means loving someone
you don’t know.”
Miranda felt Rohin’s words under her skin, the same way she’d felt Dev’s. But instead of
going hot she felt numb. It reminded her of the way she’d felt at the Indian grocery, the
moment she knew, without even looking at a picture, that Madhuri Dixit, whom Dev’s
wife resembled, was beautiful.
“That’s what my father did,” Rohin continued. “He sat next to someone he didn’t know,
someone sexy, and now he loves her instead of my mother.”
He took off his shoes and placed them side by side on the floor. Then he peeled back
the comforter and crawled into Miranda’s bed with the almanac. A minute later the book
dropped from his hands, and he closed his eyes. Miranda watched him sleep, the
comforter rising and falling as he breathed. He didn’t wake up after twelve minutes like
Dev, or even twenty. He didn’t open his eyes as she stepped out of the silver cocktail
dress and back into her jeans, and put the high-heeled shoes in the back of the closet,
and rolled up the stockings and put them back in her drawer.
When she had put everything away she sat on the bed. She leaned toward him, close
enough to see some white powder from the rice cakes stuck to the corners of his mouth,
and picked up the almanac. As she turned the pages she imagined the quarrels Rohin
had overheard in his house in Montreal. “Is she pretty?” his mother would have asked
his father, wearing the same bathrobe she’d worn for weeks, her own pretty face turning
spiteful. “Is she sexy?” His father would deny it at first, try to change the subject. “Tell
me,” Rohin’s mother would shriek, “tell me if she’s sexy.” In the end his father would
admit that she was, and his mother would cry and cry, in a bed surrounded by a tangle
of clothes, her eyes puffing up like bullfrogs. “How could you,” she’d ask, sobbing, “how

could you love a woman you don’t even know?”
As Miranda imagined the scene she began to cry a little herself. In the Mapparium that
day, all the countries had seemed close enough to touch, and Dev’s voice had bounced
wildly off the glass. From across the bridge, thirty feet away, his words had reached her
ears, so near and full of warmth that they’d drifted for days under her skin. Miranda
cried harder, unable to stop. But Rohin still slept. She guessed that he was used to it
now, to the sound of a woman crying.
On Sunday, Dev called to tell Miranda he was on his way. “I’malmost ready. I’llbe
there at two.”
She was watching a cooking show on television. A woman pointed to a row of apples,
explaining which were best for baking. “You shouldn’t come today.”
“Why not?”
“I have a cold,” she lied. It wasn’t far from the truth; crying had left her congested. “I’ve
been in bed all morning.”
“You do sound stuffed up.” There was a pause. “Do you need anything?”
“I’mall set.”
“Drink lots of fluids.”
“Dev?”
“Yes, Miranda?”
“Do you remember that day we went to the Mapparium?”
“Of course.”
“Do you remember how we whispered to each other?”
“I remember,” Dev whispered playfully. “Do you remember what you said?”
There was a pause. “‘Let’s go back to your place.’” He laughed quietly. “Next Sunday,
then?”
The day before, as she’d cried, Miranda had believed she would never forget
anything—not even the way her name looked written in Bengali. She’d fallen asleep
beside Rohin and when she woke up he was drawing an airplane on the copy of The
Economist she’d saved, hidden under the bed. “Who’s Devajit Mitra?” he had asked,
looking at the address label.
Miranda pictured Dev, in his sweatpants and sneakers, laughing into the phone. In a
moment he’d join his wife downstairs, and tell her he wasn’t going jogging. He’d pulled a
muscle while stretching, he’d say, settling down to read the paper. In spite of herself,
she longed for him. She would see him one more Sunday, she decided, perhaps two.
Then she would tell him the things she had known all along: that it wasn’t fair to her, or
to his wife, that they both deserved better, that there was no point in it dragging on.
But the next Sunday it snowed, so much so that Dev couldn’t tell his wife he was going
running along the Charles. The Sunday after that, the snow had melted, but Miranda
made plans to go to the movies with Laxmi, and when she told Dev this over the phone,
he didn’t ask her to cancel them. The third Sunday she got up early and went out for a
walk. It was cold but sunny, and so she walked all the way down Commonwealth
Avenue, past the restaurants where Dev had kissed her, and then she walked all the
way to the Christian Science center. The Mapparium was closed, but she bought a cup
of coffee nearby and sat on one of the benches in the plaza outside the church, gazing
at its giant pillars and its massive dome, and at the clear-blue sky spread over the city.

Mrs. Sen’s
E LIOTHADBEENGOING to Mrs. Sen’s for nearly a month, ever since school started in
September. The year before he was looked after by a university student named Abby, a
slim, freckled girl who read books without pictures on their covers, and refused to
prepare any food for Eliot containing meat. Before that an older woman, Mrs. Linden,
greeted him when he came home each afternoon, sipping coffee from a thermos and
working on crossword puzzles while Eliot played on his own. Abby received her degree
and moved off to another university, while Mrs. Linden was, in the end, fired when
Eliot’s mother discovered that Mrs. Linden’s thermos contained more whiskey than
coffee. Mrs. Sen came to them in tidy ballpoint script, posted on an index card outside
the supermarket: “Professor’s wife, responsible and kind, I will care for your child in my
home.” On the telephone Eliot’s mother told Mrs. Sen that the previous baby-sitters had
come to their house. “Eliot is eleven. He can feed and entertain himself; I just want an
adult in the house, in case of an emergency.” But Mrs. Sen did not know how to drive.
***
“As you can see, our home is quite clean, quite safe for a child,” Mrs. Sen had said at
their first meeting. It was a university apartment located on the fringes of the campus.
The lobby was tiled in unattractive squares of tan, with a row of mailboxes marked with
masking tape or white labels. Inside, intersecting shadows left by a vacuum cleaner
were frozen on the surface of a plush pear-colored carpet. Mismatched remnants of
other carpets were positioned in front of the sofa and chairs, like individual welcome
mats anticipating where a person’s feet would contact the floor. White drum-shaped
lampshades flanking the sofa were still wrapped in the manufacturer’s plastic. The TV
and the telephone were covered by pieces of yellow fabric with scalloped edges. There
was tea in a tall gray pot, along with mugs, and butter biscuits on a tray. Mr. Sen, a
short, stocky man with slightly protuberant eyes and glasses with black rectangular
frames, had been there, too. He crossed his legs with some effort, and held his mug
with both hands very close to his mouth, even when he wasn’t drinking. Neither Mr. nor
Mrs. Sen wore shoes; Eliot noticed several pairs lined on the shelves of a small
bookcase by the front door. They wore flip-flops. “Mr. Sen teaches mathematics at the
university,” Mrs. Sen had said by way of introduction, as if they were only distantly
acquainted.
She was about thirty. She had a small gap between her teeth and faded pockmarks on
her chin, yet her eyes were beautiful, with thick, flaring brows and liquid flourishes that
extended beyond the natural width of the lids. She wore a shimmering white sari
patterned with orange paisleys, more suitable for an evening affair than for that quiet,
faintly drizzling August afternoon. Her lips were coated in a complementary coral gloss,
and a bit of the color had strayed beyond the borders.
Yet it was his mother, Eliot had thought, in her cuffed, beige shorts and her rope-soled
shoes, who looked odd. Her cropped hair, a shade similar to her shorts, seemed too
lank and sensible, and in that room where all things were so carefully covered, her
shaved knees and thighs too exposed. She refused a biscuit each time Mrs. Sen
extended the plate in her direction, and asked a long series of questions, the answers to
which she recorded on a steno pad. Would there be other children in the apartment?
Had Mrs. Sen cared for children before? How long had she lived in this country? Most of
all she was concerned that Mrs. Sen did not know how to drive. Eliot’s mother worked in
an office fifty miles north, and his father, the last she had heard, lived two thousand
miles west.
“I have been giving her lessons, actually,” Mr. Sen said, setting his mug on the coffee
table. It was the first time he had spoken. “By my estimate Mrs. Sen should have her

driver’s license by December.”
“Is that so?” Eliot’s mother noted the information on her pad.
“Yes, I am learning,” Mrs. Sen said. “But I am a slow student. At home, you know, we
have a driver.”
“You mean a chauffeur?”
Mrs. Sen glanced at Mr. Sen, who nodded.
Eliot’s mother nodded, too, looking around the room. “And that’s all … in India?”
“Yes,” Mrs. Sen replied. The mention of the word seemed to release something in her.
She neatened the border of her sari where it rose diagonally across her chest. She, too,
looked around the room, as if she noticed in the lampshades, in the teapot, in the
shadows frozen on the carpet, something the rest of them could not. “Everything is
there.”
Eliot didn’t mind going to Mrs. Sen’s after school. By September the tiny beach house
where he and his mother lived year-round was already cold; Eliot and his mother had to
bring a portable heater along whenever they moved from one room to another, and to
seal the windows with plastic sheets and a hair drier. The beach was barren and dull to
play on alone; the only neighbors who stayed on past Labor Day, a young married
couple, had no children, and Eliot no longer found it interesting to gather broken mussel
shells in his bucket, or to stroke the seaweed, strewn like strips of emerald lasagna on
the sand. Mrs. Sen’s apartment was warm, sometimes too warm; the radiators
continuously hissed like a pressure cooker. Eliot learned to remove his sneakers first
thing in Mrs. Sen’s doorway, and to place them on the bookcase next to a row of Mrs.
Sen’s slippers, each a different color, with soles as flat as cardboard and a ring of
leather to hold her big toe.
He especially enjoyed watching Mrs. Sen as she chopped things, seated on
newspapers on the living room floor. Instead of a knife she used a blade that curved like
the prow of a Viking ship, sailing to battle in distant seas. The blade was hinged at one
end to a narrow wooden base. The steel, more black than silver, lacked a uniform
polish, and had a serrated crest, she told Eliot, for grating. Each afternoon Mrs. Sen
lifted the blade and locked it into place, so that it met the base at an angle. Facing the
sharp edge without ever touching it, she took whole vegetables between her hands and
hacked them apart: cauliflower, cabbage, butternut squash. She split things in half, then
quarters, speedily producing florets, cubes, slices, and shreds. She could peel a potato
in seconds. At times she sat cross-legged, at times with legs splayed, surrounded by an
array of colanders and shallow bowls of water in which she immersed her chopped
ingredients.
While she worked she kept an eye on the television and an eye on Eliot, but she never
seemed to keep an eye on the blade. Nevertheless she refused to let Eliot walk around
when she was chopping. “Just sit, sit please, it will take just two more minutes,” she
said, pointing to the sofa, which was draped at all times with a green and black
bedcover printed with rows of elephants bearing palanquins on their backs. The daily
procedure took about an hour. In order to occupy Eliot she supplied him with the comics
section of the newspaper, and crackers spread with peanut butter, and sometimes a
Popsicle, or carrot sticks sculpted with her blade. She would have roped off the area if
she could. Once, though, she broke her own rule; in need of additional supplies, and
reluctant to rise from the catastrophic mess that barricaded her, she asked Eliot to fetch
something from the kitchen. “Ifyou don’t mind, there is a plastic bowl, large enough to
hold this spinach, in the cabinet next to the fridge. Careful, oh dear, be careful,” she
cautioned as he approached. “Just leave it, thank you, on the coffee table, I can reach.”
She had brought the blade from India, where apparently there was at least one in

every household. “Whenever there is a wedding in the family,” she told Eliot one day,
“or a large celebration of any kind, my mother sends out word in the evening for all the
neighborhood women to bring blades just like this one, and then they sit in an enormous
circle on the roof of our building, laughing and gossiping and slicing fifty kilos of
vegetables through the night.” Her profile hovered protectively over her work, a confetti
of cucumber, eggplant, and onion skins heaped around her. “It is impossible to fall
asleep those nights, listening to their chatter.” She paused to look at a pine tree framed
by the living room window. “Here, in this place where Mr. Sen has brought me, I cannot
sometimes sleep in so much silence.”
Another day she sat prying the pimpled yellow fat off chicken parts, then dividing them
between thigh and leg. As the bones cracked apart over the blade her golden bangles
jostled, her forearms glowed, and she exhaled audibly through her nose. At one point
she paused, gripping the chicken with both hands, and stared out the window. Fat and
sinew clung to her fingers.
“Eliot, if I began to scream right now at the top of my lungs, would someone come?”
“Mrs. Sen, what’s wrong?”
“Nothing. I am only asking if someone would come.” Eliot shrugged. “Maybe.”
“At home that is all you have to do. Not everybody has a telephone. But just raise your
voice a bit, or express grief or joy of any kind, and one whole neighborhood and half of
another has come to share the news, to help with arrangements.”
By then Eliot understood that when Mrs. Sen said home, she meant India, not the
apartment where she sat chopping vegetables. He thought of his own home, just five
miles away, and the young married couple who waved from time to time as they jogged
at sunset along the shore. On Labor Day they’d had a party. People were piled on the
deck, eating, drinking, the sound of their laughter rising above the weary sigh of the
waves. Eliot and his mother weren’t invited. It was one of the rare days his mother had
off, but they didn’t go anywhere. She did the laundry, and balanced the checkbook, and,
with Eliot’s help, vacuumed the inside of the car. Eliot had suggested that they go
through the car wash a few miles down the road as they did every now and then, so that
they could sit inside, safe and dry, as soap and water and a circle of giant canvas
ribbons slapped the windshield, but his mother said she was too tired, and sprayed the
car with a hose. When, by evening, the crowd on the neighbors’ deck began dancing,
she looked up their number in the phone book and asked them to keep it down.
“They might call you,” Eliot said eventually to Mrs. Sen. “But they might complain that
you were making too much noise.”
From where Eliot sat on the sofa he could detect her curious scent of mothballs and
cumin, and he could see the perfectly centered part in her braided hair, which was
shaded with crushed vermilion and therefore appeared to be blushing. At first Eliot had
wondered if she had cut her scalp, or if something had bitten her there. But then one
day he saw her standing before the bathroom mirror, solemnly applying, with the head
of a thumbtack, a fresh stroke of scarlet powder, which she stored in a small jam jar. A
few grains of the powder fell onto the bridge of her nose as she used the thumbtack to
stamp a dot above her eyebrows. “I must wear the powder every day,” she explained
when Eliot asked her what it was for, “for the rest of the days that I am married.”
“Like a wedding ring, you mean?”
“Exactly, Eliot, exactly like a wedding ring. Only with no fear of losing it in the
dishwater.”
By the time Eliot’s mother arrived at twenty past six, Mrs. Sen always made sure all
evidence of her chopping was disposed of. The blade was scrubbed, rinsed, dried,
folded, and stowed away in a cupboard with the aid of a stepladder. With Eliot’s help the

newspapers were crushed with all the peels and seeds and skins inside them. Brimming
bowls and colanders lined the countertop, spices and pastes were measured and
blended, and eventually a collection of broths simmered over periwinkle flames on the
stove. It was never a special occasion, nor was she ever expecting company. It was
merely dinner for herself and Mr. Sen, as indicated by the two plates and two glasses
she set, without napkins or silverware, on the square Formica table at one end of the
living room.
As he pressed the newspapers deeper into the garbage pail, Eliot felt that he and Mrs.
Sen were disobeying some unspoken rule. Perhaps it was because of the urgency with
which Mrs. Sen accomplished everything, pinching salt and sugar between her
fingernails, running water through lentils, sponging all imaginable surfaces, shutting
cupboard doors with a series of successive clicks. It gave him a little shock to see his
mother all of a sudden, in the transparent stockings and shoulder-padded suits she
wore to her job, peering into the corners of Mrs. Sen’s apartment. She tended to hover
on the far side of the door frame, calling to Eliot to put on his sneakers and gather his
things, but Mrs. Sen would not allow it. Each evening she insisted that his mother sit on
the sofa, where she was served something to eat: a glass of bright pink yogurt with rose
syrup, breaded mincemeat with raisins, a bowl of semolina halvah.
“Really, Mrs. Sen. I take a late lunch. You shouldn’t go to so much trouble.”
“It is no trouble. Just like Eliot. No trouble at all.”
His mother nibbled Mrs. Sen’s concoctions with eyes cast upward, in search of an
opinion. She kept her knees pressed together, the high heels she never removed
pressed into the pear-colored carpet. “It’s delicious,” she would conclude, setting down
the plate after a bite or two. Eliot knew she didn’t like the tastes; she’d told him so once
in the car. He also knew she didn’t eat lunch at work, because the first thing she did
when they were back at the beach house was pour herself a glass of wine and eat
bread and cheese, sometimes so much of it that she wasn’t hungry for the pizza they
normally ordered for dinner. She sat at the table as he ate, drinking more wine and
asking how his day was, but eventually she went to the deck to smoke a cigarette,
leaving Eliot to wrap up the leftovers.
***
Each afternoon Mrs. Sen stood in a grove of pine trees by the main road where the
school bus dropped off Eliot along with two or three other children who lived nearby.
Eliot always sensed that Mrs. Sen had been waiting for some time, as if eager to greet a
person she hadn’t seen in years. The hair at her temples blew about in the breeze, the
column of vermilion fresh in her part. She wore navy blue sunglasses a little too big for
her face. Her sari, a different pattern each day, fluttered below the hem of a checkered
all-weather coat. Acorns and caterpillars dotted the asphalt loop that framed the
complex of about a dozen brick buildings, all identical, embedded in a communal
expanse of log chips. As they walked back from the bus stop she produced a sandwich
bag from her pocket, and offered Eliot the peeled wedges of an orange, or lightly salted
peanuts, which she had already shelled.
They proceeded directly to the car, and for twenty minutes Mrs. Sen practiced driving. It
was a toffee-colored sedan with vinyl seats. There was an AM radio with chrome
buttons, and on the ledge over the back seat, a box of Kleenex and an ice scraper. Mrs.
Sen told Eliot she didn’t feel right leaving him alone in the apartment, but Eliot knew she
wanted him sitting beside her because she was afraid. She dreaded the roar of the
ignition, and placed her hands over her ears to block out the sound as she pressed her
slippered feet to the gas, revving the engine.
“Mr. Sen says that once I receive my license, everything will improve. What do you
think, Eliot? Will things improve?”
“You could go places,” Eliot suggested. “You could go anywhere.”

“Could I drive all the way to Calcutta? How long would that take, Eliot? Ten thousand
miles, at fifty miles per hour?”
Eliot could not do the math in his head. He watched Mrs. Sen adjust the driver’s seat,
the rearview mirror, the sunglasses on top of her head. She tuned the radio to a station
that played symphonies. “Is it Beethoven?” she asked once, pronouncing the first part of
the composer’s name not “bay,” but “bee,” like the insect. She rolled down the window
on her side, and asked Eliot to do the same. Eventually she pressed her foot to the
brake pedal, manipulated the automatic gear shift as if it were an enormous, leaky pen,
and backed inch by inch out of the parking space. She circled the apartment complex
once, then once again.
“How am I doing, Eliot? Am I going to pass?”
She was continuously distracted. She stopped the car without warning to listen to
something on the radio, or to stare at something, anything, in the road. If she passed a
person, she waved. If she saw a bird twenty feet in front of her, she beeped the horn
with her index finger and waited for it to fly away. In India, she said, the driver sat on the
right side, not the left. Slowly they crept past the swing set, the laundry building, the
dark green trash bins, the rows of parked cars. Each time they approached the grove of
pine trees where the asphalt loop met the main road, she leaned forward, pinning all her
weight against the brake as cars hurtled past. It was a narrow road painted with a solid
yellow stripe, with one lane of traffic in either direction.
“Impossible, Eliot. How can I go there?”
“You need to wait until no one’s coming.”
“Why will not anybody slow down?”
“No one’s coming now.”
“But what about the car from the right, do you see? And look, a truck is behind it.
Anyway, I am not allowed on the main road without Mr. Sen.”
“You have to turn and speed up fast,” Eliot said. That was the way his mother did it, as if
without thinking. It seemed so simple when he sat beside his mother, gliding in the
evenings back to the beach house. Then the road was just a road, the other cars merely
part of the scenery. But when he sat with Mrs. Sen, under an autumn sun that glowed
without warmth through the trees, he saw how that same stream of cars made her
knuckles pale, her wrists tremble, and her English falter.
“Everyone, this people, too much in their world.”
Two things, Eliot learned, made Mrs. Sen happy. One was the arrival of a letter from her
family. It was her custom to check the mailbox after driving practice. She would unlock
the box, but she would ask Eliot to reach inside, telling him what to look for, and then
she would shut her eyes and shield them with her hands while he shuffled through the
bills and magazines that came in Mr. Sen’s name. At first Eliot found Mrs. Sen’s anxiety
incomprehensible; his mother had a p.o. box in town, and she collected mail so
infrequently that once their electricity was cut off for three days. Weeks passed at Mrs.
Sen’s before he found a blue aerogram, grainy to the touch, crammed with stamps
showing a bald man at a spinning wheel, and blackened by postmarks.
“Is this it, Mrs. Sen?”
For the first time she embraced him, clasping his face to her sari, surrounding him with
her odor of mothballs and cumin. She seized the letter from his hands.
As soon as they were inside the apartment she kicked off her slippers this way and that,
drew a wire pin from her hair, and slit the top and sides of the aerogram in three
strokes. Her eyes darted back and forth as she read. As soon as she was finished, she
cast aside the embroidery that covered the telephone, dialed, and asked, “Yes, is Mr.
Sen there, please? It is Mrs. Sen and it is very important.”

Subsequently she spoke in her own language, rapid and riotous to Eliot’s ears; it was
clear that she was reading the contents of the letter, word by word. As she read her
voice was louder and seemed to shift in key. Though she stood plainly before him, Eliot
had the sensation that Mrs. Sen was no longer present in the room with the pearcolored carpet.
Afterward the apartment was suddenly too small to contain her. They crossed the main
road and walked a short distance to the university quadrangle, where bells in a stone
tower chimed on the hour. They wandered through the student union, and dragged a
tray together along the cafeteria ledge, and ate french fries heaped in a cardboard boat
among students chatting at circular tables. Eliot drank soda from a paper cup, Mrs. Sen
steeped a tea bag with sugar and cream. After eating they explored the art building,
looking at sculptures and silk screens in cool corridors thick with the fragrance of wet
paint and clay. They walked past the mathematics building, where Mr. Sen taught his
classes.
They ended up in the noisy, chlorine-scented wing of the athletic building where,
through a wide window on the fourth floor, they watched swimmers crossing from end to
end in glaring turquoise pools. Mrs. Sen took the aerogram from India out of her purse
and studied the front and back. She unfolded it and reread to herself, sighing every now
and then. When she had finished she gazed for some time at the swimmers.
“My sister has had a baby girl. By the time I see her, depending if Mr. Sen gets his
tenure, she will be three years old. Her own aunt will be a stranger. If we sit side by side
on a train she will not know my face.” She put away the letter, then placed a hand on
Eliot’s head. “Do you miss your mother, Eliot, these afternoons with me?”
The thought had never occurred to him.
“You must miss her. When I think of you, only a boy, separated from your mother for
so much of the day, I am ashamed.”
“I see her at night.”
“When I was your age I was without knowing that one day I would be so far. You are
wiser than that, Eliot. You already taste the way things must be.”
The other thing that made Mrs. Sen happy was fish from the seaside. It was always a
whole fish she desired, not shellfish, or the fillets Eliot’s mother had broiled one night a
few months ago when she’d invited a man from her office to dinner—a man who’d spent
the night in his mother’s bedroom, but whom Eliot never saw again. One evening when
Eliot’s mother came to pick him up, Mrs. Sen served her a tuna croquette, explaining
that it was really supposed to be made with a fish called bhetki. “It is very frustrating,”
Mrs. Sen apologized, with an emphasis on the second syllable of the word. “To live so
close to the ocean and not to have so much fish.” In the summer, she said, she liked to
go to a market by the beach. She added that while the fish there tasted nothing like the
fish in India, at least it was fresh. Now that it was getting colder, the boats were no
longer going out regularly, and sometimes there was no whole fish available for weeks
at a time.
“Try the supermarket,” his mother suggested.
Mrs. Sen shook her head. “In the supermarket I can feed a cat thirty-two dinners from
one of thirty-two tins, but I can never find a single fish I like, never a single.” Mrs. Sen
said she had grown up eating fish twice a day. She added that in Calcutta people ate
fish first thing in the morning, last thing before bed, as a snack after school if they were
lucky. They ate the tail, the eggs, even the head. It was available in any market, at any
hour, from dawn until midnight. “Allyou have to do is leave the house and walk a bit,
and there you are.”
Every few days Mrs. Sen would open up the yellow pages, dial a number that she had

ticked in the margin, and ask if there was any whole fish available. If so, she would ask
the market to hold it. “Under Sen, yes, S as in Sam, N as in New York. Mr. Sen will be
there to pick it up.” Then she would call Mr. Sen at the university. A few minutes later
Mr. Sen would arrive, patting Eliot on the head but not kissing Mrs. Sen. He read his
mail at the Formica table and drank a cup of tea before heading out; half an hour later
he would return, carrying a paper bag with a smiling lobster drawn on the front of it, and
hand it to Mrs. Sen, and head back to the university to teach his evening class. One
day, when he handed Mrs. Sen the paper bag, he said, “No more fish for a while. Cook
the chicken in the freezer. I need to start holding office hours.”
For the next few days, instead of calling the fish market, Mrs. Sen thawed chicken legs
in the kitchen sink and chopped them with her blade. One day she made a stew with
green beans and tinned sardines. But the following week the man who ran the fish
market called Mrs. Sen; he assumed she wanted the fish, and said he would hold it until
the end of the day under her name. She was flattered. “Isn’t that nice of him, Eliot? The
man said he looked up my name in the telephone book. He said there is only one Sen.
Do you know how many Sens are in the Calcutta telephone book?”
She told Eliot to put on his shoes and his jacket, and then she called Mr. Sen at the
university. Eliot tied his sneakers by the bookcase and waited for her to join him, to
choose from her row of slippers. After a few minutes he called out her name. When Mrs.
Sen did not reply, he untied his sneakers and returned to the living room, where he
found her on the sofa, weeping. Her face was in her hands and tears dripped through
her fingers. Through them she murmured something about a meeting Mr. Sen was
required to attend. Slowly she stood up and rearranged the cloth over the telephone.
Eliot followed her, walking for the first time in his sneakers across the pear-colored
carpet. She stared at him. Her lower eyelids were swollen into thin pink crests. “Tellme,
Eliot. Is it too much to ask?”
Before he could answer, she took him by the hand and led him to the bedroom, whose
door was normally kept shut. Apart from the bed, which lacked a headboard, the only
other things in the room were a side table with a telephone on it, an ironing board, and a
bureau. She flung open the drawers of the bureau and the door of the closet, filled with
saris of every imaginable texture and shade, brocaded with gold and silver threads.
Some were transparent, tissue thin, others as thick as drapes, with tassels knotted
along the edges. In the closet they were on hangers; in the drawers they were folded
flat, or wound tightly like thick scrolls. She sifted through the drawers, letting saris spill
over the edges. “When have I ever worn this one? And this? And this?” She tossed the
saris one by one from the drawers, then pried several from their hangers. They landed
like a pile of tangled sheets on the bed. The room was filled with an intense smell of
mothballs.
“‘Send pictures,’ they write. ‘Send pictures of your new life.’ What picture can I send?”
She sat, exhausted, on the edge of the bed, where there was now barely room for her.
“They think I live the life of a queen, Eliot.” She looked around the blank walls of the
room. “They think I press buttons and the house is clean. They think I live in a palace.”
The phone rang. Mrs. Sen let it ring several times before picking up the extension by the
bed. During the conversation she seemed only to be replying to things, and wiping her
face with the ends of one of the saris. When she got off the phone she stuffed the saris
without folding them back into the drawers, and then she and Eliot put on their shoes
and went to the car, where they waited for Mr. Sen to meet them.
“Why don’t you drive today?” Mr. Sen asked when he appeared, rapping on the hood
of the car with his knuckles. They always spoke to each other in English when Eliot was
present.
“Not today. Another day.”
“How do you expect to pass the test if you refuse to drive on a road with other cars?”

“Eliot is here today.”
“He is here every day. It’s for your own good. Eliot, tell Mrs. Sen it’s for her own good.”
She refused.
They drove in silence, along the same roads that Eliot and his mother took back to the
beach house each evening. But in the back seat of Mr. and Mrs. Sen’s car the ride
seemed unfamiliar, and took longer than usual. The gulls whose tedious cries woke him
each morning now thrilled him as they dipped and flapped across the sky. They passed
one beach after another, and the shacks, now locked up, that sold frozen lemonade and
quahogs in summer. Only one of the shacks was open. It was the fish market.
Mrs. Sen unlocked her door and turned toward Mr. Sen, who had not yet unfastened his
seat belt. “Are you coming?”
Mr. Sen handed her some bills from his wallet. “I have a meeting in twenty minutes,” he
said, staring at the dashboard as he spoke. “Please don’t waste time.”
Eliot accompanied her into the dank little shop, whose walls were festooned with nets
and starfish and buoys. A group of tourists with cameras around their necks huddled by
the counter, some sampling stuffed clams, others pointing to a large chart illustrating
fifty different varieties of North Atlantic fish. Mrs. Sen took a ticket from the machine at
the counter and waited in line. Eliot stood by the lobsters, which stirred one on top of
another in their murky tank, their claws bound by yellow rubber bands. He watched as
Mrs. Sen laughed and chatted, when it was her turn in line, with a man with a bright red
face and yellow teeth, dressed in a black rubber apron. In either hand he held a
mackerel by the tail.
“You are sure what you sell me is very fresh?”
“Any fresher and they’d answer that question themselves.”
The dial shivered toward its verdict on the scale.
“You want this cleaned, Mrs. Sen?”
She nodded. “Leave the heads on, please.”
“You got cats at home?”
“No cats. Only a husband.”
Later, in the apartment, she pulled the blade out of the cupboard, spread newspapers
across the carpet, and inspected her treasures. One by one she drew them from the
paper wrapping, wrinkled and tinged with blood. She stroked the tails, prodded the
bellies, pried apart the gutted flesh. With a pair of scissors she clipped the fins. She
tucked a finger under the gills, a red so bright they made her vermilion seem pale. She
grasped the body, lined with inky streaks, at either end, and notched it at intervals
against the blade.
“Why do you do that?” Eliot asked.
“To see how many pieces. If I cut properly, from this fish I will get three meals.” She
sawed off the head and set it on a pie plate.
In November came a series of days when Mrs. Sen refused to practice driving. The
blade never emerged from the cupboard, newspapers were not spread on the floor. She
did not call the fish
store, nor did she thaw chicken. In silence she prepared crackers with peanut butter
for Eliot, then sat reading old aerograms from a shoebox. When it was time for Eliot to
leave she gathered together his things without inviting his mother to sit on the sofa and
eat something first. When, eventually, his mother asked him in the car if he’d noticed a
change in Mrs. Sen’s behavior, he said he hadn’t. He didn’t tell her that Mrs. Sen paced
the apartment, staring at the plastic-covered lampshades as if noticing them for the first
time. He didn’t tell her she switched on the television but never watched it, or that she
made herself tea but let it grow cold on the coffee table. One day she played a tape of

something she called a raga; it sounded a little bit like someone plucking very slowly
and then very quickly on a violin, and Mrs. Sen said it was supposed to be heard only in
the late afternoon, as the sun was setting. As the music played, for nearly an hour, she
sat on the sofa with her eyes closed. Afterward she said, “It is more sad even than your
Beethoven, isn’t it?” Another day she played a cassette of people talking in her
language—a farewell present, she told Eliot, that her family had made for her. As the
succession of voices laughed and said their bit, Mrs. Sen identified each speaker. “My
third uncle, my cousin, my father, my grandfather.” One speaker sang a song. Another
recited a poem. The final voice on the tape belonged to Mrs. Sen’s mother. It was
quieter and sounded more serious than the others. There was a pause between each
sentence, and during this pause Mrs. Sen translated for Eliot: “The price of goat rose
two rupees. The mangoes at the market are not very sweet. College Street is flooded.”
She turned off the tape. “These are things that happened the day I left India.” The next
day she played the same cassette all over again. This time, when her grandfather was
speaking, she stopped the tape. She told Eliot she’d received a letter over the weekend.
Her grandfather was dead.
A week later Mrs. Sen began cooking again. One day as she sat slicing cabbage on
the living room floor, Mr. Sen called. He wanted to take Eliot and Mrs. Sen to the
seaside. For the occasion Mrs. Sen put on a red sari and red lipstick; she freshened the
vermilion in her part and rebraided her hair. She knotted a scarf under her chin,
arranged her sunglasses on top of her head, and put a pocket camera in her purse. As
Mr. Sen backed out of the parking lot, he put his arm across the top of the front seat, so
that it looked as if he had his arm around Mrs. Sen. “It’s getting too cold for that top
coat,” he said to her at one point. “We should get you something warmer.” At the shop
they bought mackerel, and butterfish, and sea bass. This time Mr. Sen came into the
shop with them. It was Mr. Sen who asked whether the fish was fresh and to cut it this
way or that way. They bought so much fish that Eliot had to hold one of the bags. After
they put the bags in the trunk, Mr. Sen announced that he was hungry, and Mrs. Sen
agreed, so they crossed the street to a restaurant where the take-out window was still
open. They sat at a picnic table and ate two baskets of clam cakes. Mrs. Sen put a good
deal of Tabasco sauce and black pepper on hers. “Like pakoras, no?” Her face was
flushed, her lipstick faded, and she laughed at everything Mr. Sen said.
Behind the restaurant was a small beach, and when they were done eating they walked
for a while along the shore, into a wind so strong that they had to walk backward. Mrs.
Sen pointed to the water, and said that at a certain moment, each wave resembled a
sari drying on a clothesline. “Impossible!” she shouted eventually, laughing as she
turned back, her eyes teary. “I cannot move.” Instead she took a picture of Eliot and Mr.
Sen standing on the sand. “Now one of us,” she said, pressing Eliot against her
checkered coat and giving the camera to Mr. Sen. Finally the camera was given to Eliot.
“Hold it steady,” said Mr. Sen. Eliot looked through the tiny window in the camera and
waited for Mr. and Mrs. Sen to move closer together, but they didn’t. They didn’t hold
hands or put their arms around each other’s waists. Both smiled with their mouths
closed, squinting into the wind, Mrs. Sen’s red sari leaping like flames under her coat.
In the car, warm at last and exhausted from the wind and the clam cakes, they
admired the dunes, the ships they could see in the distance, the view of the lighthouse,
the peach and purple sky. After a while Mr. Sen slowed down and stopped by the side
of the road.
“What’s wrong?” Mrs. Sen asked.
“You are going to drive home today.”
“Not today.”

“Yes, today.” Mr. Sen stepped out of the car and opened the door on Mrs. Sen’s side. A
fierce wind blew into the car, accompanied by the sound of waves crashing on the
shore. Finally she slid over to the driver’s side, but spent a long time adjusting her sari
and her sunglasses. Eliot turned and looked through the back window. The road was
empty. Mrs. Sen turned on the radio, filling up the car with violin music.
“There’s no need,” Mr. Sen said, clicking it off.
“It helps me to concentrate,” Mrs. Sen said, and turned the radio on again.
“Put on your signal,” Mr. Sen directed.
“I know what to do.”
For about a mile she was fine, though far slower than the other cars that passed her.
But when the town approached, and traffic lights loomed on wires in the distance, she
went even slower.
“Switch lanes,” Mr. Sen said. “You will have to bear left at the rotary.”
Mrs. Sen did not.
“Switch lanes, I tell you.” He shut off the radio. “Are you listening to me?”
A car beeped its horn, then another. She beeped defiantly in response, stopped, then
pulled without signaling to the side of the road. “No more,” she said, her forehead
resting against the top of the steering wheel. “I hate it. I hate driving. I won’t go on.”
She stopped driving after that. The next time the fish store called she did not call Mr.
Sen at his office. She had decided to try something new. There was a town bus that ran
on an hourly schedule between the university and the seaside. After the university it
made two stops, first at a nursing home, then at a shopping plaza without a name,
which consisted of a bookstore, a shoe store, a drugstore, a pet store, and a record
store. On benches under the portico, elderly women from the nursing home sat in pairs,
in knee-length overcoats with oversized buttons, eating lozenges.
“Eliot,”Mrs. Sen asked him while they were sitting on the bus, “willyou put your mother
in a nursing home when she is old?”
“Maybe,” he said. “But I would visit every day.”
“You say that now, but you will see, when you are a man your life will be in places you
cannot know now.” She counted on her fingers: “You will have a wife, and children of
your own, and they will want to be driven to different places at the same time. No matter
how kind they are, one day they will complain about visiting your mother, and you will
get tired of it too, Eliot. You will miss one day, and another, and then she will have to
drag herself onto a bus just to get herself a bag of lozenges.”
At the fish shop the ice beds were nearly empty, as were the lobster tanks, where rustcolored stains were visible through the water. A sign said the shop would be closing for
winter at the end of the month. There was only one person working behind the counter,
a young boy who did not recognize Mrs. Sen as he handed her a bag reserved under
her name.
“Has it been cleaned and scaled?” Mrs. Sen asked.
The boy shrugged. “My boss left early. He just said to give you this bag.”
In the parking lot Mrs. Sen consulted the bus schedule. They would have to wait fortyfive minutes for the next one, and so they crossed the street and bought clam cakes at
the take-out window they had been to before. There was no place to sit. The picnic
tables were no longer in use, their benches chained upside down on top of them.
On the way home an old woman on the bus kept watching them, her eyes shifting from
Mrs. Sen to Eliot to the blood-lined bag between their feet. She wore a black overcoat,
and in her lap she held, with gnarled, colorless hands, a crisp white bag from the
drugstore. The only other passengers were two college students, boyfriend and
girlfriend, wearing matching sweatshirts, their fingers linked, slouched in the back seat.

In silence Eliot and Mrs. Sen ate the last few clam cakes in the bag. Mrs. Sen had
forgotten napkins, and traces of fried batter dotted the corners of her mouth. When they
reached the nursing home the woman in the overcoat stood up, said something to the
driver, then stepped off the bus. The driver turned his head and glanced back at Mrs.
Sen. “What’s in the bag?”
Mrs. Sen looked up, startled.
“Speak English?” The bus began to move again, causing the driver to look at Mrs. Sen
and Eliot in his enormous rearview mirror.
“Yes, I can speak.”
“Then what’s in the bag?”
“A fish,” Mrs. Sen replied.
“The smell seems to be bothering the other passengers. Kid, maybe you should open
her window or something.”
One afternoon a few days later the phone rang. Some very tasty halibut had arrived on
the boats. Would Mrs. Sen like to pick one up? She called Mr. Sen, but he was not at
his desk. A second time she tried calling, then a third. Eventually she went to the
kitchen and returned to the living room with the blade, an eggplant, and some
newspapers. Without having to be told Eliot took his place on the sofa and watched as
she sliced the stems off the eggplant. She divided it into long, slender strips, then into
small squares, smaller and smaller, as small as sugar cubes.
“I am going to put these in a very tasty stew with fish and green bananas,” she
announced. “Only I will have to do without the green bananas.”
“Are we going to get the fish?”
“We are going to get the fish.”
“Is Mr. Sen going to take us?”
“Put on your shoes.”
They left the apartment without cleaning up. Outside it was so cold that Eliot could feel
the chill on his teeth. They got in the car, and Mrs. Sen drove around the asphalt loop
several times. Each time she paused by the grove of pine trees to observe the traffic on
the main road. Eliot thought she was just practicing while they waited for Mr. Sen. But
then she gave a signal and turned.
The accident occurred quickly. After about a mile Mrs. Sen took a left before she
should have, and though the oncoming car managed to swerve out of her way, she was
so startled by the horn that she lost control of the wheel and hit a telephone pole on the
opposite corner. A policeman arrived and asked to see her license, but she did not have
one to show him. “Mr. Sen teaches mathematics at the university” was all she said by
way of explanation.
The damage was slight. Mrs. Sen cut her lip, Eliot complained briefly of a pain in his
ribs, and the car’s fender would have to be straightened. The policeman thought Mrs.
Sen had also cut her scalp, but it was only the vermilion. When Mr. Sen arrived, driven
by one of his colleagues, he spoke at length with the policeman as he filled out some
forms, but he said nothing to Mrs. Sen as he drove them back to the apartment. When
they got out of the car, Mr. Sen patted Eliot’s head. “The policeman said you were lucky.
Very lucky to come out without a scratch.”
After taking off her slippers and putting them on the bookcase, Mrs. Sen put away the
blade that was still on the living room floor and threw the eggplant pieces and the
newspapers into the garbage pail. She prepared a plate of crackers with peanut butter,
placed them on the coffee table, and turned on the television for Eliot’s benefit. “Ifhe is
still hungry give him a Popsicle from the box in the freezer,” she said to Mr. Sen, who
sat at the Formica table sorting through the mail. Then she went into her bedroom and

shut the door. When Eliot’s mother arrived at quarter to six, Mr. Sen told her the details
of the accident and offered a check reimbursing November’s payment. As he wrote out
the check he apologized on behalf of Mrs. Sen. He said she was resting, though when
Eliot had gone to the bathroom he’d heard her crying. His mother was satisfied with the
arrangement, and in a sense, she confessed to Eliot as they drove home, she was
relieved. It was the last afternoon Eliot spent with Mrs. Sen, or with any baby-sitter.
From then on his mother gave him a key, which he wore on a string around his neck. He
was to call the neighbors in case of an emergency, and to let himself into the beach
house after school. The first day, just as he was taking off his coat, the phone rang. It
was his mother calling from her office. “You’re a big boy now, Eliot,” she told him. “You
okay?” Eliot looked out the kitchen window, at gray waves receding from the shore, and
said that he was fine.

This Blessed House
THEYDIS COVERED the first one in a cupboard above the stove, beside an unopened
bottle of malt vinegar.
“Guess what I found.” Twinkle walked into the living room, lined from end to end with
taped-up packing boxes, waving the vinegar in one hand and a white porcelain effigy of
Christ, roughly the same size as the vinegar bottle, in the other.
Sanjeev looked up. He was kneeling on the floor, marking, with ripped bits of a Post-it,
patches on the baseboard that needed to be retouched with paint. “Throw it away.”
“Which?”
“Both.”
“But I can cook something with the vinegar. It’s brand-new.”
“You’ve never cooked anything with vinegar.”
“I’lllook something up. In one of those books we got for our wedding.”
Sanjeev turned back to the baseboard, to replace a Post-it scrap that had fallen to the
floor. “Check the expiration. And at the very least get rid of that idiotic statue.”
“But it could be worth something. Who knows?” She turned it upside down, then
stroked, with her index finger, the minuscule frozen folds of its robes. “It’s pretty.”
“We’re not Christian,” Sanjeev said. Lately he had begun noticing the need to state the
obvious to Twinkle. The day before he had to tell her that if she dragged her end of the
bureau instead of lifting it, the parquet floor would scratch.
She shrugged. “No, we’re not Christian. We’re good little Hindus.” She planted a kiss on
top of Christ’s head, then placed the statue on top of the fireplace mantel, which
needed, Sanjeev observed, to be dusted.
By the end of the week the mantel had still not been dusted; it had, however, come to
serve as the display shelf for a sizable collection of Christian paraphernalia. There was
a 3-D postcard of Saint Francis done in four colors, which Twinkle had found taped to
the back of the medicine cabinet, and a wooden cross key chain, which Sanjeev had
stepped on with bare feet as he was installing extra shelving in Twinkle’s study. There
was a framed paint-by-number of the three wise men, against a black velvet
background, tucked in the linen closet. There was also a tile trivet depicting a blond,
unbearded Jesus, delivering a sermon on a mountaintop, left in one of the drawers of
the built-in china cabinet in the dining room.
“Do you think the previous owners were born-agains?” asked Twinkle, making room the
next day for a small plastic snow-filled dome containing a miniature Nativity scene,
found behind the pipes of the kitchen sink.
Sanjeev was organizing his engineering texts from MIT in alphabetical order on a
bookshelf, though it had been several years since he had needed to consult any of
them. After graduating, he moved from Boston to Connecticut, to work for a firm near
Hartford, and he had recently learned that he was being considered for the position of
vice president. At thirty-three he had a secretary of his own and a dozen people working
under his supervision who gladly supplied him with any information he needed. Still, the
presence of his college books in the room reminded him of a time in his life he recalled
with fondness, when he would walk each evening across the Mass. Avenue bridge to
order Mughlai chicken with spinach from his favorite Indian restaurant on the other side
of the Charles, and return to his dorm to write out clean copies of his problem sets.
“Or perhaps it’s an attempt to convert people,” Twinkle mused.
“Clearly the scheme has succeeded in your case.”
She disregarded him, shaking the little plastic dome so that the snow swirled over the

manger.
He studied the items on the mantel. It puzzled him that each was in its own way so silly.
Clearly they lacked a sense of sacredness. He was further puzzled that Twinkle, who
normally displayed good taste, was so charmed. These objects meant something to
Twinkle, but they meant nothing to him. They irritated him. “We should call the Realtor.
Tell him there’s all this nonsense left behind. Tell him to take it away.”
“Oh, Sanj.” Twinkle groaned. “Please. I would feel terrible throwing them away.
Obviously they were important to the people who used to live here. It would feel, I don’t
know, sacrilegious or something.”
“Ifthey’re so precious, then why are they hidden all over the house? Why didn’t they
take them with them?
“There must be others,” Twinkle said. Her eyes roamed the bare off-white walls of the
room, as if there were other things concealed behind the plaster. “What else do you
think we’ll find?”
But as they unpacked their boxes and hung up their winter clothes and the silk
paintings of elephant processions bought on their honeymoon in Jaipur, Twinkle, much
to her dismay, could not find a thing. Nearly a week had passed before they discovered,
one Saturday afternoon, a larger-than-life-sized watercolor poster of Christ, weeping
translucent tears the size of peanut shells and sporting a crown of thorns, rolled up
behind a radiator in the guest bedroom. Sanjeev had mistaken it for a window shade.
“Oh, we must, we simply must put it up. It’s too spectacular.” Twinkle lit a cigarette and
began to smoke it with relish, waving it around Sanjeev’s head as if it were a
conductor’s baton as Mahler’s Fifth Symphony roared from the stereo downstairs.
“Now, look. I will tolerate, for now, your little biblical menagerie in the living room. But I
refuse to have this,” he said, flicking at one of the painted peanut-tears, “displayed in
our home.”
Twinkle stared at him, placidly exhaling, the smoke emerging in two thin blue streams
from her nostrils. She rolled up the poster slowly, securing it with one of the elastic
bands she always wore around her wrist for tying back her thick, unruly hair, streaked
here and there with henna. “I’mgoing to put it in my study,” she informed him. “That way
you don’t have to look at it.”
“What about the housewarming? They’ll want to see all the rooms. I’ve invited people
from the office.”
She rolled her eyes. Sanjeev noted that the symphony, now in its third movement, had
reached a crescendo, for it pulsed with the telltale clashing of cymbals.
“I’llput it behind the door,” she offered. “That way, when they peek in, they won’t see.
Happy?”
He stood watching her as she left the room, with her poster and her cigarette; a few
ashes had fallen to the floor where she’d been standing. He bent down, pinched them
between his fingers, and deposited them in his cupped palm. The tender fourth
movement, the adagietto, began. During breakfast, Sanjeev had read in the liner notes
that Mahler had proposed to his wife by sending her the manuscript of this portion of the
score. Although there were elements of tragedy and struggle in the Fifth Symphony, he
had read, it was principally music of love and happiness.
He heard the toilet flush. “By the way,” Twinkle hollered, “ifyou want to impress people,
I wouldn’t play this music. It’s putting me to sleep.”
Sanjeev went to the bathroom to throw away the ashes. The cigarette butt still bobbed
in the toilet bowl, but the tank was refilling, so he had to wait a moment before he could
flush it again. In the mirror of the medicine cabinet he inspected his long
eyelashes—like a girl’s, Twinkle liked to tease. Though he was of average build, his
cheeks had a plumpness to them; this, along with the eyelashes, detracted, he feared,
from what he hoped was a distinguished profile. He was of average height as well, and

had wished ever since he had stopped growing that he were just one inch taller. For this
reason it irritated him when Twinkle insisted on wearing high heels, as she had done the
other night when they ate dinner in Manhattan. This was the first weekend after they’d
moved into the house; by then the mantel had already filled up considerably, and they
had bickered about it in the car on the way down. But then Twinkle had drunk four
glasses of whiskey in a nameless bar in Alphabet City, and forgot all about it. She
dragged him to a tiny bookshop on St. Mark’s Place, where she browsed for nearly an
hour, and when they left she insisted that they dance a tango on the sidewalk in front of
strangers.
Afterward, she tottered on his arm, rising faintly over his line of vision, in a pair of
suede three-inch leopard-print pumps. In this manner they walked the endless blocks
back to a parking garage on Washington Square, for Sanjeev had heard far too many
stories about the terrible things that happened to cars in Manhattan. “But I do nothing all
day except sit at my desk,” she fretted when they were driving home, after he had
mentioned that her shoes looked uncomfortable and suggested that perhaps she should
not wear them. “I can’t exactly wear heels when I’m typing.” Though he abandoned the
argument, he knew for a fact that she didn’t spend all day at her desk; just that
afternoon, when he got back from a run, he found her inexplicably in bed, reading.
When he asked why she was in bed in the middle of the day she told him she was
bored. He had wanted to say to her then, You could unpack some boxes. You could
sweep the attic. You could retouch the paint on the bathroom windowsill, and after you
do it you could warn me so that I don’t put my watch on it. They didn’t bother her, these
scattered, unsettled matters. She seemed content with whatever clothes she found at
the front of the closet, with whatever magazine was lying around, with whatever song
was on the radio—content yet curious. And now all of her curiosity centered around
discovering the next treasure.
A few days later when Sanjeev returned from the office, he found Twinkle on the
telephone, smoking and talking to one of her girlfriends in California even though it was
before five o’clock and the long-distance rates were at their peak. “Highly devout
people,” she was saying, pausing every now and then to exhale. “Each day is like a
treasure hunt. I’m serious. This you won’t believe. The switch plates in the bedrooms
were decorated with scenes from the Bible. You know, Noah’s Ark and all that. Three
bedrooms, but one is my study. Sanjeev went to the hardware store right away and
replaced them, can you imagine, he replaced every single one.”
Now it was the friend’s turn to talk. Twinkle nodded, slouched on the floor in front of
the fridge, wearing black stirrup pants and a yellow chenille sweater, groping for her
lighter. Sanjeev could smell something aromatic on the stove, and he picked his way
carefully across the extra-long phone cord tangled on the Mexican terra-cotta tiles. He
opened the lid of a pot with some sort of reddish brown sauce dripping over the sides,
boiling furiously.
“It’s a stew made with fish. I put the vinegar in it,” she said to him, interrupting her friend,
crossing her fingers. “Sorry, you were saying?” She was like that, excited and delighted
by little things, crossing her fingers before any remotely unpredictable event, like tasting
a new flavor of ice cream, or dropping a letter in a mailbox. It was a quality he did not
understand. It made him feel stupid, as if the world contained hidden wonders he could
not anticipate, or see. He looked at her face, which, it occurred to him, had not grown
out of its girlhood, the eyes untroubled, the pleasing features unfirm, as if they still had
to settle into some sort of permanent expression. Nicknamed after a nursery rhyme, she
had yet to shed a childhood endearment. Now, in the second month of their marriage,
certain things nettled him—the way she sometimes spat a little when she spoke, or left
her undergarments after removing them at night at the foot of their bed rather than
depositing them in the laundry hamper.

They had met only four months before. Her parents, who lived in California, and his,
who still lived in Calcutta, were old friends, and across continents they had arranged the
occasion at which Twinkle and Sanjeev were introduced—a sixteenth birthday party for
a daughter in their circle—when Sanjeev was in Palo Alto on business. At the restaurant
they were seated side by side at a round table with a revolving platter of spareribs and
egg rolls and chicken wings, which, they concurred, all tasted the same. They had
concurred too on their adolescent but still persistent fondness for Wodehouse novels,
and their dislike for the sitar, and later Twinkle confessed that she was charmed by the
way Sanjeev had dutifully refilled her teacup during their conversation.
And so the phone calls began, and grew longer, and then the visits, first he to
Stanford, then she to Connecticut, after which Sanjeev would save in an ashtray left on
the balcony the crushed cigarettes she had smoked during the weekend—saved them,
that is, until the next time she came to visit him, and then he vacuumed the apartment,
washed the sheets, even dusted the plant leaves in her honor. She was twenty-seven
and recently abandoned, he had gathered, by an American who had tried and failed to
be an actor; Sanjeev was lonely, with an excessively generous income for a single man,
and had never been in love. At the urging of their matchmakers, they married in India,
amid hundreds of well-wishers whom he barely remembered from his childhood, in
incessant August rains, under a red and orange tent strung with Christmas tree lights on
Mandeville Road.
“Did you sweep the attic?” he asked Twinkle later as she was folding paper napkins and
wedging them by their plates. The attic was the only part of the house they had not yet
given an initial cleaning.
“Not yet. I will, I promise. I hope this tastes good,” she said, planting the steaming pot
on top of the Jesus trivet. There was a loaf of Italian bread in a little basket, and iceberg
lettuce and grated carrots tossed with bottled dressing and croutons, and glasses of red
wine. She was not terribly ambitious in the kitchen. She bought preroasted chickens
from the supermarket and served them with potato salad prepared who knew when,
sold in little plastic containers. Indian food, she complained, was a bother; she detested
chopping garlic, and peeling ginger, and could not operate a blender, and so it was
Sanjeev who, on weekends, seasoned mustard oil with cinnamon sticks and cloves in
order to produce a proper curry.
He had to admit, though, that whatever it was that she had cooked today, it was
unusually tasty, attractive even, with bright white cubes of fish, and flecks of parsley,
and fresh tomatoes gleaming in the dark brown-red broth.
“How did you make it?”
“I made it up.”
“What did you do?”
“I just put some things into the pot and added the malt vinegar at the end.”
“How much vinegar?”
She shrugged, ripping off some bread and plunging it into her bowl.
“What do you mean you don’t know? You should write it down. What if you need to
make it again, for a party or something?”
“I’llremember,” she said. She covered the bread basket with a dishtowel that had, he
suddenly noticed, the Ten Commandments printed on it. She flashed him a smile, giving
his knee a little squeeze under the table. “Face it. This house is blessed.”
The housewarming party was scheduled for the last Saturday in October, and they had
invited about thirty people. All were Sanjeev’s acquaintances, people from the office,

and a number of Indian couples in the Connecticut area, many of whom he barely knew,
but who had regularly invited him, in his bachelor days, to supper on Saturdays. He
often wondered why they included him in their circle. He had little in common with any of
them, but he always attended their gatherings, to eat spiced chickpeas and shrimp
cutlets, and gossip and discuss politics, for he seldom had other plans. So far, no one
had met Twinkle; back when they were still dating, Sanjeev didn’t want to waste their
brief weekends together with people he associated with being alone. Other than
Sanjeev and an ex-boyfriend who she believed worked in a pottery studio in Brookfield,
she knew no one in the state of Connecticut. She was completing her master’s thesis at
Stanford, a study of an Irish poet whom Sanjeev had never heard of.
Sanjeev had found the house on his own before leaving for the wedding, for a good
price, in a neighborhood with a fine school system. He was impressed by the elegant
curved staircase with its wrought-iron banister, and the dark wooden wainscoting, and
the solarium overlooking rhododendron bushes, and the solid brass 22, which also
happened to be the date of his birth, nailed impressively to the vaguely Tudor facade.
There were two working fireplaces, a two-car garage, and an attic suitable for
converting into extra bedrooms if, the Realtor mentioned, the need should arise. By then
Sanjeev had already made up his mind, was determined that he and Twinkle should live
there together, forever, and so he had not bothered to notice the switch plates covered
with biblical stickers, or the transparent decal of the Virgin on the half shell, as Twinkle
liked to call it, adhered to the window in the master bedroom. When, after moving in, he
tried to scrape it off, he scratched the glass.
The weekend before the party they were raking the lawn when he heard Twinkle shriek.
He ran to her, clutching his rake, worried that she had discovered a dead animal, or a
snake. A brisk October breeze stung the tops of his ears as his sneakers crunched over
brown and yellow leaves. When he reached her, she had collapsed on the grass,
dissolved in nearly silent laughter. Behind an overgrown forsythia bush was a plaster
Virgin Mary as tall as their waists, with a blue painted hood draped over her head in the
manner of an Indian bride. Twinkle grabbed the hem of her T-shirt and began wiping
away the dirt staining the statue’s brow.
“I suppose you want to put her by the foot of our bed,” Sanjeev said.
She looked at him, astonished. Her belly was exposed, and he saw that there were
goose bumps around her navel. “What do you think? Of course we can’t put this in our
bedroom.”
“We can’t?”
“No, silly Sanj. This is meant for outside. For the lawn.”
“Oh God, no. Twinkle, no.”
“But we must. It would be bad luck not to.”
“Allthe neighbors will see. They’ll think we’re insane.”
“Why, for having a statue of the Virgin Mary on our lawn? Every other person in this
neighborhood has a statue of Mary on the lawn. We’ll fit right in.”
“We’re not Christian.”
“So you keep reminding me.” She spat onto the tip of her finger and started to rub
intently at a particularly stubborn stain on Mary’s chin. “Do you think this is dirt, or some
kind of fungus?”
He was getting nowhere with her, with this woman whom he had known for only four
months and whom he had married, this woman with whom he now shared his life. He
thought with a flicker of regret of the snapshots his mother used to send him from
Calcutta, of prospective brides who could sing and sew and season lentils without
consulting a cookbook. Sanjeev had considered these women, had even ranked them in

order of preference, but then he had met Twinkle. “Twinkle, I can’t have the people I
work with see this statue on my lawn.”
“They can’t fire you for being a believer. It would be discrimination.”
“That’s not the point.”
“Why does it matter to you so much what other people think?”
“Twinkle, please.” He was tired. He let his weight rest against his rake as she began
dragging the statue toward an oval bed of myrtle, beside the lamppost that flanked the
brick pathway. “Look, Sanj. She’s so lovely.”
He returned to his pile of leaves and began to deposit them by handfuls into a plastic
garbage bag. Over his head the blue sky was cloudless. One tree on the lawn was still
full of leaves, red and orange, like the tent in which he had married Twinkle.
He did not know if he loved her. He said he did when she had first asked him, one
afternoon in Palo Alto as they sat side by side in a darkened, nearly empty movie
theater. Before the film, one of her favorites, something in German that he found
extremely depressing, she had pressed the tip of her nose to his so that he could feel
the flutter of her mascara-coated eyelashes. That afternoon he had replied, yes, he
loved her, and she was delighted, and fed him a piece of popcorn, letting her finger
linger an instant between his lips, as if it were his reward for coming up with the right
answer.
Though she did not say it herself, he assumed then that she loved him too, but now he
was no longer sure. In truth, Sanjeev did not know what love was, only what he thought
it was not. It was not, he had decided, returning to an empty carpeted condominium
each night, and using only the top fork in his cutlery drawer, and turning away politely at
those weekend dinner parties when the other men eventually put their arms around the
waists of their wives and girlfriends, leaning over every now and again to kiss their
shoulders or necks. It was not sending away for classical music CDs by mail, working
his way methodically through the major composers that the catalogue recommended,
and always sending his payments in on time. In the months before meeting Twinkle,
Sanjeev had begun to realize this. “You have enough money in the bank to raise three
families,” his mother reminded him when they spoke at the start of each month on the
phone. “You need a wife to look after and love.” Now he had one, a pretty one, from a
suitably high caste, who would soon have a master’s degree. What was there not to
love?
That evening Sanjeev poured himself a gin and tonic, drank it and most of another
during one segment of the news, and then approached Twinkle, who was taking a
bubble bath, for she announced that her limbs ached from raking the lawn, something
she had never done before. He didn’t knock. She had applied a bright blue mask to her
face, was smoking and sipping some bourbon with ice and leafing through a fat
paperback book whose pages had buckled and turned gray from the water. He glanced
at the cover; the only thing written on it was the word “Sonnets” in dark red letters. He
took a breath, and then he informed her very calmly that after finishing his drink he was
going to put on his shoes and go outside and remove the Virgin from the front lawn.
“Where are you going to put it?” she asked him dreamily, her eyes closed. One of her
legs emerged, unfolding gracefully, from the layer of suds. She flexed and pointed her
toes.
“For now I am going to put it in the garage. Then tomorrow morning on my way to work I
am going to take it to the dump.”
“Don’t you dare.” She stood up, letting the book fall into the water, bubbles dripping
down her thighs. “I hate you,” she informed him, her eyes narrowing at the word “hate.”
She reached for her bathrobe, tied it tightly about her waist, and padded down the

winding staircase, leaving sloppy wet footprints along the parquet floor. When she
reached the foyer, Sanjeev said, “Are you planning on leaving the house that way?” He
felt a throbbing in his temples, and his voice revealed an unfamiliar snarl when he
spoke.
“Who cares? Who cares what way I leave this house?”
“Where are you planning on going at this hour?”
“You can’t throw away that statue. I won’t let you.” Her mask, now dry, had assumed an
ashen quality, and water from her hair dripped onto the caked contours of her face.
“Yes I can. I will.”
“No,” Twinkle said, her voice suddenly small. “This is our house. We own it together.
The statue is a part of our property.” She had begun to shiver. A small pool of bathwater
had collected around her ankles. He went to shut a window, fearing that she would
catch cold. Then he noticed that some of the water dripping down her hard blue face
was tears.
“Oh God, Twinkle, please, I didn’t mean it.” He had never seen her cry before, had
never seen such sadness in her eyes. She didn’t turn away or try to stop the tears;
instead she looked strangely at peace. For a moment she closed her lids, pale and
unprotected compared to the blue that caked the rest of her face. Sanjeev felt ill, as if he
had eaten either too much or too little.
She went to him, placing her damp toweled arms about his neck, sobbing into his chest,
soaking his shirt. The mask flaked onto his shoulders.
In the end they settled on a compromise: the statue would be placed in a recess at the
side of the house, so that it wasn’t obvious to passersby, but was still clearly visible to
all who came.
The menu for the party was fairly simple: there would be a case of champagne, and
samosas from an Indian restaurant in Hartford, and big trays of rice with chicken and
almonds and orange peels, which Sanjeev had spent the greater part of the morning
and afternoon preparing. He had never entertained on such a large scale before and,
worried that there would not be enough to drink, ran out at one point to buy another
case of champagne just in case. For this reason he burned one of the rice trays and had
to start it over again. Twinkle swept the floors and volunteered to pick up the samosas;
she had an appointment for a manicure and a pedicure in that direction, anyway.
Sanjeev had planned to ask if she would consider clearing the menagerie off the
mantel, if only for the party, but she left while he was in the shower. She was gone for a
good three hours, and so it was Sanjeev who did the rest of the cleaning. By five-thirty
the entire house sparkled, with scented candles that Twinkle had picked up in Hartford
illuminating the items on the mantel, and slender stalks of burning incense planted into
the soil of potted plants. Each time he passed the mantel he winced, dreading the
raised eyebrows of his guests as they viewed the flickering ceramic saints, the salt and
pepper shakers designed to resemble Mary and Joseph. Still, they would be impressed,
he hoped, by the lovely bay windows, the shining parquet floors, the impressive winding
staircase, the wooden wainscoting, as they sipped champagne and dipped samosas in
chutney.
Douglas, one of the new consultants at the firm, and his girlfriend Nora were the first to
arrive. Both were tall and blond, wearing matching wire-rimmed glasses and long black
overcoats. Nora wore a black hat full of sharp thin feathers that corresponded to the
sharp thin angles of her face. Her left hand was joined with Douglas’s. In her right hand
was a bottle of cognac with a red ribbon wrapped around its neck, which she gave to
Twinkle.
“Great lawn, Sanjeev,” Douglas remarked. “We’ve got to get that rake out ourselves,

sweetie. And this must be…”
“My wife. Tanima.”
“Call me Twinkle.”
“What an unusual name,” Nora remarked.
Twinkle shrugged. “Not really. There’s an actress in Bombay named Dimple Kapadia.
She even has a sister named Simple.”
Douglas and Nora raised their eyebrows simultaneously, nodding slowly, as if to let the
absurdity of the names settle in. “Pleased to meet you, Twinkle.”
“Help yourself to champagne. There’s gallons.”
“I hope you don’t mind my asking,” Douglas said, “but I noticed the statue outside, and
are you guys Christian? I thought you were Indian.”
“There are Christians in India,” Sanjeev replied, “but we’re not.”
“I love your outfit,” Nora told Twinkle.
“And I adore your hat. Would you like the grand tour?”
The bell rang again, and again and again. Within minutes, it seemed, the house had
filled with bodies and conversations and unfamiliar fragrances. The women wore heels
and sheer stockings, and short black dresses made of crepe and chiffon. They handed
their wraps and coats to Sanjeev, who draped them carefully on hangers in the
spacious coat closet, though Twinkle told people to throw their things on the ottomans in
the solarium. Some of the Indian women wore their finest saris, made with gold filigree
that draped in elegant pleats over their shoulders. The men wore jackets and ties and
citrus-scented aftershaves. As people filtered from one room to the next, presents piled
onto the long cherry-wood table that ran from one end of the downstairs hall to the
other.
It bewildered Sanjeev that it was for him, and his house, and his wife, that they had all
gone to so much care. The only other time in his life that something similar had
happened was his wedding day, but somehow this was different, for these were not his
family, but people who knew him only casually, and in a sense owed him nothing.
Everyone congratulated him. Lester, another coworker, predicted that Sanjeev would be
promoted to vice president in two months maximum. People devoured the samosas,
and dutifully admired the freshly painted ceilings and walls, the hanging plants, the bay
windows, the silk paintings from Jaipur. But most of all they admired Twinkle, and her
brocaded salwar-kameez, which was the shade of a persimmon with a low scoop in
the back, and the little string of white rose petals she had coiled cleverly around her
head, and the pearl choker with a sapphire at its center that adorned her throat. Over
hectic jazz records, played under Twinkle’s supervision, they laughed at her anecdotes
and observations, forming a widening circle around her, while Sanjeev replenished the
samosas that he kept warming evenly in the oven, and getting ice for people’s drinks,
and opening more bottles of champagne with some difficulty, and explaining for the
fortieth time that he wasn’t Christian. It was Twinkle who led them in separate groups up
and down the winding stairs, to gaze at the back lawn, to peer down the cellar steps.
“Your friends adore the poster in my study,” she mentioned to him triumphantly, placing
her hand on the small of his back as they, at one point, brushed past each other.
Sanjeev went to the kitchen, which was empty, and ate a piece of chicken out of the
tray on the counter with his fingers because he thought no one was looking. He ate a
second piece, then washed it down with a gulp of gin straight from the bottle.
“Great house. Great rice.” Sunil, an anesthesiologist, walked in, spooning food from his
paper plate into his mouth. “Do you have more champagne?”
“Your wife’s wow,” added Prabal, following behind. He was an unmarried professor of
physics at Yale. For a moment Sanjeev stared at him blankly, then blushed; once at a
dinner party Prabal had pronounced that Sophia Loren was wow, as was Audrey
Hepburn. “Does she have a sister?”

Sunil picked a raisin out of the rice tray. “Is her last name Little Star?”
The two men laughed and started eating more rice from the tray, plowing through it with
their plastic spoons. Sanjeev went down to the cellar for more liquor. For a few minutes
he paused on the steps, in the damp, cool silence, hugging the second crate of
champagne to his chest as the party drifted above the rafters. Then he set the
reinforcements on the dining table.
“Yes, everything, we found them all in the house, in the most unusual places,” he heard
Twinkle saying in the living room. “In fact we keep finding them.”
“No!”
“Yes! Every day is like a treasure hunt. It’s too good. God only knows what else we’ll
find, no pun intended.”
That was what started it. As if by some unspoken pact, the whole party joined forces
and began combing through each of the rooms, opening closets on their own, peering
under chairs and cushions, feeling behind curtains, removing books from bookcases.
Groups scampered, giggling and swaying, up and down the winding staircase.
“We’ve never explored the attic,” Twinkle announced suddenly, and so everybody
followed.
“How do we get up there?”
“There’s a ladder in the hallway, somewhere in the ceiling.”
Wearily Sanjeev followed at the back of the crowd, to point out the location of the
ladder, but Twinkle had already found it on her own. “Eureka!” she hollered.
Douglas pulled the chain that released the steps. His face was flushed and he was
wearing Nora’s feather hat on his head. One by one the guests disappeared, men
helping women as they placed their strappy high heels on the narrow slats of the ladder,
the Indian women wrapping the free ends of their expensive saris into their waistbands.
The men followed behind, all quickly disappearing, until Sanjeev alone remained at the
top of the winding staircase. Footsteps thundered over his head. He had no desire to
join them. He wondered if the ceiling would collapse, imagined, for a split second, the
sight of all the tumbling drunk perfumed bodies crashing, tangled, around him. He heard
a shriek, and then rising, spreading waves of laughter in discordant tones. Something
fell, something else shattered. He could hear them babbling about a trunk. They
seemed to be struggling to get it open, banging feverishly on its surface.
He thought perhaps Twinkle would call for his assistance, but he was not summoned.
He looked about the hallway and to the landing below, at the champagne glasses and
half-eaten samosas and napkins smeared with lipstick abandoned in every corner, on
every available surface. Then he noticed that Twinkle, in her haste, had discarded her
shoes altogether, for they lay by the foot of the ladder, black patent-leather mules with
heels like golf tees, open toes, and slightly soiled silk labels on the instep where her
soles had rested. He placed them in the doorway of the master bedroom so that no one
would trip when they descended.
He heard something creaking open slowly. The strident voices had subsided to an
even murmur. It occurred to Sanjeev that he had the house all to himself. The music
had ended and he could hear, if he concentrated, the hum of the refrigerator, and the
rustle of the last leaves on the trees outside, and the tapping of their branches against
the windowpanes. With one flick of his hand he could snap the ladder back on its spring
into the ceiling, and they would have no way of getting down unless he were to pull the
chain and let them. He thought of all the things he could do, undisturbed. He could
sweep Twinkle’s menagerie into a garbage bag and get in the car and drive it all to the
dump, and tear down the poster of weeping Jesus, and take a hammer to the Virgin
Mary while he was at it. Then he would return to the empty house; he could easily clear
up the cups and plates in an hour’s time, and pour himself a gin and tonic, and eat a
plate of warmed rice and listen to his new Bach CD while reading the liner notes so as

to understand it properly. He nudged the ladder slightly, but it was sturdily planted
against the floor. Budging it would require some effort.
“My God, I need a cigarette,” Twinkle exclaimed from above.
Sanjeev felt knots forming at the back of his neck. He felt dizzy. He needed to lie down.
He walked toward the bedroom, but stopped short when he saw Twinkle’s shoes facing
him in the doorway. He thought of her slipping them on her feet. But instead of feeling
irritated, as he had ever since they’d moved into the house together, he felt a pang of
anticipation at the thought of her rushing unsteadily down the winding staircase in them,
scratching the floor a bit in her path. The pang intensified as he thought of her rushing
to the bathroom to brighten her lipstick, and eventually rushing to get people their coats,
and finally rushing to the cherry-wood table when the last guest had left, to begin
opening their housewarming presents. It was the same pang he used to feel before they
were married, when he would hang up the phone after one of their conversations, or
when he would drive back from the airport, wondering which ascending plane in the sky
was hers.
“Sanj, you won’t believe this.”
She emerged with her back to him, her hands over her head, the tops of her bare
shoulder blades perspiring, supporting something still hidden from view.
“You got it, Twinkle?” someone asked.
“Yes, you can let go.”
Now he saw that her hands were wrapped around it: a solid silver bust of Christ, the
head easily three times the size of his own. It had a patrician bump on its nose,
magnificent curly hair that rested atop a pronounced collarbone, and a broad forehead
that reflected in miniature the walls and doors and lampshades around them. Its
expression was confident, as if assured of its devotees, the unyielding lips sensuous
and full. It was also sporting Nora’s feather hat. As Twinkle descended, Sanjeev put his
hands around her waist to balance her, and he relieved her of the bust when she had
reached the ground. It weighed a good thirty pounds. The others began lowering
themselves slowly, exhausted from the hunt. Some trickled downstairs in search of a
fresh drink.
She took a breath, raised her eyebrows, crossed her fingers. “Would you mind terribly if
we displayed it on the mantel? Just for tonight? I know you hate it.”
He did hate it. He hated its immensity, and its flawless, polished surface, and its
undeniable value. He hated that it was in his house, and that he owned it. Unlike the
other things they’d found, this contained dignity, solemnity, beauty even. But to his
surprise these qualities made him hate it all the more. Most of all he hated it because he
knew that Twinkle loved it.
“I’llkeep it in my study from tomorrow,” Twinkle added. “I promise.”
She would never put it in her study, he knew. For the rest of their days together she
would keep it on the center of the mantel, flanked on either side by the rest of the
menagerie. Each time they had guests Twinkle would explain how she had found it, and
they would admire her as they listened. He gazed at the crushed rose petals in her hair,
at the pearl and sapphire choker at her throat, at the sparkly crimson polish on her toes.
He decided these were among the things that made Prabal think she was wow. His
head ached from gin and his arms ached from the weight of the statue. He said, “I put
your shoes in the bedroom.”
“Thanks. But my feet are killing me.” Twinkle gave his elbow a little squeeze and
headed for the living room.
Sanjeev pressed the massive silver face to his ribs, careful not to let the feather hat slip,
and followed her.

The Treatment of Bibi Haldar
F ORTHEGREATERNUMBER of her twenty-nine years, Bibi Haldar suffered from an ailment
that baffled family, friends, priests, palmists, spinsters, gem therapists, prophets, and
fools. In efforts to cure her, concerned members of our town brought her holy water
from seven holy rivers. When we heard her screams and throes in the night, when her
wrists were bound with ropes and stinging poultices pressed upon her, we named her in
our prayers. Wise men had massaged eucalyptus balm into her temples, steamed her
face with herbal infusions. At the suggestion of a blind Christian she was once taken by
train to kiss the tombs of saints and martyrs. Amulets warding against the evil eye
girded her arms and neck. Auspicious stones adorned her fingers.
Treatments offered by doctors only made matters worse. Allopaths, homeopaths,
ayurvedics—over time, all branches of the medical arts had been consulted. Their
advice was endless. After x-rays, probes, auscultations, and injections, some advised
Bibi to gain weight, others to lose it. If one forbade her to sleep beyond dawn, another
insisted she remain in bed till noon. This one told her to perform headstands, that one to
chant Vedic verses at specified intervals throughout the day. “Take her to Calcutta for
hypnosis” was a suggestion others would offer. Shuttled from one specialist to the next,
the girl had been prescribed to shun garlic, consume disproportionate quantities of
bitters, meditate, drink green coconut water, and swallow raw duck’s eggs beaten in
milk. In short, Bibi’s life was an encounter with one fruitless antidote after another.
The nature of her illness, which struck without warning, confined her world to the
unpainted four-story building in which her only local family, an elder cousin and his wife,
rented an apartment on the second floor. Liable to fall unconscious and enter, at any
moment, into a shameless delirium, Bibi could be trusted neither to cross a street nor
board a tram without supervision. Her daily occupation consisted of sitting in the storage
room on the roof of our building, a space in which one could sit but not comfortably
stand, featuring an adjoining latrine, a curtained entrance, one window without a grille,
and shelves made from the panels of old doors. There, cross-legged on a square of
jute, she recorded inventory for the cosmetics shop that her cousin Haldar owned and
managed at the mouth of our courtyard. For her services, Bibi received no income but
was given meals, provisions, and sufficient meters of cotton at every October holiday to
replenish her wardrobe at an inexpensive tailor. At night she slept on a folding camp cot
in the cousin’s place downstairs.
In the mornings Bibi arrived in the storage room wearing cracked plastic slippers and a
housecoat whose hem stopped some inches below the knee, a length we had not worn
since we were fifteen. Her shins were hairless, and sprayed with a generous number of
pallid freckles. She bemoaned her fate and challenged her stars as we hung our laundry
or scrubbed scales from our fish. She was not pretty. Her upper lip was thin, her teeth
too small. Her gums protruded when she spoke. “I ask you, is it fair for a girl to sit out
her years, pass neglected through her prime, listing labels and prices without promise of
a future?” Her voice was louder than necessary, as if she were speaking to a deaf
person. “Is it wrong to envy you, all brides and mothers, busy with lives and cares?
Wrong to want to shade my eyes, scent my hair? To raise a child and teach him sweet
from sour, good from bad?”
Each day she unloaded her countless privations upon us, until it became unendurably
apparent that Bibi wanted a man. She wanted to be spoken for, protected, placed on
her path in life. Like the rest of us, she wanted to serve suppers, and scold servants,
and set aside money in her almari to have her eyebrows threaded every three weeks
at the Chinese beauty parlor. She pestered us for details of our own weddings: the
jewels, the invitations, the scent of tuberoses strung over the nuptial bed. When, at her

insistence, we showed her our photo albums embossed with the designs of butterflies,
she pored over the snapshots that chronicled the ceremony: butter poured in fires,
garlands exchanged, vermilion-painted fish, trays of shells and silver coins. “An
impressive number of guests,” she would observe, stroking with her finger the
misplaced faces that had surrounded us. “When it happens to me, you will all be
present.”
Anticipation began to plague her with such ferocity that the thought of a husband, on
which all her hopes were pinned, threatened at times to send her into another attack.
Amid tins of talc and boxes of bobby pins she would curl up on the floor of the storage
room, speaking in non sequiturs. “I will never dip my feet in milk,” she whimpered. “My
face will never be painted with sandalwood paste. Who will rub me with turmeric? My
name will never be printed with scarlet ink on a card.”
Her soliloquies mawkish, her sentiments maudlin, malaise dripped like a fever from her
pores. In her most embittered moments we wrapped her in shawls, washed her face
from the cistern tap, and brought her glasses of yogurt and rosewater. In moments
when she was less disconsolate, we encouraged her to accompany us to the tailor and
replenish her blouses and petticoats, in part to provide her with a change of scenery,
and in part because we thought it might increase whatever matrimonial prospects she
had. “No man wants a woman who dresses like a dishwasher,” we told her. “Do you
want all that fabric of yours to go to the moths?” She sulked, pouted, protested, and
sighed. “Where do I go, who would I dress for?” she demanded. “Who takes me to the
cinema, the zoo-garden, buys me lime soda and cashews? Admit it, are these concerns
of mine? I will never be cured, never married.”
But then a new treatment was prescribed for Bibi, the most outrageous of them all. One
evening on her way to dinner, she collapsed on the third-floor landing, pounding her
fists, kicking her feet, sweating buckets, lost to this world. Her moans echoed through
the stairwell, and we rushed out of our apartments to calm her at once, bearing palm
fans and sugar cubes, and tumblers of refrigerated water to pour on her head. Our
children clung to the banisters and witnessed her paroxysm; our servants were sent to
summon her cousin. It was ten minutes before Haldar emerged from his shop,
impassive apart from the red in his face. He told us to stop fussing, and then with no
efforts to repress his disdain he packed her into a rickshaw bound for the polyclinic. It
was there, after performing a series of blood tests, that the doctor in charge of Bibi’s
case, exasperated, concluded that a marriage would cure her.
News spread between our window bars, across our clotheslines, and over the pigeon
droppings that plastered the parapets of our rooftops. By the next morning, three
separate palmists had examined Bibi’s hand and confirmed that there was, no doubt,
evidence of an imminent union etched into her skin. Unsavory sorts murmured
indelicacies at cutlet stands; grandmothers consulted almanacs to determine a
propitious hour for the betrothal. For days afterward, as we walked our children to
school, picked up our cleaning, stood in lines at the ration shop, we whispered.
Apparently some activity was what the poor girl needed all along. For the first time we
imagined the contours below her housecoat, and attempted to appraise the pleasures
she could offer a man. For the first time we noted the clarity of her complexion, the
length and languor of her eyelashes, the undeniably elegant armature of her hands.
“They say it’s the only hope. A case of overexcitement. They say”—and here we
paused, blushing—”relations will calm her blood.”
Needless to say, Bibi was delighted by the diagnosis, and began at once to prepare for
conjugal life. With some damaged merchandise from Haldar’s shop she polished her
toenails and softened her elbows. Neglecting the new shipments delivered to the
storage room, she began hounding us for recipes, for vermicelli pudding and papaya
stew, and inscribed them in crooked letters in the pages of her inventory ledger. She

made guest lists, dessert lists, listed lands in which she intended to honeymoon. She
applied glycerine to smooth her lips, resisted sweets to reduce her measurements. One
day she asked one of us to accompany her to the tailor, who stitched her a new salwarkameez in an umbrella cut, the fashion that season. On the streets she dragged us to
the counters of each and every jeweler, peering into glass cases, seeking our opinions
of tiara designs and locket settings. In the windows of sari shops she pointed to a
magenta Benarasi silk, and a turquoise one, and then one that was the color of
marigolds. “The first part of the ceremony I will wear this one, then this one, then this.”
But Haldar and his wife thought otherwise. Immune to her fancies, indifferent to our
fears, they conducted business as usual, stuffed together in that cosmetics shop no
bigger than a wardrobe, whose walls were crammed on three sides with hennas, hair
oils, pumice stones, and fairness creams. “We have little time for indecent suggestions,”
replied Haldar to those who broached the subject of Bibi’s health. “What won’t be cured
must be endured. Bibi has caused enough worry, added enough to expenses, sullied
enough the family name.” His wife, seated beside him behind the tiny glass counter,
fanned the mottled skin above her breasts and agreed. She was a heavy woman whose
powder, a shade too pale for her, caked in the creases of her throat. “Besides, who
would marry her? The girl knows nothing about anything, speaks backward, is
practically thirty, can’t light a coal stove, can’t boil rice, can’t tell the difference between
fennel and a cumin seed. Imagine her attempting to feed a man!”
They had a point. Bibi had never been taught to be a woman; the illness had left her
naive in most practical matters. Haldar’s wife, convinced that the devil himself
possessed her, kept Bibi away from fire and flame. She had not been taught to wear a
sari without pinning it in four different places, nor could she embroider slipcovers or
crochet shawls with any exceptional talent. She was not allowed to watch the television
(Haldar assumed its electronic properties would excite her), and was thus ignorant of
the events and entertainments of our world. Her formal studies had ended after the
ninth standard.
For Bibi’s sake we argued in favor of finding a husband. “It’s what she’s wanted all
along,” we pointed out. But Haldar and his wife were impossible to reason with. Their
rancor toward Bibi was fixed on their lips, thinner than the strings with which they tied
our purchases. When we maintained that the new treatment deserved a chance, they
contended, “Bibi possesses insufficient quantities of respect and self-control. She plays
up her malady for the attention. The best thing is to keep her occupied, away from the
trouble she invariably creates.”
“Why not marry her off, then? It will get her off your hands, at least.”
“And waste our profits on a wedding? Feeding guests, ordering bracelets, buying a bed,
assembling a dowry?”
But Bibi’s gripes persisted. Late one morning, dressed under our supervision in a sari of
lavender eyelet chiffon and mirrored slippers lent to her for the occasion, she hastened
in uneven steps to Haldar’s shop and insisted on being taken to the photographer’s
studio so that her portrait, like those of other brides-in-waiting, could be circulated in the
homes of eligible men. Through the shutters of our balconies we watched her;
perspiration had already left black moons beneath her armpits. “Apart from my x-rays I
have never been photographed,” she fretted. “Potential in-laws need to know what I look
like.” But Haldar refused. He said that anyone who wished to see her could observe her
for themselves, weeping and wailing and warding off customers. She was a bane for
business, he told her, a liability and a loss. Who in this town needed a photo to know
that?
The next day Bibi stopped listing inventory altogether and regaled us, instead, with
imprudent details about Haldar and his wife. “On Sundays he plucks hairs from her chin.
They keep their money refrigerated under lock and key.” For the benefit of neighboring

rooftops she strutted and shrieked; with each proclamation her audience expanded. “In
the bath she applies chickpea flour to her arms because she thinks it will make her
paler. The third toe on her right foot is missing. The reason they take such long siestas
is that she is impossible to please.”
To get her to quiet down, Haldar placed a one-line advertisement in the town
newspaper, in order to solicit a groom: “GIRL, UNS TABLE, HEIGHT 152 CENTIMETRES ,
S EEKS HUS BAND.” The identity of the prospective bride was no secret to the parents of
our young men, and no family was willing to shoulder so blatant a risk. Who could
blame them? It was rumored by many that Bibi conversed with herself in a fluent but
totally incomprehensible language, and slept without dreams. Even the lonely fourtoothed widower who repaired our handbags in the market could not be persuaded to
propose. Nevertheless, to distract her, we began to coach her in wifely ways. “Frowning
like a rice pot will get you nowhere. Men require that you caress them with your
expression.” As practice for the event of encountering a possible suitor, we urged her to
engage in small conversations with nearby men. When the water bearer arrived, at the
end of his rounds, to fillBibi’s urn in the storage room, we instructed her to say “How do
you do?” When the coal supplier unloaded his baskets on the roof, we advised her to
smile and make a comment about the weather. Recalling our own experiences, we
prepared her for an interview. “Most likely the groom will arrive with one parent, a
grandparent, and either an uncle or aunt. They will stare, ask several questions. They
will examine the bottoms of your feet, the thickness of your braid. They will ask you to
name the prime minister, recite poetry, feed a dozen hungry people on half a dozen
eggs.”
When two months had passed without a single reply to the advertisement, Haldar and
his wife felt vindicated. “Now do you see that she is unfit to marry? Now do you see no
man of sane mind would touch her?”
Things had not been so bad for Bibi before her father died. (The mother had not
survived beyond the birth of the girl.) In his final years, the old man, a teacher of
mathematics in our elementary schools, had kept assiduous track of Bibi’s illness in
hopes of determining some logic to her condition. “To every problem there is a solution,”
he would reply whenever we inquired after his progress. He reassured Bibi. For a time
he reassured us all. He wrote letters to doctors in England, spent his evenings reading
casebooks at the library, gave up eating meat on Fridays in order to appease his
household god. Eventually he gave up teaching as well, tutoring only from his room, so
that he could monitor Bibi at all hours. But though in his youth he had received prizes for
his ability to deduce square roots from memory, he was unable to solve the mystery of
his daughter’s disease. For all his work, his records led him to conclude only that Bibi’s
attacks occurred more frequently in summer than winter, and that she had suffered
approximately twenty-five major attacks in all. He created a chart of her symptoms with
directions for calming her, and distributed it throughout the neighborhood, but these
were eventually lost, or turned into sailboats by our children, or used to calculate
grocery budgets on the reverse side.
Apart from keeping her company, apart from soothing her woes, apart from keeping an
occasional eye on her, there was little we could do to improve the situation. None of us
were capable of understanding such desolation. Some days, after siesta, we combed
out her hair, remembering now and then to change the part in her scalp so that it would
not grow too broad. At her request we powdered the down over her lips and throat,
penciled definition into her brows, and walked her to the banks of the fish pond where
our children played cricket in the afternoon. She was still determined to lure a man.
“Apart from my condition I am perfectly healthy,” she maintained, seating herself on a
bench along the footpath where courting men and women strolled hand in hand. “I have
never had a cold or flu. I have never had jaundice. I have never suffered from colic or

indigestion.” Sometimes we bought her smoked corn on the cob sprinkled with lemon
juice, or two paisa caramels. We consoled her; when she was convinced a man was
giving her the eye, we humored her and agreed. But she was not our responsibility, and
in our private moments we were thankful for it.
In November we learned that Haldar’s wife was pregnant. That morning in the storage
room, Bibi wept. “She says I’m contagious, like the pox. She says I’llspoil the baby.”
She was breathing heavily, her pupils fixed to a peeling spot on the wall. “What will
become of me?” There was still no response to the advertisement in the newspaper. “Is
it not punishment enough that I bear this curse alone? Must I also be blamed for
infecting another?” Dissent within the Haldar household grew. The wife, convinced that
Bibi’s presence would infect the unborn child, began to wrap woolen shawls around her
tumid belly. In the bathroom Bibi was given separate soaps and towels. According to the
scullery maid, Bibi’s plates were not washed with the others.
And then one afternoon, without word or warning, it happened again. On the banks of
the fish pond, Bibi fell to the footpath. She shook. She shuddered. She chewed her lips.
A group encircled the convulsing girl at once, eager to assist in whatever way possible.
The opener of soda bottles pinned down her thrashing limbs. The vendor of sliced
cucumbers attempted to unclasp her fingers. One of us doused her with water from the
pond. Another wiped her mouth with a perfumed handkerchief. The seller of jackfruits
was holding Bibi’s head, which struggled to toss from side to side. And the man who
cranked the sugarcane press gripped the palm fan that he ordinarily used to chase
away flies, agitating the air from every conceivable angle.
“Is there a doctor in the crowd?”
“Watch that she doesn’t swallow her tongue.”
“Has anyone informed Haldar?”
“She’s hotter than coals!”
In spite of our efforts, the tumult persisted. Wrestling with her adversary, wracked with
anguish, she ground her teeth and twitched at the knees. Over two minutes had passed.
We watched and worried. We wondered what to do.
“Leather!” someone cried suddenly. “She needs to smell leather.” Then we
remembered; the last time it had happened, a cowhide sandal held under her nostrils
was what had finally freed Bibi from the clutches of her torment.
“Bibi, what happened? Tell us what happened,” we asked when she opened her eyes.
“I felt hot, then hotter. Smoke passed before my eyes. The world went black. Didn’t you
see it?”
A group of our husbands escorted her home. Dusk thickened, conch shells were blown,
and the air grew dense with the incense of prayers. Bibi muttered and staggered but
said nothing. Her cheeks were bruised and nicked here and there. Her hair was matted,
her elbows caked with dirt, and a small piece of one front tooth was missing. We
followed behind, at what we assumed to be safe distances, holding our children by the
hand.
She needed a blanket, a compress, a sedative tablet. She needed supervision. But
when we reached the courtyard Haldar and his wife would not have her in the flat.
“The medical risk is too great for an expectant mother to be in contact with an
hysterical person,” he insisted.
That night Bibi slept in the storage room.
Their baby, a girl, was delivered by forceps at the end of June. By then Bibi was
sleeping downstairs again, though they kept her camp cot in the corridor, and would not

let her touch the child directly. Every day they sent her to the roof to record inventory
until lunch, at which point Haldar brought her receipts from the morning’s sales and a
bowl of yellow split peas for her lunch. At night she ate milk and bread alone in the
stairwell. Another seizure, and another, went unchecked.
When we voiced our concern, Haldar said it was not our business, and flatly refused to
discuss the matter. To express our indignation we began to take our shopping
elsewhere; this provided us with our only revenge. Over the weeks the products on
Haldar’s shelves grew dusty. Labels faded and colognes turned rank. Passing by in the
evenings, we saw Haldar sitting alone, swatting moths with the sole of his slipper. We
hardly saw the wife at all. According to the scullery maid she was still bedridden;
apparently her labor had been complicated.
Autumn came, with its promise of the October holidays, and the town grew busy
shopping and planning for the season. Film songs blared from amplifiers strung through
trees. Arcades and markets stayed open all hours. We bought our children balloons and
colored ribbons, purchased sweetmeats by the kilo, paid calls in taxis to relatives we
had not seen throughout the year. The days grew shorter, the evenings colder. We
buttoned our sweaters and pulled up our socks. Then a chill set in that made our throats
itch. We made our children gargle with warm saltwater and wrap mufflers around their
necks. But it was the Haldar baby who ended up getting sick.
A doctor was summoned in the middle of the night and commanded to reduce the fever.
“Cure her,” the wife pleaded. Her shrill commotion had woken us all. “We can give you
anything, just cure my baby girl.” The doctor prescribed a glucose formula, crushed
aspirins in a mortar, and told them to wrap the child with quilts and covers.
Five days later the fever had not budged.
“It’s Bibi,” the wife wailed. “She’s done it, she’s infected our child. We should never have
let her back down here. We should never have let her back into this house.”
And so Bibi started to spend her nights in the storage room again. At the wife’s
insistence Haldar even moved her camp cot up there, along with a tin trunk that
contained her belongings. Her meals were left covered with a colander at the top of the
stairs.
“I don’t mind,” Bibi told us. “It’s better to live apart from them, to set up house on my
own.” She unpacked the trunk—some housecoats, a framed portrait of her father,
sewing supplies, and an assortment of fabrics—and arranged her things on a few empty
shelves. By the week’s end the baby had recuperated, but Bibi was not asked to return
downstairs. “Don’t worry, it’s not as if they’ve locked me in here,” she said in order to set
us at ease. “The world begins at the bottom of the stairs. Now I am free to discover life
as I please.”
But in truth she stopped going out altogether. When we asked her to come with us to
the fish pond or to go see temple decorations she refused, claiming that she was
stitching a new curtain to hang across the entrance of the storage room. Her skin looked
ashen. She needed fresh air. “What about finding your husband?” we suggested. “How
do you expect to charm a man sitting up here all day?”
Nothing persuaded her.
***
By mid-December, Haldar cleared all the unsold merchandise off the shelves of his
beauty shop and hauled them in boxes up to the storage room. We had succeeded in
driving him more or less out of business. Before the year’s end the family moved away,
leaving an envelope containing three hundred rupees under Bibi’s door. There was no
more news of them.
One of us had an address for a relation of Bibi’s in Hyderabad, and wrote explaining the
situation. The letter was returned unopened, address unknown. Before the coldest
weeks set in, we had the shutters of the storage room repaired and attached a sheet of

tin to the doorframe, so that she would at least have some privacy. Someone donated a
kerosene lamp; another gave her some old mosquito netting and a pair of socks without
heels. At every opportunity we reminded her that we surrounded her, that she could
come to us if she ever needed advice or aid of any kind. For a time we sent our children
to play on the roof in the afternoons, so that they could alert us if she was having
another attack. But each night we left her alone.
Some months passed. Bibi had retreated into a deep and prolonged silence. We took
turns leaving her plates of rice and glasses of tea. She drank little, ate less, and began
to assume an expression that no longer matched her years. At twilight she circled the
parapet once or twice, but she never left the rooftop. After dark she remained behind
the tin door and did not come out for any reason. We did not disturb her. Some of us
began to wonder if she was dying. Others concluded that she had lost her mind.
One morning in April, when the heat had returned for drying lentil wafers on the roof, we
noticed that someone had vomited by the cistern tap. When we noticed this a second
morning as well, we knocked on Bibi’s tin door. When there was no answer we opened
it ourselves, as there was no lock to fasten it.
We found her lying on the camp cot. She was about four months pregnant.
She said she could not remember what had happened. She would not tell us who had
done it. We prepared her semolina with hot milk and raisins; still she would not reveal
the man’s identity. In vain we searched for traces of the assault, some sign of the
intrusion, but the room was swept and in order. On the floor beside the cot, her
inventory ledger, open to a fresh page, contained a list of names.
She carried the baby to full term, and one evening in September, we helped her deliver
a son. We showed her how to feed him, and bathe him, and lull him to sleep. We bought
her an oilcloth and helped her stitch clothes and pillowcases out of the fabric she had
saved over the years. Within a month Bibi had recuperated from the birth, and with the
money that Haldar had left her, she had the storage room whitewashed, and placed
padlocks on the window and doors. Then she dusted the shelves and arranged the
leftover potions and lotions, selling Haldar’s old inventory at half price. She told us to
spread word of the sale, and we did. From Bibi we purchased our soaps and kohl, our
combs and powders, and when she had sold the last of her merchandise, she went by
taxi to the wholesale market, using her profits to restock the shelves. In this manner she
raised the boy and ran a business in the storage room, and we did what we could to
help. For years afterward, we wondered who in our town had disgraced her. A few of
our servants were questioned, and in tea stalls and bus stands, possible suspects were
debated and dismissed. But there was no point carrying out an investigation. She was,
to the best of our knowledge, cured.

The Third and Final Continent
I LEFTINDIAIN 1964 with a certificate in commerce and the equivalent, in those days, of
ten dollars to my name. For three weeks I sailed on the SS Roma, an Italian cargo
vessel, in a cabin next to the ship’s engine, across the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, the
Mediterranean, and finally to England. I lived in north London, in Finsbury Park, in a
house occupied entirely by penniless Bengali bachelors like myself, at least a dozen
and sometimes more, all struggling to educate and establish ourselves abroad.
I attended lectures at LSE and worked at the university library to get by. We lived three
or four to a room, shared a single, icy toilet, and took turns cooking pots of egg curry,
which we ate with our hands on a table covered with newspapers. Apart from our jobs
we had few responsibilities. On weekends we lounged barefoot in drawstring pajamas,
drinking tea and smoking Rothmans, or set out to watch cricket at Lord’s. Some
weekends the house was crammed with still more Bengalis, to whom we had introduced
ourselves at the greengrocer, or on the Tube, and we made yet more egg curry, and
played Mukesh on a Grundig reel-to-reel, and soaked our dirty dishes in the bathtub.
Every now and then someone in the house moved out, to live with a woman whom his
family back in Calcutta had determined he was to wed. In 1969, when I was thirty-six
years old, my own marriage was arranged. Around the same time I was offered a fulltime job in America, in the processing department of a library at MIT. The salary was
generous enough to support a wife, and I was honored to be hired by a world-famous
university, and so I obtained a sixth-preference green card, and prepared to travel
farther still.
By now I had enough money to go by plane. I flew first to Calcutta, to attend my
wedding, and a week later I flew to Boston, to begin my new job. During the flight I read
The Student Guide to North America, a paperback volume that I’d bought before
leaving London, for seven shillings six pence on Tottenham Court Road, for although I
was no longer a student I was on a budget all the same. I learned that Americans drove
on the right side of the road, not the left, and that they called a lift an elevator and an
engaged phone busy. “The pace of life in North America is different from Britain as you
will soon discover,” the guidebook informed me. “Everybody feels he must get to the
top. Don’t expect an English cup of tea.” As the plane began its descent over Boston
Harbor, the pilot announced the weather and time, and that President Nixon had
declared a national holiday: two American men had landed on the moon. Several
passengers cheered. “God bless America!” one of them hollered. Across the aisle, I saw
a woman praying.
I spent my first night at the YMCA in Central Square, Cambridge, an inexpensive
accommodation recommended by my guidebook. It was walking distance from MIT, and
steps from the post office and a supermarket called Purity Supreme. The room
contained a cot, a desk, and a small wooden cross on one wall. A sign on the door said
cooking was strictly forbidden. A bare window overlooked Massachusetts Avenue, a
major thoroughfare with traffic in both directions. Car horns, shrill and prolonged, blared
one after another. Flashing sirens heralded endless emergencies, and a fleet of buses
rumbled past, their doors opening and closing with a powerful hiss, throughout the night.
The noise was constantly distracting, at times suffocating. I felt it deep in my ribs, just as
I had felt the furious drone of the engine on the SS Roma. But there was no ship’s
deck to escape to, no glittering ocean to thrill my soul, no breeze to cool my face, no
one to talk to. I was too tired to pace the gloomy corridors of the YMCA in my drawstring
pajamas. Instead I sat at the desk and stared out the window, at the city hall of
Cambridge and a row of small shops. In the morning I reported to my job at the Dewey
Library, a beige fortlike building by Memorial Drive. I also opened a bank account,

rented a post office box, and bought a plastic bowl and a spoon at Woolworth’s, a store
whose name I recognized from London. I went to Purity Supreme, wandering up and
down the aisles, converting ounces to grams and comparing prices to things in England.
In the end I bought a small carton of milk and a box of cornflakes. This was my first
meal in America. I ate it at my desk. I preferred it to hamburgers or hot dogs, the only
alternative I could afford in the coffee shops on Massachusetts Avenue, and, besides, at
the time I had yet to consume any beef. Even the simple chore of buying milk was new
to me; in London we’d had bottles delivered each morning to our door.
In a week I had adjusted, more or less. I ate cornflakes and milk, morning and night,
and bought some bananas for variety, slicing them into the bowl with the edge of my
spoon. In addition I bought tea bags and a flask, which the salesman in Woolworth’s
referred to as a thermos (a flask, he informed me, was used to store whiskey, another
thing I had never consumed). For the price of one cup of tea at a coffee shop, I filled the
flask with boiling water on my way to work each morning, and brewed the four cups I
drank in the course of a day. I bought a larger carton of milk, and learned to leave it on
the shaded part of the windowsill, as I had seen another resident at the YMCA do. To
pass the time in the evenings I read the Boston Globe downstairs, in a spacious room
with stained-glass windows. I read every article and advertisement, so that I would grow
familiar with things, and when my eyes grew tired I slept. Only I did not sleep well. Each
night I had to keep the window wide open; it was the only source of air in the stifling
room, and the noise was intolerable. I would lie on the cot with my fingers pressed into
my ears, but when I drifted off to sleep my hands fell away, and the noise of the traffic
would wake me up again. Pigeon feathers drifted onto the window-sill, and one evening,
when I poured milk over my cornflakes, I saw that it had soured. Nevertheless I resolved
to stay at the YMCA for six weeks, until my wife’s passport and green card were ready.
Once she arrived I would have to rent a proper apartment, and from time to time I
studied the classified section of the newspaper, or stopped in at the housing office at
MIT during my lunch break, to see what was available in my price range. It was in this
manner that I discovered a room for immediate occupancy, in a house on a quiet street,
the listing said, for eight dollars per week. I copied the number into my guidebook and
dialed from a pay telephone, sorting through the coins with which I was still unfamiliar,
smaller and lighter than shillings, heavier and brighter than paisas.
“Who is speaking?” a woman demanded. Her voice was bold and clamorous.
“Yes, good afternoon, madame. I am calling about the room for rent.”
“Harvard or Tech?”
“I beg your pardon?”
“Are you from Harvard or Tech?”
Gathering that Tech referred to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, I replied, “I
work at Dewey Library,” adding tentatively, “at Tech.”
“I only rent rooms to boys from Harvard or Tech!”
“Yes, madame.”
I was given an address and an appointment for seven o’clock that evening. Thirty
minutes before the hour I set out, my guidebook in my pocket, my breath fresh with
Listerine. I turned down a street shaded with trees, perpendicular to Massachusetts
Avenue. Stray blades of grass poked between the cracks of the footpath. In spite of the
heat I wore a coat and a tie, regarding the event as I would any other interview; I had
never lived in the home of a person who was not Indian. The house, surrounded by a
chain-link fence, was off-white with dark brown trim. Unlike the stucco row house I’d
lived in in London, this house, fully detached, was covered with wooden shingles, with a
tangle of forsythia bushes plastered against the front and sides. When I pressed the

calling bell, the woman with whom I had spoken on the phone hollered from what
seemed to be just the other side of the door, “One minute, please!”
Several minutes later the door was opened by a tiny, extremely old woman. A mass of
snowy hair was arranged like a small sack on top of her head. As I stepped into the
house she sat down on a wooden bench positioned at the bottom of a narrow carpeted
staircase. Once she was settled on the bench, in a small pool of light, she peered up at
me with undivided attention. She wore a long black skirt that spread like a stiff tent to
the floor, and a starched white shirt edged with ruffles at the throat and cuffs. Her
hands, folded together in her lap, had long pallid fingers, with swollen knuckles and
tough yellow nails. Age had battered her features so that she almost resembled a man,
with sharp, shrunken eyes and prominent creases on either side of her nose. Her lips,
chapped and faded, had nearly disappeared, and her eyebrows were missing
altogether. Nevertheless she looked fierce.
“Lock up!” she commanded. She shouted even though I stood only a few feet away.
“Fasten the chain and firmly press that button on the knob! This is the first thing you
shall do when you enter, is that clear?”
I locked the door as directed and examined the house. Next to the bench on which the
woman sat was a small round table, its legs fully concealed, much like the woman’s, by
a skirt of lace. The table held a lamp, a transistor radio, a leather change purse with a
silver clasp, and a telephone. A thick wooden cane coated with a layer of dust was
propped against one side. There was a parlor to my right, lined with bookcases and
filled with shabby claw-footed furniture. In the corner of the parlor I saw a grand piano
with its top down, piled with papers. The piano’s bench was missing; it seemed to be the
one on which the woman was sitting. Somewhere in the house a clock chimed seven
times.
“You’re punctual!” the woman proclaimed. “I expect you shall be so with the rent!”
“I have a letter, madame.” In my jacket pocket was a letter confirming my employment
from MIT, which I had brought along to prove that I was indeed from Tech.
She stared at the letter, then handed it back to me carefully, gripping it with her fingers
as if it were a dinner plate heaped with food instead of a sheet of paper. She did not
wear glasses, and I wondered if she’d read a word of it. “The last boy was always late!
Still owes me eight dollars! Harvard boys aren’t what they used to be! Only Harvard and
Tech in this house! How’s Tech, boy?”
“It is very well.”
“You checked the lock?”
“Yes, madame.”
She slapped the space beside her on the bench with one hand, and told me to sit down.
For a moment she was silent. Then she intoned, as if she alone possessed this
knowledge:
“There is an American flag on the moon!”
“Yes, madame.” Until then I had not thought very much about the moon shot. It was in
the newspaper, of course, article upon article. The astronauts had landed on the shores
of the Sea of Tranquillity, I had read, traveling farther than anyone in the history of
civilization. For a few hours they explored the moon’s surface. They gathered rocks in
their pockets, described their surroundings (a magnificent desolation, according to one
astronaut), spoke by phone to the president, and planted a flag in lunar soil. The voyage
was hailed as man’s most awesome achievement. I had seen full-page photographs in
the Globe, of the astronauts in their inflated costumes, and read about what certain
people in Boston had been doing at the exact moment the astronauts landed, on a
Sunday afternoon. A man said that he was operating a swan boat with a radio pressed
to his ear; a woman had been baking rolls for her grandchildren.
The woman bellowed, “A flag on the moon, boy! I heard it on the radio! Isn’t that

splendid?”
“Yes, madame.”
But she was not satisfied with my reply. Instead she commanded, “Say ‘splendid’!”
I was both baffled and somewhat insulted by the request. It reminded me of the way I
was taught multiplication tables as a child, repeating after the master, sitting crosslegged, without shoes or pencils, on the floor of my one-room Tollygunge school. It also
reminded me of my wedding, when I had repeated endless Sanskrit verses after the
priest, verses I barely understood, which joined me to my wife. I said nothing.
“Say ‘splendid’!” the woman bellowed once again.
“Splendid,” I murmured. I had to repeat the word a second time at the top of my lungs,
so she could hear. I am soft-spoken by nature and was especially reluctant to raise my
voice to an elderly woman whom I had met only moments ago, but she did not appear
to be offended. If anything the reply pleased her because her next command was:
“Go see the room!”
I rose from the bench and mounted the narrow carpeted staircase. There were five
doors, two on either side of an equally narrow hallway, and one at the opposite end.
Only one door was partly open. The room contained a twin bed under a sloping ceiling,
a brown oval rug, a basin with an exposed pipe, and a chest of drawers. One door,
painted white, led to a closet, another to a toilet and a tub. The walls were covered with
gray and ivory striped paper. The window was open; net curtains stirred in the breeze. I
lifted them away and inspected the view: a small back yard, with a few fruit trees and an
empty clothesline. I was satisfied. From the bottom of the stairs I heard the woman
demand, “What is your decision?”
When I returned to the foyer and told her, she picked up the leather change purse on
the table, opened the clasp, fished about with her fingers, and produced a key on a thin
wire hoop. She informed me that there was a kitchen at the back of the house,
accessible through the parlor. I was welcome to use the stove as long as I left it as I
found it. Sheets and towels were provided, but keeping them clean was my own
responsibility. The rent was due Friday mornings on the ledge above the piano keys.
“And no lady visitors!”
“I am a married man, madame.” It was the first time I had announced this fact to
anyone.
But she had not heard. “No lady visitors!” she insisted. She introduced herself as Mrs.
Croft.
My wife’s name was Mala. The marriage had been arranged by my older brother and
his wife. I regarded the proposition with neither objection nor enthusiasm. It was a duty
expected of me, as it was expected of every man. She was the daughter of a
schoolteacher in Beleghata. I was told that she could cook, knit, embroider, sketch
landscapes, and recite poems by Tagore, but these talents could not make up for the
fact that she did not possess a fair complexion, and so a string of men had rejected her
to her face. She was twenty-seven, an age when her parents had begun to fear that she
would never marry, and so they were willing to ship their only child halfway across the
world in order to save her from spinsterhood.
For five nights we shared a bed. Each of those nights, after applying cold cream and
braiding her hair, which she tied up at the end with a black cotton string, she turned
from me and wept; she missed her parents. Although I would be leaving the country in a
few days, custom dictated that she was now a part of my household, and for the next six
weeks she was to live with my brother and his wife, cooking, cleaning, serving tea and
sweets to guests. I did nothing to console her. I lay on my own side of the bed, reading
my guidebook by flashlight and anticipating my journey. At times I thought of the tiny

room on the other side of the wall which had belonged to my mother. Now the room was
practically empty; the wooden pallet on which she’d once slept was piled with trunks
and old bedding. Nearly six years ago, before leaving for London, I had watched her die
on that bed, had found her playing with her excrement in her final days. Before we
cremated her I had cleaned each of her fingernails with a hairpin, and then, because my
brother could not bear it, I had assumed the role of eldest son, and had touched the
flame to her temple, to release her tormented soul to heaven.
The next morning I moved into the room in Mrs. Croft’s house. When I unlocked the
door I saw that she was sitting on the piano bench, on the same side as the previous
evening. She wore the same black skirt, the same starched white blouse, and had her
hands folded together the same way in her lap. She looked so much the same that I
wondered if she’d spent the whole night on the bench. I put my suitcase upstairs, filled
my flask with boiling water in the kitchen, and headed off to work. That evening when I
came home from the university, she was still there.
“Sit down, boy!” She slapped the space beside her.
I perched beside her on the bench. I had a bag of groceries with me—more milk, more
cornflakes, and more bananas, for my inspection of the kitchen earlier in the day had
revealed no spare pots, pans, or cooking utensils. There were only two saucepans in
the refrigerator, both containing some orange broth, and a copper kettle on the stove.
“Good evening, madame.”
She asked me if I had checked the lock. I told her I had.
For a moment she was silent. Then suddenly she declared, with the equal measures of
disbelief and delight as the night before, “There’s an American flag on the moon, boy!”
“Yes, madame.”
“A flag on the moon! Isn’t that splendid?”
I nodded, dreading what I knew was coming. “Yes, madame.”
“Say ‘splendid’!”
This time I paused, looking to either side in case anyone were there to overhear me,
though I knew perfectly well that the house was empty. I felt like an idiot. But it was a
small enough thing to ask. “Splendid!” I cried out.
Within days it became our routine. In the mornings when I left for the library Mrs. Croft
was either hidden away in her bedroom, on the other side of the staircase, or she was
sitting on the bench, oblivious to my presence, listening to the news or classical music
on the radio. But each evening when I returned the same thing happened: she slapped
the bench, ordered me to sit down, declared that there was a flag on the moon, and
declared that it was splendid. I said it was splendid, too, and then we sat in silence. As
awkward as it was, and as endless as it felt to me then, the nightly encounter lasted
only about ten minutes; inevitably she would drift off to sleep, her head falling abruptly
toward her chest, leaving me free to retire to my room. By then, of course, there was no
flag standing on the moon. The astronauts, I had read in the paper, had seen it fall
before they flew back to Earth. But I did not have the heart to tell her.
Friday morning, when my first week’s rent was due, I went to the piano in the parlor to
place my money on the ledge. The piano keys were dull and discolored. When I
pressed one, it made no sound at all. I had put eight one-dollar bills in an envelope and
written Mrs. Croft’s name on the front of it. I was not in the habit of leaving money
unmarked and unattended. From where I stood I could see the profile of her tentshaped skirt. She was sitting on the bench, listening to the radio. It seemed
unnecessary to make her get up and walk all the way to the piano. I never saw her

walking about, and assumed, from the cane always propped against the round table at
her side, that she did so with difficulty. When I approached the bench she peered up at
me and demanded:
“What is your business?”
“The rent, madame.”
“On the ledge above the piano keys!”
“I have it here.” I extended the envelope toward her, but her fingers, folded together in
her lap, did not budge. I bowed slightly and lowered the envelope, so that it hovered just
above her hands. After a moment she accepted, and nodded her head.
That night when I came home, she did not slap the bench, but out of habit I sat beside
her as usual. She asked me if I had checked the lock, but she mentioned nothing about
the flag on the moon. Instead she said:
“It was very kind of you!”
“I beg your pardon, madame?”
“Very kind of you!”
She was still holding the envelope in her hands.
On Sunday there was a knock on my door. An elderly woman introduced herself: she
was Mrs. Croft’s daughter, Helen. She walked into the room and looked at each of the
walls as if for signs of change, glancing at the shirts that hung in the closet, the neckties
draped over the doorknob, the box of cornflakes on the chest of drawers, the dirty bowl
and spoon in the basin. She was short and thick-waisted, with cropped silver hair and
bright pink lipstick. She wore a sleeveless summer dress, a row of white plastic beads,
and spectacles on a chain that hung like a swing against her chest. The backs of her
legs were mapped with dark blue veins, and her upper arms sagged like the flesh of a
roasted eggplant. She told me she lived in Arlington, a town farther up Massachusetts
Avenue. “I come once a week to bring Mother groceries. Has she sent you packing
yet?”
“It is very well, madame.”
“Some of the boys run screaming. But I think she likes you. You’re the first boarder
she’s ever referred to as a gentleman.”
“Not at all, madame.”
She looked at me, noticing my bare feet (I still felt strange wearing shoes indoors, and
always removed them before entering my room). “Are you new to Boston?”
“New to America, madame.”
“From?” She raised her eyebrows.
“I am from Calcutta, India.”
“Is that right? We had a Brazilian fellow, about a year ago. You’llfind Cambridge a very
international city.”
I nodded, and began to wonder how long our conversation would last. But at that
moment we heard Mrs. Croft’s electrifying voice rising up the stairs. When we stepped
into the hallway we heard her hollering:
“You are to come downstairs immediately!”
“What is it?” Helen hollered back.
“Immediately!”
I put on my shoes at once. Helen sighed.
We walked down the staircase. It was too narrow for us to descend side by side, so I
followed Helen, who seemed to be in no hurry, and complained at one point that she
had a bad knee. “Have you been walking without your cane?” Helen called out. “You
know you’re not supposed to walk without that cane.” She paused, resting her hand on
the banister, and looked back at me. “She slips sometimes.”

For the first time Mrs. Croft seemed vulnerable. I pictured her on the floor in front of the
bench, flat on her back, staring at the ceiling, her feet pointing in opposite directions.
But when we reached the bottom of the staircase she was sitting there as usual, her
hands folded together in her lap. Two grocery bags were at her feet. When we stood
before her she did not slap the bench, or ask us to sit down. She glared.
“What is it, Mother?”
“It’s improper!”
“What’s improper?”
“It is improper for a lady and gentleman who are not married to one another to hold a
private conversation without a chaperone!”
Helen said she was sixty-eight years old, old enough to be my mother, but Mrs. Croft
insisted that Helen and I speak to each other downstairs, in the parlor. She added that it
was also improper for a lady of Helen’s station to reveal her age, and to wear a dress so
high above the ankle.
“For your information, Mother, it’s 1969. What would you do if you actually left the house
one day and saw a girl in a miniskirt?”
Mrs. Croft sniffed. “I’dhave her arrested.”
Helen shook her head and picked up one of the grocery bags. I picked up the other one,
and followed her through the parlor and into the kitchen. The bags were filled with cans
of soup, which Helen opened up one by one with a few cranks of a can opener. She
tossed the old soup in the saucepans into the sink, rinsed the pans under the tap, filled
them with soup from the newly opened cans, and put them back in the refrigerator. “A
few years ago she could still open the cans herself,” Helen said. “She hates that I do it
for her now. But the piano killed her hands.” She put on her spectacles, glanced at the
cupboards, and spotted my tea bags. “Shall we have a cup?”
I filled the kettle on the stove. “I beg your pardon, madame. The piano?”
“She used to give lessons. For forty years. It was how she raised us after my father
died.” Helen put her hands on her hips, staring at the open refrigerator. She reached
into the back, pulled out a wrapped stick of butter, frowned, and tossed it into the
garbage. “That ought to do it,” she said, and put the unopened cans of soup in the
cupboard. I sat at the table and watched as Helen washed the dirty dishes, tied up the
garbage bag, watered a spider plant over the sink, and poured boiling water into two
cups. She handed one to me without milk, the string of the tea bag trailing over the side,
and sat down at the table.
“Excuse me, madame, but is it enough?”
Helen took a sip of her tea. Her lipstick left a smiling pink stain on the inside rim of the
cup. “Is what enough?”
“The soup in the pans. Is it enough food for Mrs. Croft?”
“She won’t eat anything else. She stopped eating solids after she turned one hundred.
That was, let’s see, three years ago.”
I was mortified. I had assumed Mrs. Croft was in her eighties, perhaps as old as ninety.
I had never known a person who had lived for over a century. That this person was a
widow who lived alone mortified me further still. It was widowhood that had driven my
own mother insane. My father, who worked as a clerk at the General Post Office of
Calcutta, died of encephalitis when I was sixteen. My mother refused to adjust to life
without him; instead she sank deeper into a world of darkness from which neither I, nor
my brother, nor concerned relatives, nor psychiatric clinics on Rash Behari Avenue
could save her. What pained me most was to see her so unguarded, to hear her burp
after meals or expel gas in front of company without the slightest embarrassment. After
my father’s death my brother abandoned his schooling and began to work in the jute mill
he would eventually manage, in order to keep the household running. And so it was my
job to sit by my mother’s feet and study for my exams as she counted and recounted

the bracelets on her arm as if they were the beads of an abacus. We tried to keep an
eye on her. Once she had wandered half naked to the tram depot before we were able
to bring her inside again.
“I am happy to warm Mrs. Croft’s soup in the evenings,” I suggested, removing the tea
bag from my cup and squeezing out the liquor. “It is no trouble.”
Helen looked at her watch, stood up, and poured the rest of her tea into the sink. “I
wouldn’t if I were you. That’s the sort of thing that would kill her altogether.”
That evening, when Helen had gone back to Arlington and Mrs. Croft and I were alone
again, I began to worry. Now that I knew how very old she was, I worried that something
would happen to her in the middle of the night, or when I was out during the day. As
vigorous as her voice was, and imperious as she seemed, I knew that even a scratch or
a cough could kill a person that old; each day she lived, I knew, was something of a
miracle. Although Helen had seemed friendly enough, a small part of me worried that
she might accuse me of negligence if anything were to happen. Helen didn’t seem
worried. She came and went, bringing soup for Mrs. Croft, one Sunday after the next.
In this manner the six weeks of that summer passed. I came home each evening, after
my hours at the library, and spent a few minutes on the piano bench with Mrs. Croft. I
gave her a bit of my company, and assured her that I had checked the lock, and told her
that the flag on the moon was splendid. Some evenings I sat beside her long after she
had drifted off to sleep, still in awe of how many years she had spent on this earth. At
times I tried to picture the world she had been born into, in 1866—a world, I imagined,
filled with women in long black skirts, and chaste conversations in the parlor. Now,
when I looked at her hands with their swollen knuckles folded together in her lap, I
imagined them smooth and slim, striking the piano keys. At times I came downstairs
before going to sleep, to make sure she was sitting upright on the bench, or was safe in
her bedroom. On Fridays I made sure to put the rent in her hands. There was nothing I
could do for her beyond these simple gestures. I was not her son, and apart from those
eight dollars, I owed her nothing.
At the end of August, Mala’s passport and green card were ready. I received a
telegram with her flight information; my brother’s house in Calcutta had no telephone.
Around that time I also received a letter from her, written only a few days after we had
parted. There was no salutation; addressing me by name would have assumed an
intimacy we had not yet discovered. It contained only a few lines. “I write in English in
preparation for the journey. Here I am very much lonely. Is it very cold there. Is there
snow. Yours, Mala.”
I was not touched by her words. We had spent only a handful of days in each other’s
company. And yet we were bound together; for six weeks she had worn an iron bangle
on her wrist, and applied vermilion powder to the part in her hair, to signify to the world
that she was a bride. In those six weeks I regarded her arrival as I would the arrival of a
coming month, or season—something inevitable, but meaningless at the time. So little
did I know her that, while details of her face sometimes rose to my memory, I could not
conjure up the whole of it.
A few days after receiving the letter, as I was walking to work in the morning, I saw an
Indian woman on the other side of Massachusetts Avenue, wearing a sari with its free
end nearly dragging on the footpath, and pushing a child in a stroller. An American
woman with a small black dog on a leash was walking to one side of her. Suddenly the
dog began barking. From the other side of the street I watched as the Indian woman,
startled, stopped in her path, at which point the dog leapt up and seized the end of the

sari between its teeth. The American woman scolded the dog, appeared to apologize,
and walked quickly away, leaving the Indian woman to fix her sari in the middle of the
footpath, and quiet her crying child. She did not see me standing there, and eventually
she continued on her way. Such a mishap, I realized that morning, would soon be my
concern. It was my duty to take care of Mala, to welcome her and protect her. I would
have to buy her her first pair of snow boots, her first winter coat. I would have to tell her
which streets to avoid, which way the traffic came, tell her to wear her sari so that the
free end did not drag on the footpath. A five-mile separation from her parents, I recalled
with some irritation, had caused her to weep.
Unlike Mala, I was used to it all by then: used to cornflakes and milk, used to Helen’s
visits, used to sitting on the bench with Mrs. Croft. The only thing I was not used to was
Mala. Nevertheless I did what I had to do. I went to the housing office at MIT and found
a furnished apartment a few blocks away, with a double bed and a private kitchen and
bath, for forty dollars a week. One last Friday I handed Mrs. Croft eight one-dollar bills in
an envelope, brought my suitcase downstairs, and informed her that I was moving. She
put my key into her change purse. The last thing she asked me to do was hand her the
cane propped against the table, so that she could walk to the door and lock it behind
me. “Good-bye, then,” she said, and retreated back into the house. I did not expect any
display of emotion, but I was disappointed all the same. I was only a boarder, a man
who paid her a bit of money and passed in and out of her home for six weeks.
Compared to a century, it was no time at all.
At the airport I recognized Mala immediately. The free end of her sari did not drag on
the floor, but was draped in a sign of bridal modesty over her head, just as it had draped
my mother until the day my father died. Her thin brown arms were stacked with gold
bracelets, a small red circle was painted on her forehead, and the edges of her feet
were tinted with a decorative red dye. I did not embrace her, or kiss her, or take her
hand. Instead I asked her, speaking Bengali for the first time in America, if she was
hungry.
She hesitated, then nodded yes.
I told her I had prepared some egg curry at home. “What did they give you to eat on the
plane?”
“I didn’t eat.”
“Allthe way from Calcutta?”
“The menu said oxtail soup.”
“But surely there were other items.”
“The thought of eating an ox’s tail made me lose my appetite.”
When we arrived home, Mala opened up one of her suitcases, and presented me with
two pullover sweaters, both made with bright blue wool, which she had knitted in the
course of our separation, one with a V neck, the other covered with cables. I tried them
on; both were tight under the arms. She had also brought me two new pairs of
drawstring pajamas, a letter from my brother, and a packet of loose Darjeeling tea. I had
no present for her apart from the egg curry. We sat at a bare table, each of us staring at
our plates. We ate with our hands, another thing I had not yet done in America.
“The house is nice,” she said. “Also the egg curry.” With her left hand she held the end
of her sari to her chest, so it would not slip off her head.
“I don’t know many recipes.”
She nodded, peeling the skin off each of her potatoes before eating them. At one point
the sari slipped to her shoulders. She readjusted it at once.
“There is no need to cover your head,” I said. “I don’t mind. It doesn’t matter here.”
She kept it covered anyway.

I waited to get used to her, to her presence at my side, at my table and in my bed, but a
week later we were still strangers. I still was not used to coming home to an apartment
that smelled of steamed rice, and finding that the basin in the bathroom was always
wiped clean, our two toothbrushes lying side by side, a cake of Pears soap from India
resting in the soap dish. I was not used to the fragrance of the coconut oil she rubbed
every other night into her scalp, or the delicate sound her bracelets made as she moved
about the apartment. In the mornings she was always awake before I was. The first
morning when I came into the kitchen she had heated up the leftovers and set a plate
with a spoonful of salt on its edge on the table, assuming I would eat rice for breakfast,
as most Bengali husbands did. I told her cereal would do, and the next morning when I
came into the kitchen she had already poured the cornflakes into my bowl. One morning
she walked with me down Massachusetts Avenue to MIT, where I gave her a short tour
of the campus. On the way we stopped at a hardware store and I made a copy of the
key, so that she could let herself into the apartment. The next morning before I left for
work she asked me for a few dollars. I parted with them reluctantly, but I knew that this,
too, was now normal. When I came home from work there was a potato peeler in the
kitchen drawer, and a tablecloth on the table, and chicken curry made with fresh garlic
and ginger on the stove. We did not have a television in those days. After dinner I read
the newspaper, while Mala sat at the kitchen table, working on a cardigan for herself
with more of the bright blue wool, or writing letters home.
At the end of our first week, on Friday, I suggested going out. Mala set down her
knitting and disappeared into the bathroom. When she emerged I regretted the
suggestion; she had put on a clean silk sari and extra bracelets, and coiled her hair with
a flattering side part on top of her head. She was prepared as if for a party, or at the
very least for the cinema, but I had no such destination in mind. The evening air was
balmy. We walked several blocks down Massachusetts Avenue, looking into the
windows of restaurants and shops. Then, without thinking, I led her down the quiet
street where for so many nights I had walked alone.
“This is where I lived before you came,” I said, stopping at Mrs. Croft’s chain-link fence.
“In such a big house?”
“I had a small room upstairs. At the back.”
“Who else lives there?”
“A very old woman.”
“With her family?”
“Alone.”
“But who takes care of her?”
I opened the gate. “For the most part she takes care of herself.”
I wondered if Mrs. Croft would remember me; I wondered if she had a new boarder to sit
with her on the bench each evening. When I pressed the bell I expected the same long
wait as that day of our first meeting, when I did not have a key. But this time the door
was opened almost immediately, by Helen. Mrs. Croft was not sitting on the bench. The
bench was gone.
“Hello there,” Helen said, smiling with her bright pink lips at Mala. “Mother’s in the
parlor. Will you be visiting awhile?”
“As you wish, madame.”
“Then I think I’llrun to the store, if you don’t mind. She had a little accident. We can’t
leave her alone these days, not even for a minute.”
I locked the door after Helen and walked into the parlor. Mrs. Croft was lying flat on her
back, her head on a peach-colored cushion, a thin white quilt spread over her body. Her
hands were folded together on top of her chest. When she saw me she pointed at the
sofa, and told me to sit down. I took my place as directed, but Mala wandered over to
the piano and sat on the bench, which was now positioned where it belonged.

“I broke my hip!” Mrs. Croft announced, as if no time had passed.
“Oh dear, madame.”
“I fell off the bench!”
“I am so sorry, madame.”
“It was the middle of the night! Do you know what I did, boy?”
I shook my head.
“I called the police!”
She stared up at the ceiling and grinned sedately, exposing a crowded row of long gray
teeth. Not one was missing. “What do you say to that, boy?”
As stunned as I was, I knew what I had to say. With no hesitation at all, I cried out,
“Splendid!”
Mala laughed then. Her voice was full of kindness, her eyes bright with amusement. I
had never heard her laugh before, and it was loud enough so that Mrs. Croft had heard,
too. She turned to Mala and glared.
“Who is she, boy?”
“She is my wife, madame.”
Mrs. Croft pressed her head at an angle against the cushion to get a better look. “Can
you play the piano?”
“No, madame,” Mala replied.
“Then stand up!”
Mala rose to her feet, adjusting the end of her sari over her head and holding it to her
chest, and, for the first time since her arrival, I felt sympathy. I remembered my first
days in London, learning how to take the Tube to Russell Square, riding an escalator for
the first time, being unable to understand that when the man cried “piper” it meant
“paper,” being unable to decipher, for a whole year, that the conductor said “mind the
gap” as the train pulled away from each station. Like me, Mala had traveled far from
home, not knowing where she was going, or what she would find, for no reason other
than to be my wife. As strange as it seemed, I knew in my heart that one day her death
would affect me, and stranger still, that mine would affect her. I wanted somehow to
explain this to Mrs. Croft, who was still scrutinizing Mala from top to toe with what
seemed to be placid disdain. I wondered if Mrs. Croft had ever seen a woman in a sari,
with a dot painted on her forehead and bracelets stacked on her wrists. I wondered
what she would object to. I wondered if she could see the red dye still vivid on Mala’s
feet, all but obscured by the bottom edge of her sari. At last Mrs. Croft declared, with the
equal measures of disbelief and delight I knew well:
“She is a perfect lady!”
Now it was I who laughed. I did so quietly, and Mrs. Croft did not hear me. But Mala
had heard, and, for the first time, we looked at each other and smiled.
I like to think of that moment in Mrs. Croft’s parlor as the moment when the distance
between Mala and me began to lessen. Although we were not yet fully in love, I like to
think of the months that followed as a honeymoon of sorts. Together we explored the
city and met other Bengalis, some of whom are still friends today. We discovered that a
man named Bill sold fresh fish on Prospect Street, and that a shop in Harvard Square
called Cardullo’s sold bay leaves and cloves. In the evenings we walked to the Charles
River to watch sailboats drift across the water, or had ice cream cones in Harvard Yard.
We bought an Instamatic camera with which to document our life together, and I took
pictures of her posing in front of the Prudential building, so that she could send them to
her parents. At night we kissed, shy at first but quickly bold, and discovered pleasure
and solace in each other’s arms. I told her about my voyage on the SS Roma, and
about Finsbury Park and the YMCA, and my evenings on the bench with Mrs. Croft.

When I told her stories about my mother, she wept. It was Mala who consoled me when,
reading the Globe one evening, I came across Mrs. Croft’s obituary. I had not thought
of her in several months—by then those six weeks of the summer were already a
remote interlude in my past—but when I learned of her death I was stricken, so much so
that when Mala looked up from her knitting she found me staring at the wall, the
newspaper neglected in my lap, unable to speak. Mrs. Croft’s was the first death I
mourned in America, for hers was the first life I had admired; she had left this world at
last, ancient and alone, never to return.
As for me, I have not strayed much farther. Mala and I live in a town about twenty
miles from Boston, on a tree-lined street much like Mrs. Croft’s, in a house we own, with
a garden that saves us from buying tomatoes in summer, and room for guests. We are
American citizens now, so that we can collect social security when it is time. Though we
visit Calcutta every few years, and bring back more drawstring pajamas and Darjeeling
tea, we have decided to grow old here. I work in a small college library. We have a son
who attends Harvard University. Mala no longer drapes the end of her sari over her
head, or weeps at night for her parents, but occasionally she weeps for our son. So we
drive to Cambridge to visit him, or bring him home for a weekend, so that he can eat
rice with us with his hands, and speak in Bengali, things we sometimes worry he will no
longer do after we die.
Whenever we make that drive, I always make it a point to take Massachusetts Avenue,
in spite of the traffic. I barely recognize the buildings now, but each time I am there I
return instantly to those six weeks as if they were only the other day, and I slow down
and point to Mrs. Croft’s street, saying to my son, here was my first home in America,
where I lived with a woman who was 103. “Remember?” Mala says, and smiles,
amazed, as I am, that there was ever a time that we were strangers. My son always
expresses his astonishment, not at Mrs. Croft’s age, but at how little I paid in rent, a fact
nearly as inconceivable to him as a flag on the moon was to a woman born in 1866. In
my son’s eyes I see the ambition that had first hurled me across the world. In a few
years he will graduate and pave his way, alone and unprotected. But I remind myself
that he has a father who is still living, a mother who is happy and strong. Whenever he
is discouraged, I tell him that if I can survive on three continents, then there is no
obstacle he can not conquer. While the astronauts, heroes forever, spent mere hours on
the moon, I have remained in this new world for nearly thirty years. I know that my
achievement is quite ordinary. I am not the only man to seek his fortune far from home,
and certainly I am not the first. Still, there are times I am bewildered by each mile I have
traveled, each meal I have eaten, each person I have known, each room in which I have
slept. As ordinary as it all appears, there are times when it is beyond my imagination.

PART ONE

Unaccustomed Earth
After her mother's death, Ruma's father retired from the pharmaceutical
company where he had worked for many decades and began traveling in Europe,
a continent he'd never seen. In the past year he had visited France, Holland, and
most recently Italy. They were package tours, traveling in the company of
strangers, riding by bus through the countryside, each meal and museum and
hotel prearranged. He was gone for two, three, sometimes four weeks at a time.
When he was away Ruma did not hear from him. Each time, she kept the
printout of his flight information behind a magnet on the door of the refrigerator,
and on the days he was scheduled to fly she watched the news, to make sure
there hadn't been a plane crash anywhere in the world.
Occasionally a postcard would arrive in Seattle, where Ruma and Adam
and their son Akash lived. The postcards showed the facades of churches, stone
fountains, crowded piazzas, terracotta rooftops mellowed by late afternoon sun.
Nearly fifteen years had passed since Ruma's only European adventure, a monthlong EuroRail holiday she'd taken with two girlfriends after college, with money
saved up from her salary as a paralegal. She'd slept in shabby pensions,
practicing a frugality that was foreign to her at this stage of her life, buying
nothing but variations of the same postcards her father sent now. Her father
wrote succinct, impersonal accounts of the things he had seen and done:
"Yesterday the Uffizi Gallery. Today a walk to the other side of the Arno. A trip
to Siena scheduled tomorrow." Occasionally there was a sentence about the
weather. But there was never a sense of her father's presence in those places.
Ruma was reminded of the telegrams her parents used to send to their relatives
long ago, after visiting Calcutta and safely arriving back in Pennsylvania.
The postcards were the first pieces of mail Ruma had received from her
father. In her thirty-eight years he'd never had any reason to write to her. It was a
one-sided correspondence; his trips were brief enough so that there was no time
for Ruma to write back, and besides, he was not in a position to receive mail on
his end. Her father's penmanship was small, precise, slightly feminine; her
mother's had been a jumble of capital and lowercase, as though she'd learned to
make only one version of each letter. The cards were addressed to Ruma; her
father never included Adam's name, or mentioned Akash. It was only in his
closing that he acknowledged any personal connection between them. "Be
happy, love Baba," he signed them, as if the attainment of happiness were as
simple as that.

In August her father would be going away again, to Prague. But first he was
coming to spend a week with Ruma and see the house she and Adam had bought
on the Eastside of Seattle. They'd moved from Brooklyn in the spring, for
Adam's job. It was her father who suggested the visit, calling Ruma as she was
making dinner in her new kitchen, surprising her. After her mother's death it was
Ruma who assumed the duty of speaking to her father every evening, asking
how his day had gone. The calls were less frequent now, normally once a week
on Sunday afternoons. "You're always welcome here, Baba," she'd told her
father on the phone. "You know you don't have to ask."
Her mother would not have asked. "We're coming to see you in July," she
would have informed Ruma, the plane tickets already in hand. There had been a
time in her life when such presumptuousness would have angered Ruma. She
missed it now.
Adam would be away that week, on another business trip. He worked for a
hedge fund and since the move had yet to spend two consecutive weeks at home.
Tagging along with him wasn't an option. He never went anywhere interestingusually towns in the Northwest or Canada where there was nothing special for
her and Akash to do. In a few months, Adam assured her, the trips would
diminish. He hated stranding Ruma with Akash so often, he said, especially now
that she was pregnant again. He encouraged her to hire a babysitter, even a livein if that would be helpful. But Ruma knew no one in Seattle, and the prospect of
finding someone to care for her child in a strange place seemed more daunting
than looking after him on her own. It was just a matter of getting through the
summer-in September, Akash would start at a preschool. Besides, Ruma wasn't
working and couldn't justify paying for something she now had the freedom to
do.
In New York, after Akash was born, she'd negotiated a part-time schedule
at her law firm, spending Thursdays and Fridays at home in Park Slope, and this
had seemed like the perfect balance. The firm had been tolerant at first, but it
had not been so easy, dealing with her mother's death just as an important case
was about to go to trial. She had died on the operating table, of heart failure;
anesthesia for routine gallstone surgery had triggered anaphylactic shock.
After the two weeks Ruma received for bereavement, she couldn't face
going back. Overseeing her clients' futures, preparing their wills and refinancing
their mortgages, felt ridiculous to her, and all she wanted was to stay home with
Akash, not just Thursdays and Fridays but every day. And then, miraculously,
Adam's new job came through, with a salary generous enough for her to give
notice. It was the house that was her work now: leafing through the piles of
catalogues that came in the mail, marking them with Post-its, ordering sheets

covered with dragons for Akash's room.
"Perfect," Adam said, when Ruma told him about her father's visit. "He'll be
able to help you out while I'm gone." But Ruma disagreed. It was her mother
who would have been the helpful one, taking over the kitchen, singing songs to
Akash and teaching him Bengali nursery rhymes, throwing loads of laundry into
the machine. Ruma had never spent a week alone with her father. When her
parents visited her in Brooklyn, after Akash was born, her father claimed an
armchair in the living room, quietly combing through the Times, occasionally
tucking a finger under the baby's chin but behaving as if he were waiting for the
time to pass.
Her father lived alone now, made his own meals. She could not picture his
surroundings when they spoke on the phone. He'd moved into a one-bedroom
condominium in a part of Pennsylvania Ruma did not know well. He had pared
down his possessions and sold the house where Ruma and her younger brother
Romi had spent their childhood, informing them only after he and the buyer
went into contract. It hadn't made a difference to Romi, who'd been living in
New Zealand for the past two years, working on the crew of a German
documentary filmmaker. Ruma knew that the house, with the rooms her mother
had decorated and the bed in which she liked to sit up doing crossword puzzles
and the stove on which she'd cooked, was too big for her father now. Still, the
news had been shocking, wiping out her mother's presence just as the surgeon
had.
She knew her father did not need taking care of, and yet this very fact
caused her to feel guilty; in India, there would have been no question of his not
moving in with her. Her father had never mentioned the possibility, and after her
mother's death it hadn't been feasible; their old apartment was too small. But in
Seattle there were rooms to spare, rooms that stood empty and without purpose.
Ruma feared that her father would become a responsibility, an added
demand, continuously present in a way she was no longer used to. It would mean
an end to the family she'd created on her own: herself and Adam and Akash, and
the second child that would come in January, conceived just before the move.
She couldn't imagine tending to her father as her mother had, serving the meals
her mother used to prepare. Still, not offering him a place in her home made her
feel worse. It was a dilemma Adam didn't understand. Whenever she brought up
the issue, he pointed out the obvious, that she already had a small child to care
for, another on the way. He reminded her that her father was in good health for
his age, content where he was. But he didn't object to the idea of her father living
with them. His willingness was meant kindly, generously, an example of why
she loved Adam, and yet it worried her. Did it not make a difference to him? She

knew he was trying to help, but at the same time she sensed that his patience was
wearing thin. By allowing her to leave her job, splurging on a beautiful house,
agreeing to having a second baby, Adam was doing everything in his power to
make Ruma happy. But nothing was making her happy; recently, in the course of
conversation, he'd pointed that out, too.
How freeing it was, these days, to travel alone, with only a single suitcase
to check. He had never visited the Pacific Northwest, never appreciated the
staggering breadth of his adopted land. He had flown across America only once
before, the time his wife booked tickets to Calcutta on Royal Thai Airlines, via
Los Angeles, rather than traveling east as they normally did. That journey was
endless, four seats, he still remembered, among the smokers at the very back of
the plane. None of them had the energy to visit any sights in Bangkok during
their layover, sleeping instead in the hotel provided by the airline. His wife, who
had been most excited to see the Floating Market, slept even through dinner, for
he remembered a meal in the hotel with only Romi and Ruma, in a solarium
overlooking a garden, tasting the spiciest food he'd ever had in his life as
mosquitoes swarmed angrily behind his children's faces. No matter how they
went, those trips to India were always epic, and he still recalled the anxiety they
provoked in him, having to pack so much luggage and getting it all to the airport,
keeping documents in order and ferrying his family safely so many thousands of
miles. But his wife had lived for these journeys, and until both his parents died, a
part of him lived for them, too. And so they'd gone in spite of the expense, in
spite of the sadness and shame he felt each time he returned to Calcutta, in spite
of the fact that the older his children grew, the less they wanted to go.
He stared out the window at a shelf of clouds that was like miles and miles
of densely packed snow one could walk across. The sight filled him with peace;
this was his life now, the ability to do as he pleased, the responsibility of his
family absent just as all else was absent from the unmolested vision of the
clouds. Those returns to India had been a fact of life for him, and for all their
Indian friends in America. Mrs. Bagchi was an exception. She had married a boy
she'd loved since girlhood, but after two years of marriage he was killed in a
scooter accident. At twenty-six she moved to America, knowing that otherwise
her parents would try to marry her off again. She lived on Long Island, an
anomaly, an Indian woman alone. She had completed her doctorate in statistics
and taught since the seventies at Stonybrook University, and in over thirty years
she had gone back to Calcutta only to attend her parents' funerals. Meenakshi
was her name, and though he used it now when he addressed her, in his thoughts
he continued to think of her as Mrs. Bagchi.

Being the only two Bengalis in the tour group, naturally they'd struck up a
conversation. They started eating together, sitting next to one another on the bus.
Because of their common appearance and language, people mistook them for
husband and wife. Initially there was nothing romantic; neither of them had been
interested in anything like that. He enjoyed Mrs. Bagchi's company, knowing
that at the end of a few weeks she would board a separate plane and disappear.
But after Italy he'd begun thinking of her, looking forward to receiving her emails, checking his computer five or six times a day. He searched MapQuest for
the town she lived in to see how long it would take him to drive to her home,
though they had agreed, for the time being, to see each other only when they
were abroad. Part of the route was familiar to him, the same path that he and his
wife used to take to visit Ruma in Brooklyn.
He would soon see Mrs. Bagchi again, in Prague; this time, they'd agreed,
they would share a room, and they were thinking, in the winter, of taking a
cruise in the Gulf of Mexico. She was adamant about not marrying, about never
sharing her home with another man, conditions which made the prospect of her
companionship all the more appealing. He closed his eyes and thought of her
face, which was still full, though he guessed she was probably almost sixty, only
five or six years younger than his wife. She wore Western clothing, cardigans
and black pull-on slacks and styled her thick dark hair in a bun. It was her voice
that appealed to him most, well modulated, her words always measured, as if
there were only a limited supply of things she was willing to say on any given
day. Perhaps, because she expected so little, he was generous with her, attentive
in a way he'd never been in his marriage. How shy he'd felt, asking
Mrs. Bagchi for the first time in Amsterdam, after they had a tour of the
Anne Frank House, to pose for a photograph in front of a canal.
Ruma had offered to drive to the airport and greet her father, but he insisted
on renting a car and following directions off the Internet. When she heard the
sound of tires on the gravel drive, she started picking up the toys that were
scattered across the living-room floor, putting away the plastic animals and
closing the books that Akash insisted on leaving open to his favorite pages.
"Turn off the television, Peanut," she called out to him now. "Don't sit so close
to the screen. Come, Dadu's here."
Akash was lying motionless on the floor, on his stomach, his chin cupped in
his hands. He was a perfect synthesis of Ruma and Adam, his curly hair they'd
never cut and his skin a warm gold, the faint hair on his legs gold as well,
reminding her of a little lion. Even his face, with its slanted, narrow green eyes,
had a faintly leonine aspect. He was only three, but sometimes she already felt

the resistance, the profound barrier she assumed would set in with adolescence.
After the move he'd grown difficult. It was a combination, she knew, of the new
surroundings, and her lack of energy, and Adam being away so much. There
were times Akash would throw himself without warning on the ground, the body
she'd nurtured inside of her utterly alien, hostile. Either that or he was clingy,
demanding that she hold him while she was trying to make a meal.
Though she'd mentioned nothing about the baby, she was convinced that
he'd figured it out already, that already he felt replaced. She'd changed, too-she
was less patient, quicker to say no instead of reasoning with him. She hadn't
been prepared for how much work it was, how isolating it could be. There were
mornings she wished she could simply get dressed and walk out the door, like
Adam. She didn't understand how her mother had done it. Growing up, her
mother's example-moving to a foreign place for the sake of marriage, caring
exclusively for children and a household-had served as a warning, a path to
avoid. Yet this was Ruma's life now.
She walked across the living room, turned off the television. "Answer me
when I talk to you, Akash. Get up, let's go."
The sight of her father's rental car, a compact maroon sedan, upset her,
freshly confirming the fact that she lived on a separate coast thousands of miles
from where she grew up, a place where her parents knew no one, where neither
of her parents, until today, had set foot. The connections her family had formed
to America, her parents' circle of Bengali friends in Pennsylvania and New
Jersey, her father's company, the schools Ruma and Romi had gone through, did
not exist here. It was seven months since she'd last seen her father. In the process
of selling and packing up their old apartment, moving and settling into the new
house, and her father's various trips, over half a year had gone by.
Akash got up and trailed behind her, and together they watched as her
father opened the trunk of the car, lifting out a small black suitcase with wheels.
He was wearing a baseball cap that said pompeii, brown cotton pants and a skyblue polo shirt, and a pair of white leather sneakers. She was struck by the
degree to which her father resembled an American in his old age. With his gray
hair and fair skin he could have been practically from anywhere. It was her
mother who would have stuck out in this wet Northern landscape, in her brightly
colored saris, her dime-sized maroon bindi, her jewels.
He began to pull the suitcase along the driveway, but because of the
inconvenience of the gravel under the wheels, he picked it up by the handle and
walked across the grass up to the house. She saw that it was a slight struggle for
him, and she wished Adam were there to help.
"Akash, is that you?" her father called out in mock bewilderment, in

English. "So big you have become." By now Akash had forgotten the little
Bengali Ruma had taught him when he was little. After he started speaking in
full sentences English had taken over, and she lacked the discipline to stick to
Bengali. Besides, it was one thing to coo at him in Bengali, to point to this or
that and tell him the corresponding words. But it was another to be authoritative;
Bengali had never been a language in which she felt like an adult. Her own
Bengali was slipping from her. Her mother had been strict, so much so that
Ruma had never spoken to her in English. But her father didn't mind. On the rare
occasions Ruma used Bengali anymore, when an aunt or uncle called from
Calcutta to wish her a Happy Bijoya or Akash a Happy Birthday, she tripped
over words, mangled tenses. And yet it was the language she had spoken
exclusively in the first years of her life.
"How old now? Three? Or is it three hundred?" her father asked.
Akash did not respond, behaving as if her father did not exist. "Mommy,
I'm thirsty," he said. "In a minute, Akash."
Her father seemed the same to her. For a man of seventy, the skin of his
hands and face was firm and clear. He had not lost weight and the hair on his
head was plentiful, more so, she feared, than her own after Akash's birth, when it
had fallen out in clumps on her pillow each night, the crushed strands the first
thing she noticed every morning. Her doctor assured her it would grow back, but
her bathtub was still filled with shampoos that promised to stimulate scalp
growth, plump the shafts. Her father looked well rested, another quality Ruma
did not possess these days. She'd taken to applying concealer below her eyes,
even when she had no plans to leave the house. In addition she'd been putting on
weight. With Akash she'd lost weight in her first trimester, but this time, at just
twelve weeks, she was already ten pounds heavier. She decided that it must have
been the food she found herself always finishing off of Akash's plate and the fact
that now she had to drive everywhere instead of walk. She'd already ordered
pants and skirts with elastic waistbands from catalogues, and there was a solidity
to her face that upset her each time she looked in the mirror.
"Akash, please say hello to Dadu," she said, giving him a gentle push
behind the shoulder. She kissed her father on the cheek. "How long did it take
you to get here? Was there traffic?"
"Not so much. Your home is twenty-two miles from the airport." Her father
always made it his business to know the distances he traveled, large and small.
Even before MapQuest existed, he knew the exact distance from their house to
his office, and to the supermarket where her parents shopped for food, and to the
homes of their friends.
"Gasoline is expensive here," he added. He said this matter-of-factly, but

still she felt the prick of his criticism as she had all her life, feeling at fault that
gas cost more in Seattle than in Pennsylvania.
"It's a long flight. You must be tired."
"I am only tired at bedtime. Come here," her father said to Akash. He set
down the suitcase, bent over slightly, and put out his arms.
But Akash pressed his head into Ruma's legs, refusing to budge.
They came inside, her father leaning over to untie the laces of his sneakers,
lifting one foot at a time, wobbling slightly.
"Baba, come into the living room, you'll be more comfortable doing that
sitting down on the sofa," Ruma said. But he continued removing his sneakers,
setting them in the foyer next to the mail table before straightening and
acknowledging his surroundings.
"Why does Dadu take his shoes off?" Akash asked Ruma. "He's more
comfortable that way."
"I want shoes off, too." Akash stomped his sandals on the floor.
It was one of the many habits of her upbringing which she'd shed in her
adult life, without knowing when or why. She ignored Akash's request and
showed her father the house, the rooms that were larger and more gracious than
the ones that had sheltered her when she was a child. Akash trailed behind them,
darting off on his own now and then. The house had been built in 1959, designed
and originally owned by an architect, and Ruma and Adam were filling it slowly
with furniture from that period: simple expensive sofas covered with muted
shades of wool, long, low bookcases on outwardly turned feet. Lake Washington
was a few blocks down a sloping street. There was a large window in the living
room framing the water, and beyond the dining room was a screened-in porch
with an even more spectacular view: the Seattle skyline to the left, and, straight
ahead, the Olympic Mountains, whose snowy peaks seemed hewn from the same
billowing white of the clouds drifting above them. Ruma and Adam hadn't
planned on living in a suburb, but after five years in an apartment that faced the
backs of other buildings, a home so close to a lake, from which they could sit
and watch the sun set, was impossible to resist.
She pointed out one of the two bridges that spanned the lake, explaining
that they floated on pontoons at their centers because the water was too deep.
Her father looked out the window but said nothing. Her mother would have been
more forthcoming, remarking on the view, wondering whether ivory curtains
would have been better than green. It appeared, as her father walked from one
end of the living room to another, that he was inwardly measuring its
dimensions. She remembered him doing this when he helped her to move in the
past, into dorm rooms and her first apartments after college. She imagined him

on his tours, in public squares, walking from one end to another, pacing up and
down a nave, counting the number of steps one had to ascend in order to enter a
library or a museum.
She took him downstairs, where she had prepared the guest room. The
space was divided into two sections by an accordion door. on one side was the
bed and a bureau, and on the other, a desk and sofa, bookcase and coffee table.
She opened the door to the bathroom and pointed to the wicker basket where he
was to put his laundry. "You can close this off if you like," she said, pulling at
the accordion door to demonstrate.
"It's not needed," her father said.
"All the way, Mommy," Akash said, tugging at the handle, causing the
folded cream-colored panel to sway back and forth. "Close it all the way."
"No, Akash."
"This is my room when I get bigger," Akash announced.
"That little TV in the corner works, but it's not hooked up to cable," Ruma
told her father. "Nine is the PBS station,"she added, knowing those were the
programs he was fond of.
"Hey, don't walk on my bed with your shoes on," her father said suddenly
to Akash, who had gotten onto the bed and was walking with large, deliberate
steps around the bedcover.
"Peanut, get off the bed."
For a moment Akash continued exactly as he was doing, ignoring them.
Then he stopped, looking suspiciously at his grandfather. "Why?"
Before Ruma could explain, her father said, "Because I will have
nightmares."
Akash dropped his head. Quickly, to Ruma's surprise, he slithered onto the
floor, briefly crawling as if he were a baby again.
They went back upstairs, to the kitchen. It was the room Ruma was most
proud of, with its soapstone counters and cherry cupboards. Showing it off to her
father, she felt self-conscious of her successful life with Adam, and at the same
time she felt a quiet slap of rejection, gathering, from his continued silence, that
none of it impressed him.
"Adam planted all this?" her father asked, taking in the garden that was
visible through the kitchen window, mentioning Adam for the first time.
"No. It was all here."
"Your delphiniums need watering."
"Which are they?" she asked, embarrassed that she did not know the names
of the plants in her own backyard. He pointed. "The tall purple ones."
It occurred to her that her father missed gardening. For as long as she could

remember it had been his passion, working outdoors in the summers as soon as
he came home from the office, staying out until it grew dark, subjecting himself
to bug bites and rashes. It was something he'd done alone; neither Romi nor
Ruma had ever been interested in helping, and their father never offered to
include them. Her mother would complain, having to keep dinner waiting until
nine at night. "Go ahead and eat," Ruma would say, but her mother, trained all
her life to serve her husband first, would never consider such a thing. In addition
to tomatoes and eggplant and zucchini, her father had grown expert over the
years at cultivating the things her mother liked to cook with-bitter melon and
chili peppers and delicate strains of spinach. oblivious to her mother's needs in
other ways, he had toiled in unfriendly soil, coaxing such things from the
ground.
He glanced at the gleaming six-burner stove with its thick red knobs and
then, without asking, began to open one of the cupboards.
"What are you looking for?"
"Do you have a kettle?"
She opened the pantry. "I'll make tea, Baba."
"Let me water your delphiniums. They won't survive another day." He took
the kettle from her hands and filled it at the sink. Then he carried it, slowly and
carefully, through the kitchen door outside, taking oddly small steps, and for the
first time since his arrival she saw that in spite of his clear eyes and skin, her
father had become an old man. She stood by the window and watched her father
water the flowers, his head bent, his eyebrows raised. She listened to the sound
of the water hitting the earth in a forceful, steady stream. It was a sound that
vaguely embarrassed her, as if he were urinating in her presence. Even after the
sound stopped, her father stood there for a moment, tipping the spout and
pouring out the final drops that the kettle contained. Akash had followed her
father outside, and now he stood a few feet away, looking up at his grandfather
with curiosity.
Akash had no memory of her mother. She had died when he was two, and
now, when she pointed her mother out in a photograph, Akash would always
say, "she died," as if it were something extraordinary and impressive her mother
had done. He would know nothing of the weeks her mother had come to stay
with Ruma after his birth, holding him in the mornings in her kaftan as Ruma
slept off her postpartum fatigue. Her mother had refused to put him into the
bassinet, always cradling him, for hours at a time, in her arms. The new baby
would know nothing of her mother at all, apart from the sweaters she had knit
for Akash, which he'd already outgrown and which the new baby would
eventually wear. There was a half-knit cardigan patterned with white stars still

on its needles, one of the few items of her mother's Ruma had kept. Of the two
hundred and eighteen saris, she kept only three, placing them in a quilted
zippered bag at the back of her closet, telling her mother's friends to divide up
the rest. And she had remembered the many times her mother had predicted this
very moment, lamenting the fact that her daughter preferred pants and skirts to
the clothing she wore, that there would be no one to whom to pass on her things.
He went downstairs to unpack, arranging his two pairs of pants in one of
the drawers of the bureau, hanging his four checkered summer shirts on hangers
in the closet, putting on a pair of flip-flops for indoors. He shut his empty
suitcase and put it in the closet as well and placed his kit bag in the bathroom, at
the side of the sink. The accommodations would have pleased his wife; it had
always upset her, the fact that Ruma and Adam used to live in an apartment,
with no separate room for them to sleep in when they stayed. He looked out at
the yard. There were houses on either side, but the back felt secluded. one could
not see the water or the mountains from here, only the ground, thick with the
evergreen trees he'd seen on the sides of the highway, that were everywhere in
Seattle.
Upstairs, Ruma was serving tea on the porch. She had brought everything
out on a tray: a pot of Darjeeling, the strainer, milk and sugar, and a plate of
Nice biscuits. He associated the biscuits deeply with his wife-the visible crystals
of sugar, the faint coconut taste-their kitchen cupboard always contained a box
of them. Never had he managed to dip one into a cup of tea without having it
dissolve, leaving a lump of beige mush in the bottom of his cup.
He sat down and distributed gifts. For Akash there was a small wooden
plane with red propellers and a marionette of Pinocchio. The boy began playing
with his toys immediately, tangling up Pinocchio's strings and demanding that
Ruma fix them. There was a handpainted cruet that had the word "olio" on its
side for Ruma, and a marbled box for Adam, the sort of thing one might use for
storing paper clips. Mrs. Bagchi had chosen everything, spending nearly an hour
in a toyshop, though she had no grandchildren. He had mentioned nothing to
Ruma or Romi about Mrs. Bagchi, planned to say nothing.
He saw no point in upsetting them, especially Ruma now that she was
expecting again. He wondered if this was how his children had felt in the past,
covertly conducting relationships back when it was something he and his wife
had forbidden, something that would have devastated them.
It was Ruma and his wife who were supposed to have gone on the first of
his trips to Europe. In the year before she died, his wife had begun to remark that
although she had flown over Europe dozens of times in the process of traveling
from Pennsylvania to Calcutta, she had never once seen the canals of Venice or

the Eiffel Tower or the windmills and tulips of Holland. He had found his wife's
interest surprising; throughout most of their marriage it had been an
unquestioned fact that visiting family in Calcutta was the only thing worth
boarding a plane for. "They show so many nice places on the Travel Channel,"
she would remark sometimes in the evenings. "We can afford it now, you have
vacation days that are wasting away." But back then he had had no interest in
taking such a trip; he was impervious to his wife's sudden wanderlust, and
besides, in all their years, they had never taken a vacation together, alone.
Ruma had organized as a sixty-fourth birthday present a package tour to
Paris for her mother and herself. She scheduled it during the summer, a time
Adam could take Akash to her in-laws' place on Martha's Vineyard. Ruma put
down a deposit at the travel agency and sent her mother tapes to learn
conversational French and a guidebook filled with colorful pictures. For a while
he would come home from work and hear his wife up in her sewing room,
listening to the tapes on a Walkman, counting in French, reciting the days of the
week. The gallstone surgery was scheduled accordingly, the doctor saying that
six weeks would be more than enough time for her to recover before traveling.
Ruma took the day off from work and came down with Akash for the procedure,
insisting on being there even though he'd said there was no need. He
remembered how irritated he'd felt in the waiting room over how long it was
taking, that feeling vivid in a way the surgeon's news still was not. That
information, and the chronology of events that followed, remained hazy to him:
listening to the surgeon say his wife was dead, that she had reacted adversely to
the Rocuronium used to relax her muscles for the procedure, he and Ruma taking
turns with Akash as they went in to see the body. It was the same hospital where
Ruma had been a candy striper, where he had once rushed to the emergency
room after Romi broke his arm on a soccer field. A few weeks after the funeral
one of his colleagues at work suggested that he take a vacation, and it was then
that he'd remembered the trip Ruma and his wife had planned. He'd asked Ruma
if she still intended to go, and when she said no, he asked if it would be all right
for him to reserve the tour in his own name.
"Did you like Italy?" Ruma asked him now. She sat with the Pinocchio on
her lap, clumsily untwisting the strings. He wanted to tell her that she was going
about it wrong, there was a knot in the center that needed to be undone first.
Instead, he replied to her questions, saying that he had liked Italy very much,
commenting on the pleasant climate, the many piazzas, and the fact that the
people, unlike most Americans, were slim. He held up his index finger, waving
it back and forth. "And everyone still smokes. I was nearly tempted to have a
cigarette myself," he said. He had smoked when she was little, a habit he'd

acquired in India but abandoned in his forties. He remembered Ruma, never
Romi or his wife, pestering him about quitting, hiding his packs of Winstons, or
removing the cigarettes when he wasn't aware of it and replacing them with
balled-up tissue paper. There was the time she'd cried all night, convinced, after
her teacher at school had talked about the dangers of smoking, that he would die
within a handful of years.
He had done nothing, back then, to comfort her; he'd maintained his
addiction in spite of his daughter's fear. He'd been attached to a small brass
ashtray in the house, shaped like a nagrai slipper with a curling, pointed toe.
After he quit he threw out all the other ashtrays in the house, but Ruma, to his
puzzlement, appropriated his favorite, rinsing it out and keeping it among her
toys. He recalled that she and her friends would pretend it was the glass slipper
in Cinderella, trying to get it to fit over the unyielding plastic feet of her various
dolls. "Did you?" she asked him now.
"What?"
"Have a cigarette in Italy."
"oh no. I am too old for such things," he said, his eyes drifting over to the
lake.
"What did you eat there?" she asked.
He remembered one of the first meals the group had had, lunch at a
restaurant close to the Medici Palace. He'd been shocked by the amount of food,
the numerous courses. The marinated vegetables were enough for him, but then
the waiters brought out plates of ravioli, followed by roasted meat. That
afternoon a number of people in the group, including him, went back to the hotel
to recover, forgoing the rest of the sightseeing. The next day their guide told
them that the restaurant lunches were optional, as long as everyone met back at
the next designated place and time. And so he and Mrs. Bagchi began to wander
off together, picking up something small, commenting with amazement that
there had once been a time when they, too, were capable of eating elaborate
lunches, as was the custom in India.
"I tried one or two pasta dishes," he said, sipping his tea. "But mainly I ate
pizza."
"You spent three weeks in Italy and all you ate was pizza?"
"It was quite tasty pizza."
She shook her head. "But the food there is so amazing." "I have videos," he
said, changing the subject. "I can show them later if you like."
They ate dinner early, Ruma saying her father must be hungry from the
journey and her father admitting that he was eager to turn in, that it was after all

three hours later on the East Coast. She'd spent the past two days cooking, the
items accumulating one by one on the shelves of the refrigerator, and the labor
had left her exhausted. When she cooked Indian food for Adam she could afford
to be lazy. She could do away with making dal or served salad instead of a
chorchori. "Is that all?" her mother sometimes exclaimed in disbelief on the
phone, asking Ruma what she was making for dinner, and it was in such
moments that Ruma recognized how different her experience of being a wife
was. Her mother had never cut corners; even in Pennsylvania she had run her
household as if to satisfy a motherin-law's fastidious eye. Though her mother
had been an excellent cook, her father never praised her for it. It was only when
they went to the homes of others, and he would complain about the food on the
way home, that it became clear how much he appreciated his wife's talent.
Ruma's cooking didn't come close, the vegetables sliced too thickly, the rice
overdone, but as her father worked his way through the things she'd made, he
repeatedly told her how delicious it was.
She ate with her fingers, as her father did, for the first time in months, for
the first time in this new house in Seattle. Akash sat between them in his booster
seat, wanting to eat with his fingers, too, but this was something Ruma had not
taught him to do. They did not talk about her mother, or about Romi, the brother
with whom she had always felt so little in common, in spite of their absurdly
matching names. They did not discuss her pregnancy, how she was feeling
compared to last time, as she and her mother surely would have. They did not
talk very much at all, her father never one to be conversant during meals. His
reticence was one of the things her mother would complain about, one of the
ways Ruma had tried to fill in for her father.
"It is still so light outside," he said eventually, though he had not lifted his
eyes from his plate since he'd started eating, had seemed, as he so often did to
Ruma, oblivious to his surroundings.
"The sun doesn't set until after nine in the summer," she said. "Sorry the
begunis broke apart," she added. "I didn't let the oil get hot enough."
"It doesn't matter. Try it," he told Akash, who for the past four months
refused to eat anything other than macaroni and cheese for dinner. To Ruma he
added, pointing to Akash's plate, "Why do you buy those things? They are filled
with chemicals." When Akash was younger she had followed her mother's
advice to get him used to the taste of Indian food and made the effort to poach
chicken and vegetables with cinnamon and cardamom and clove. Now he ate
from boxes.
"I hate that food," Akash retorted, frowning at her father's plate.
"Akash, don't talk that way." In spite of her efforts he was turning into the

sort of American child she was always careful not to be, the sort that horrified
and intimidated her mother: imperious, afraid of eating things. When he was
younger, he'd eaten whatever her mother made for him. "You used to eat Dida's
cooking," she said. "She used to make all these things."
"I don't remember Dida," Akash said. He shook his head from side to side,
as if denying the very fact that she was ever alive. "I don't remember it. She
died."
She was reading stories to Akash before his bedtime when her father
knocked softly on the door, handing her the receiver of the cordless phone. He
was holding up his right hand awkwardly in front of his chest, and she saw that it
was soapy from dishwater. "Adam is on the phone."
"Baba, I would have done those. Go to sleep."
"It is only a few things." Her father had always done the dishes after the
family had eaten; he claimed that standing upright for fifteen minutes after a
meal helped him to digest. Unlike Ruma, unlike her mother, unlike anyone
Ruma had ever known, her father never ran the water while he soaped
everything. He waited until the plates and pans were ready to be rinsed, and until
then it was only the quiet, persistent sound of the sponge that could be heard.
She took the phone. "Rum," she heard Adam say. That was what he'd begun
to call her, soon after they met. The first time he wrote her a letter, he'd
misspelled her name, beginning, "Dear Room-"
She pictured him collapsed on the bed in a hotel room in Calgary, where
he'd gone this time, his shoes off, his tie loosened, ankles crossed. At thirty-nine
he was still boyishly handsome, with the generous, curling brown-blond hair that
Akash had inherited, a whittled marathoner's body, cheekbones she secretly
coveted. Were it not for the powerful depth of his voice and the glasses he wore
these days for distance he could still pass for one of the easy-going, athletic boys
she went to college with.
"My dad's here."
"We spoke." "What did he say?"
"The usual questions: 'How are you? How are your parents?' " It was true;
this was all her father ever had to say to Adam.
"Have you eaten?"
There was a pause before he replied. She realized he must have been
watching something on the television as they were speaking. "I'm about to head
off to dinner with a client. How's
Akash?"
"Right here." She put the receiver to his ear. "Say hi to

Daddy."
"Hi," Akash said, without enthusiasm. Then silence. She could hear Adam
saying, "What's going on, buddy? Having fun with Dadu?" But Akash refused to
engage any further, staring at the page of his book, and eventually she put the
phone back to her own ear.
"He's tired," she said. "He's about to fall asleep."
"I wish I could fall asleep," Adam said. "I'm wiped."
She knew he'd been traveling since early morning, that he'd been working
all day, would have to work through his dinner. And yet she felt no sympathy. "I
can't imagine my father living here," she said.
"Then don't ask him to."
"I think the visit is his way of suggesting it."
"Then ask."
"And if he says yes?" "Then he moves in with us."
"Should I ask?"
She heard Adam breathing patiently through his nose. "We've been over
this a million times, Rum. It's your call. He's your dad."
She turned a page of Akash's book, saying nothing. "I need to get going,"
Adam said. "I miss you guys." "We miss you, too," she said.
She hung up the phone, putting it beside the framed photograph on the
bedside table, of Ruma and Adam on their wedding day, slicing into the tiered
white cake. She could not explain what had happened to her marriage after her
mother's death. For the first time since they'd met, at a dinner party in Boston
when she was a law student and he was getting his MBA, she felt a wall between
them, simply because he had not experienced what she had, because both his
parents were still living in the house in Lincoln, Massachusetts, where Adam had
been raised. It was wrong of her, she knew, and yet an awareness had set in, that
she and Adam were separate people leading separate lives. Though his absences
contributed to her isolation, sometimes it was worse, not better, when Adam was
home. Even with Akash to care for, part of her was beginning to prefer the
solitude, without Adam hovering around, full of concern about her state of mind,
her mood.
Ten years ago her mother had done everything in her power to talk Ruma
out of marrying Adam, saying that he would divorce her, that in the end he
would want an American girl. Neither of these things had happened, but she
sometimes thought back to that time, remembering how bold she'd had to be in
order to withstand her mother's outrage, and her father's refusal to express even
that, which had felt more cruel. "You are ashamed of yourself, of being Indian,
that is the bottom line," her mother had told Ruma again and again. She knew

what a shock it was; she had kept her other involvements with American men a
secret from her parents until the day she announced that she was engaged. Over
the years her mother not only retracted her objections but vehemently denied
them; she grew to love Adam as a son, a replacement for Romi, who had crushed
them by moving abroad and maintaining only distant ties. Her mother would
chat with Adam on the phone, even when Ruma was not at home, e-mailing him
from time to time, carrying on a game of Scrabble with him over the Internet.
When her parents visited, her mother would always bring a picnic cooler filled
with homemade mishti, elaborate, syrupy, cream-filled concoctions which Ruma
had never learned to make, and Adam loved.
It was after she'd had a child that Ruma's relationship with her mother
became harmonious; being a grandmother transformed her mother, bringing a
happiness and an energy Ruma had never witnessed. For the first time in her life
Ruma felt forgiven for the many expectations she'd violated or shirked over the
years. She came to look forward to their nightly conversations, reporting the
events of her day, describing what new things Akash had learned to do. Her
mother had even begun to exercise, getting up at five in the morning, wearing an
old Colgate sweatshirt of Ruma's. She wanted to live to see her grandchildren
married, she'd said. There were times Ruma felt closer to her mother in death
than she had in life, an intimacy born simply of thinking of her so often, of
missing her. But she knew that this was an illusion, a mirage, and that the
distance between them was now infinite, unyielding.
After finishing with the dishes he dried them and then scrubbed and dried
the inside of the sink, removing the food particles from the drainer. He put the
leftovers away in the refrigerator, tied up the trash bag and put it into the large
barrel he'd noticed in the driveway, made sure the doors were locked. He sat for
a while at the kitchen table, fiddling with a saucepan whose handle-he'd noticed
while washing it-was wobbly. He searched in the drawers for a screwdriver and,
not finding one, accomplished the task with the tip of a steak knife. When he
was finished he poked his head into Akash's room and found both the boy and
Ruma asleep. For several minutes he stood in the doorway. Something about his
daughter's appearance had changed; she now resembled his wife so strongly that
he could not bear to look at her directly. That first glimpse of her earlier,
standing on the lawn with Akash, had nearly taken his breath away. Her face was
older now, as his wife's had been, and the hair was beginning to turn gray at her
temples in the same way, twisted with an elastic band into a loose knot. And the
features, haunting now that his wife was gone-the identical shape and shade of
the eyes, the dimple on the left side when they smiled.

In spite of his jet lag he had trouble falling asleep, was distracted by the
sound of a motorboat cutting now and then across the lake. He sat up in bed
flipping absently through an issue of U.S. News & World Report, which he'd
taken from the seat pocket on the plane, and then opened a guidebook to Seattle
that had been placed on the bedside table, he guessed, for his benefit. He glanced
at the photographs, of the new library and coffee shops and whole salmon
displayed on beds of ice. He read about the average yearly rainfall, and the fact
that it seldom snowed. Studying a map, he was surprised by how far he was from
the Pacific Ocean, not realizing until now that mountains stood in the way.
Though he had traveled such a distance, his surroundings did not feel foreign to
him as they had when he went to Europe. There he was reminded of his early
days in America, understanding only a word or two of what people said,
handling different coins. Here, as on a summer night in Pennsylvania, moths
fluttered against the window screen, and sometimes an insect would bang against
it, startling him with its force.
From his position in bed he took in the spacious, sparsely furnished room.
When he was Ruma's age, he had lived with his wife and children in a small
apartment in Garden City, New Jersey. They'd converted a walk-in closet into a
nursery when Romi and then Ruma were born. He had worried for his family's
safety in that apartment complex, the surveillance cameras in the lobby making
him nervous rather than putting him at ease, but at the time, still working on his
PhD in biochemistry, it was the best he could afford. He remembered his wife
making meals on the electric stove in the tiny kitchen, the rooms smelling
afterward of whatever she'd prepared. They lived on the fourteenth floor and she
would dry her saris one by one over the narrow balcony railing. The bedroom in
which Romi and Ruma had both been conceived was dreary, morning light never
penetrating, and yet he considered it, still, the most sacred of spaces. He recalled
his children running through the rooms, the pitch of their young voices. It was a
part of their lives only he and his wife carried with them. His children would
only remember the large house he'd bought in the suburbs with willow trees in
the backyard, with rooms for each of them and a basement filled with their toys.
And compared to where Ruma now lived even that house was nothing, a flimsy
structure that he always feared could burn down from the flame of a match.
Now that he was on his own, acquaintances sometimes asked if he planned
to move in with Ruma. Even Mrs. Bagchi mentioned the idea. But he pointed out
that Ruma hadn't been raised with that sense of duty. She led her own life, had
made her own decisions, married an American boy. He didn't expect her to take
him in, and really, he couldn't blame her. For what had he done, when his own
father was dying, when his mother was left behind? By then Ruma and Romi

were teenagers. There was no question of his moving the family back to India,
and also no question of his eighty-year-old widowed mother moving to
Pennsylvania. He had let his siblings look after her until she, too, eventually
died.
Were he to have gone first, his wife would not have thought twice about
moving in with Ruma. His wife had not been built to live on her own, just as
morning glories were not intended to grow in the shade. She was the opposite of
Mrs. Bagchi that way. The isolation of living in an American suburb, something
about which his wife complained and about which he felt responsible, had been
more solitude than she could bear. But he enjoyed solitude, as Mrs. Bagchi did.
Now that he had retired he spent his days volunteering for the Democratic Party
in Pennsylvania, work he could do from his computer at home, and this, in
addition to his trips, was enough to keep him occupied. It was a relief not to have
to maintain the old house, to mow and rake the lawn, to replace the storm
windows with screens in summer, only to have to reverse the process a few
months later. It was a relief, too, to be living in another part of the state, close
enough so things were still familiar, but far enough to feel different. In the old
house he was still stuck in his former life, attending by himself the parties he and
his wife had gone to, getting phone calls in the evenings from concerned friends
who routinely dropped off pots of chicken curry or, assuming he was lonely,
visited without warning on Sunday afternoons.
He was suddenly tired, his vision blurring and the words in the guidebook
lifting off the page. Beside the small pile of books there was a telephone. He set
down the book, lifted the receiver, checked for a dial tone, and set it down again.
Before coming to Seattle he had given Mrs. Bagchi his daughter's phone number
in an e-mail, but it was understood that she was not to call. She had loved her
husband of two years more than he had loved his wife of nearly forty, of this he
was certain. In her wallet she still carried a picture of him, a clean-shaven boy in
his twenties, the hair parted far to one side. He didn't mind. In a way he preferred
knowing that her heart still belonged to another man. It was not passion that was
driving him, at seventy, to be involved, however discreetly, however
occasionally, with another woman. Instead it was the consequence of being
married all those years, the habit of companionship.
Without his wife, the thought of his own death preyed on him, knowing that
it might strike him just as suddenly. He'd never experienced death up close;
when his parents and relatives had died he was always continents away, never
witnessing the ugly violence of it. Then again, he had not even been present,
technically, when his wife passed away. He had been reading a magazine,
sipping a cup of tea from the hospital cafeteria.

But that was not what caused him to feel guilty. It was the fact that they'd
all been so full of assumptions: the assumption that the procedure would go
smoothly, the assumption that she would spend one night in the hospital and then
return home, the assumption that friends would be coming to the house two
weeks later for dinner, that she would visit France a few weeks after that. The
assumption that his wife's surgery was to be a minor trial in her life and not the
end of it. He remembered Ruma sobbing in his arms as if she were suddenly
very young again and had fallen off a bicycle or been stung by a bee. As in those
other instances he had been strong for her, not shedding a tear.
Sometime in the middle of the night she'd woken up in Akash's bed and
stumbled into her own. Normally Akash came into her bed at dawn, falling
asleep beside her for another few hours before waking her up and wanting
cereal. She didn't mind Akash coming into her bed, especially when Adam was
out of town. But this morning the bed was empty. She no longer felt sick in the
mornings. Instead, her first thought was of food; she wanted a burrito, or one of
the egg and cheese sandwiches from the bagel shop near their old apartment in
Park Slope, a reminder that all through the night, as she slept, her body had been
hard at work. In the kitchen she saw that the dinner dishes, washed and dried,
were at one side of the countertop. In the drainer was a clean bowl, spoon, juice
glass, and mug. Beside the stove, on a saucer, was a drying tea bag, reserved for
a second use. She heard Akash's voice coming from somewhere outside, but
couldn't see him through the window. She went onto the porch, where the sound
of his voice was more distinct. "But I didn't see a turtle," she heard him say, and
she gathered that he and her father had taken a walk down to the lake. She took
her prenatal vitamin, put on water for tea. She was making toast when her father
and Akash came in through the kitchen door.
"We went to the lake and Dadu put me into a movie," Akash said excitedly,
pointing to the video camera strung around her father's neck.
"You're wet," she observed, noticing that the straps of his sandals and the
front of his shorts were darkened by water. She turned to her father. "What
happened?"
"Nothing, nothing. We thought we saw a turtle, and Akash wanted to touch
it," he said to Ruma. "He is asking for cereal."
"Come on, first you need to change," she said to Akash. When she returned
she saw that her father had opened up the cupboard. "Is this the one he takes?"
he asked, holding up a box of Cheerios.
She nodded. "When did you wake up, Baba?"
"Oh, I was up before five. I sat on the porch and had my breakfast, and then

Akash joined me and we went outside."
"I can take over," she said, watching her father pour milk into the cereal
bowl.
"I don't mind. Have your food."
She opened the fridge for butter and jam, prepared her tea. When she was
finished, her father took the kettle, put the dried-out tea bag into the same cup
that was in the dish drainer, and added the remaining hot water.
"Dadu, outside?" Akash said, tugging on her father's pants.
"Soon, Babu. Let me finish."
As she ate her breakfast she mentioned the places they could see during the
course of his visit-before his arrival she had looked up hours of admission, ticket
prices, and in her mind she'd already conceived of an itinerary, something to
keep them occupied each day. She hadn't had the time or energy to explore much
of downtown Seattle, and thought the week with her father would provide the
opportunity. "There's the Space Needle of course," she began. "And Pike Place
Market. There's an aquarium along the waterfront I've been meaning to take
Akash to. They have ferry rides across Puget Sound that are supposed to be nice.
We could go to Victoria for the day. And then there's the Boeing factory, if
you're interested. They give tours."
"Yes," her father said. He looked tired to her, his eyes small behind his
glasses. "To be honest," he said, "I wouldn't mind a rest from all that."
She was confused; she had assumed her father would want to see Seattle
with his video camera, just as he was interested in seeing so many other places in
the world these days. "Well, otherwise, there's not much else to do here."
"I don't need to be entertained."
"That's not what I meant. Whatever you'd like, Baba." Her confusion was
followed by worry. She wondered if there was something he wasn't telling her.
She wondered how it was in the condominium, whether there were too many
stairs to climb, if he had any neighbors who knew or cared about him. She
remembered a statistic she'd heard, about long-term spouses typically dying
within two years of one another, the surviving spouse dying essentially of a
broken heart. But Ruma knew that her parents had never loved each other in that
way.
"Are you all right?"
He looked up at her; he'd been leaning close to Akash, making faces to
distract him as he finished the cereal. "What do you mean?"
"I mean, are you feeling all right?"
"I am feeling fine. I was just hoping for a vacation from my vacations," he
said. "The tours are work, in their own way."

She nodded. "I understand." She did understand, for deep down she knew
that there was nothing wrong with her father. Though it upset her to admit it, if
anything, he seemed happier now; her mother's death had lightened him, the
opposite of what it had done to her.
He took a worn white handkerchief from his pocket, wiped remnants of
milk and cereal off Akash's face. The gesture reminded her of being small, and
the little ways her father had come to her rescue, pulling out a handkerchief if
she'd spilt food on her clothes, or needed to blow her nose, or had scraped her
knee. "Let a few days go by. Maybe then we can take a boat ride."
After breakfast Akash had his weekly swimming lesson. She expected her
father to stay at home, but he said he wanted to go, bringing his video camera
along. He offered to drive them to the pool in the rental car, but because the car
seat was in the SUV, Ruma drove. She had learned to drive in high school, but
then for years she had lived in cities and not owned a car, so that until now it
was an activity she associated only with visiting her parents: taking the car to
drop off videos, or going with her mother to the mall. It was something she had
to get used to in Seattle-having to fill the car with gas, making sure there was air
in the tires. Though she was growing familiar with the roads, with the exits and
the mountains and the quality of the light, she felt no connection to any of it, or
to anyone. She had exchanged only pleasantries with her neighbors-a retired
husband and wife on one side, two gay professors at the University of
Washington on the other. There were some women she would talk to as she sat
watching Akash in the swimming pool, but at the end of each class they never
suggested getting together. It felt unnatural to have to reach out to strangers at
this point in her life.
She was used to the friends she'd left behind in Brooklyn, women she met
in prenatal yoga and through a mommy group she'd joined after Akash was born,
who had known the everyday details of her life. They'd kept her company when
she went into labor, handed down the clothes and blankets their children had
outgrown. Those friends had been a five-or ten-minute walk from her apartment,
some of them in the building itself, and back when she worked part time they
could meet her at a moment's notice, pushing their strollers through Prospect
Park. They had gotten to know Ruma's mother when she came to visit on
weekends, and some of them had driven down to Pennsylvania for the funeral.
At first, after the move, these friends sent Ruma e-mails, or called from their cell
phones as they sat in the playground without her. But given the time change and
the children always at their sides, it was impossible to carry on a meaningful
conversation. For all the time she'd spent with these women the roots did not go

deep, and these days, after reading their e-mails, Ruma was seldom inspired to
write back.
The car was silent apart from the sound the tires made on the road, and the
slicing sound of cars passing in the opposite direction. Akash was playing with
one of his toy trains, running its wheels along the surface of the door and the
back of Ruma's seat. She was aware of her father quietly monitoring her driving,
glancing now and then at the speedometer, looking along with her when she was
about to switch lanes. She pointed out the grocery store where she now shopped,
the direction of Mount Rainier, not visible today.
"There's the exit Adam takes to go to work," she said.
"How far it is?"
When she was younger she would have corrected him; "How far is it?" she
would immediately have said, irritated, as if his error were a reflection of her
own shortcomings. "I don't know. I think it takes him about forty minutes each
way."
"That's a lot of driving. Why didn't you choose a house closer by?"
"We don't mind. And we fell in love with the house." She wondered
whether her father would consider this last remark frivolous.
"And you? Have you found work in this new place?"
"Part-time litigation work is hard to find," she said. "Preschool is only until
noon, and Adam and I don't want Akash in a daycare."
"In order to practice here you will have to take another bar exam?" her
father asked.
"No. There's reciprocity with New York." "Then why not look for a new
job?"
"I'm not ready yet, Baba." She had not bothered to contact any firms in
Seattle, not called up the trusts and estates attorney one of the partners at her old
firm had given her the name of, suggesting maybe Ruma could write briefs on a
case-by-case basis. She realized she'd never explicitly told her father that she
intended, for the next few years, to be at home. "We're still getting settled."
"That I understand. I am only asking if you have a time frame in mind."
"Maybe when the new baby starts kindergarten."
"But that is over five years from now. Now is the time for you to be
working, building your career."
"I am working, Baba. Soon I'll be taking care of two children, just like Ma
did."
"Will this make you happy?"
She didn't answer him. Her mother would have understood her decision,
would have been supportive and proud. Ruma had worked fifty-hour weeks for

years, had earned six figures while Romi was still living hand to mouth. She'd
always felt unfairly cast, by both her parents, into roles that weren't accurate: as
her father's oldest son, her mother's secondary spouse.
"They won't be young forever, Ruma," her father continued. "Then what
will you do?"
"Then I'll go back."
"You'll be over forty. It may not be so simple."
She kept her eyes on the road, pushing a button that turned on the radio,
filling the car with the determined drone of a reporter's voice. She had never
been able to confront her father freely, the way she used to fight with her
mother. Somehow, she feared that any difference of opinion would chip away at
the already frail bond that existed between them. She knew that she had
disappointed him, getting rejected by all the Ivy Leagues she'd applied to. In
spite of Romi's itinerant, uncertain life, she knew her father respected him more
for having graduated from Princeton and getting a Fulbright to go abroad. Ruma
could count the arguments she'd had with her father on one hand. In high school,
after she'd gotten her license, he'd refused to insure her on the family car so that
she could drive it on her own. In college, when it was time to declare her major,
he'd tried to convince her to choose biology instead of history. He had balked at
the cost of law school, but when she'd gotten into Northeastern he had paid for it
all the same. And he had argued, when she and Adam were planning their
wedding, that an outdoor ceremony was unwise, recommending an institutional
banquet hall instead of the bluff on Martha's Vineyard she and Adam desired as
a location. As it turned out the weather was perfect, the sun beating brilliantly on
the ocean as they exchanged their vows. And yet, even to this day, Ruma
suffered from nightmares of the white tent and folding chairs and hundreds of
guests soaked by rain.
She pulled into the parking lot where the swimming pool was. Inside the
building, she told her father to wait on the benches where they could watch the
class through a window, while she went into the locker room to change Akash
into his bathing suit. When she joined her father he was busy with his camera,
putting in a new tape and adjusting the settings. "There's Akash," she said,
pointing to where he sat, wrapped in a towel, waiting for the class to begin. She
had thought Akash was too young to go into the pool without her, that they
would have to take the earlier class, in which parents went into the water as well.
But there were no spots in that class, and from the very beginning Akash had
separated from her willingly, leaping into the arms of the instructor, an auburnhaired teenage girl.
For the next thirty minutes her father taped Akash continuously: having the

flotation device strapped on his back, jumping into the pool, blowing bubbles
and practicing kicks. Her father stood up from the bench where Ruma sat, the
lens of the video camera nearly touching the window. He had not paid this sort
of attention when Ruma and Romi were growing up. Back then it was their
mother who sat watching their swimming lessons, who held her breath, terrified,
as they climbed the ladder and waved at her, then plunged off the high diving
board. Her father had not taught Romi to throw a baseball, and he had not taken
them to learn to skate on the pond, a short walk through the woods behind their
neighborhood, that froze every winter.
In the car on the way home, her father brought up the topic of her career
again. "Work is important, Ruma. Not only for financial stability. For mental
stability. All my life, since I was sixteen, I have been working."
"You're retired."
"But I cannot stay unoccupied. That is why I am traveling so much. It is an
extravagance, but I don't need all the money I've saved up.
"Self-reliance is important, Ruma," he continued. "Life is full of surprises.
Today, you can depend on Adam, on Adam's job. Tomorrow, who knows."
For a split second she took her eyes off the road, turning to him. "What are
you suggesting? What are you saying?"
"Nothing. Only, perhaps, that it makes me nervous that you are not
employed. It is not for my sake, you understand. My concern is for you. I have
more than enough money to last until I am dead."
"Who else is dead?" Akash called out from the backseat.
"No one. We are only talking silly things. Oh dear, what a nice train you
have, has it left the station?" her father inquired, turning back to Akash.
That night after dinner he showed his videos. First, to Akash's delight, they
watched the footage of the swimming class, and then he showed videos of
Europe: frescoes in churches, pigeons flying, the backs of people's heads. Most
of the images were captured through the window of the tour bus, as a guide
explained things about the monuments they were passing. He had always been
careful to keep Mrs. Bagchi out of the frame, but as he watched the video
enlarged on his daughter's television, he realized there were traces throughoutthere was Mrs. Bagchi's arm resting on the open window of the bus, there was
her blue leather handbag on a bench.
"That's Luigi," he said, as the camera focused briefly on their Italian guide.
"Who goes on these tours with you?" Ruma asked.
"They are mostly people like me, retired or otherwise idle," he said. "A lot
of Japanese. It is a different group in each country."

"Have you made any friends?"
"We are all friendly with one another."
"How many of you are there?"
"Perhaps eighteen or twenty."
"And are you stuck with them all day, or do you have time on your own?"
"An hour here and there." "Who's that?" she asked suddenly.
He stared, horrified, at the television screen, where for a few seconds Mrs.
Bagchi choppily appeared, sitting at a small table at a cafe, stirring sugar with a
tiny spoon into a tiny cup. And then he remembered offering to let Mr. Yamata,
one of his
Japanese companions, look through the lens. Without his realizing, Mr.
Yamata must have pressed the record button. Mrs. Bagchi vanished, did not
appear again. He was grateful the room was dark, that his daughter could not see
his face. "Who do you mean?"
"She's gone now. A woman who looked Indian."
It was an opportunity to tell Ruma. It was more difficult than he'd thought,
being in his daughter's home, being around her all day. He felt pathetic deceiving
her. But what would he say? That he had made a new friend? A girlfriend? The
word was unknown to him, impossible to express; he had never had a girlfriend
in his life. It would have been easier telling Romi. He would have absorbed the
information casually, might even have found it a relief. Ruma was different. All
his life he'd felt condemned by her, on his wife's behalf. She and Ruma were
allies. And he had endured his daughter's resentment, never telling Ruma his side
of things, never saying that his wife had been overly demanding, unwilling to
appreciate the life he'd worked hard to provide.
Like his wife, Ruma was now alone in this new place, overwhelmed,
without friends, caring for a young child, all of it reminding him, too much, of
the early years of his marriage, the years for which his wife had never forgiven
him. He had always assumed Ruma's life would be different. She'd worked for as
long as he could remember. Even in high school, in spite of his and his wife's
protests, she'd insisted, in the summers, on working as a busgirl at a local
restaurant, the sort of work their relatives in India would have found disgraceful
for a girl of her class and education. But his daughter was no longer his
responsibility. Finally, he had reached that age.
"That is one thing I have observed on my travels," he said as Siena's sloping
pink piazza flashed across the screen, Mrs. Bagchi concealed somewhere in the
throng. "Indians are everywhere these days."
Akash woke her the following morning, running into her room and tugging
her arm. "Dadu went away." "What are you talking about?"

"He's not here."
She got up. It was quarter to eight. "He's probably gone for a walk, Akash."
But when she looked out the window, she saw that the rental car wasn't in the
driveway.
"Is he coming back?"
"Hold on, Akash, let me think." Her heart was pounding and she felt as she
would sometimes on a playground, unable, for a few seconds, to spot Akash. In
the kitchen she saw that her father had not had his breakfast; there was no bowl
and spoon in the dish drainer, no dried-out tea bag on a plate beside the stove.
She wondered if he'd been feeling ill, if he'd driven off in search of a pharmacy
for aspirin or Alka-Seltzer. It would be like him, to do that and not wake her up.
Once he'd had root canal surgery without telling anyone, coming home in the
evening with his mouth swollen and full of gauze. Then she wondered if he'd
discovered the boats moored to the dock they shared at the edge of the lake and
taken one onto the water. There was no way to reach him; her father did not
carry a cell phone. As for calling the police, she didn't know the number of the
rental car's license plate. She picked up the phone anyway, deciding to call
Adam, to ask him what to do. But just then she heard the sound of gravel
crackling under tires.
"Where on earth did you go?" she demanded. There was nothing to indicate
that her father was in any type of distress; he was carrying a flat box tied with
string that looked like it had come from a bakery.
"I remembered, yesterday on the way to swimming, passing by a nursery. I
thought I would drive by and see their hours."
"But we've already decided on a nursery school for Akash."
"Not a school. A place that sells plants. You get a fair amount of sun in the
back, and the soil looks rich," he said, looking out the window. "A rainy climate
is good for the garden. I can plant a few shrubs, some ground covering if you
like." "Oh," she said.
"It is just six miles from your home. Next to it is a place that sells pastries.
Here," he said, opening the box and showing it to
Akash. "Which would you like?"
"You don't have to work on our garden, Baba. You said you wanted to
rest."
"It is relaxing for me."
Flowers in the backyard had not occurred to her until now. And yet his
offer appealed to her. She felt flattered by his interest in the place in which she
lived, by his desire to make it more beautiful.
"You could have let me know you were going out," Ruma said.

"I did," he replied. "I left a note on the bureau downstairs, saying I was
going for a drive."
She turned to Akash, who had pulled apart a croissant and scattered flakes
of dough across the front of his pajamas. She was about to blame him for being
hasty in his search of her father's room. But of course Akash was too small to see
the top of the bureau, too young to read a note.
When the nursery opened her father went out again, taking Akash with him
this time, transferring the car seat into the sedan. As they drove off, she realized
that this was the first time she was leaving Akash exclusively in her father's care.
It was odd being alone in the house, and she worried that perhaps Akash would
suddenly demand her presence. She used to feel that way in his infancy, when he
would nurse every two hours, when being without him, even briefly, felt
abnormal. An hour later her father and Akash returned, with bags of topsoil, flats
full of flowers, a shovel, a rake, and a hose. Her father asked if he could borrow
some old clothes of Adam's, and Ruma gave him a pair of khakis and a torn
oxford shirt, things Adam had set aside to give to the Salvation Army, and lent
him a pair of Adam's running shoes. The clothes were large on her father, the
shoulders of the shirt drooping, the cuffs of the pants rolled up. For the rest of
the day, with Akash playing at his side in a growing mountain of soil, her father
pushed the shovel into the ground, hacking away at grass with a soft, forceful
sound, wearing his baseball cap to protect his head from the sun. He worked
steadily, pausing briefly at midday to eat a peanut butter and jelly sandwich
along with Akash, coming in at dusk only because he said the mosquitoes were
out.
The next morning her father drove back to the nursery to get more things: a
bale of peat moss, bags of mulch and composted manure. This time, in addition
to the gardening supplies, he brought back an inflatable kiddie pool, in the form
of a crocodile spouting water from its head, which he set up in the yard and
filled with the hose. Akash spent all day outdoors, splashing in the pool and
squirting water into the garden, or searching for the worms her father dug up.
Again her father worked almost continuously until dusk. With Akash outside all
day, Ruma had time to do a few things around the house, small and large things
she'd been putting off. She paid the bills that were due at the month's end, filed
away piles of the paperwork her life with Adam generated, and then began to
sort through Akash's clothing, weeding drawers of what he'd outgrown, bringing
up larger things from plastic tubs stored in the basement. Depending on whether
she had a boy or a girl, she'd have to save the smaller clothes or give them away.
It would be another four weeks until the amnio, allowing them to learn the sex.

She wasn't showing significantly, had yet to feel any kicks.
But unlike the last time she didn't doubt the presence of life inside her.
She dug out her maternity wear, the large-paneled pants and tunics that she
would soon require. After sorting through the clothing, she turned to the
unfinished bookcase in Akash's room, which she'd been meaning to paint ever
since she bought it, over ten years ago in Boston, to hold her law books. She
removed all the toys and books and began to put them in the corner. She would
ask her father to help her carry it outside, so that she could paint in the yard. At
one point Akash came into the room, surprising her. He was barefoot, his golden
legs covered with dirt. She wondered if he would be upset with her for touching
his things, but he regarded the pile as if it were perfectly normal and then began
picking items out of it.
"What are you up to?" she asked him.
"Growing things."
"Oh? What are you planting?"
"All this stuff," he said, his arms full, walking out of the room. She
followed him outside, where she saw that her father had created a small plot for
Akash, hardly larger than a spread-open newspaper, with shallow holes dug out
at intervals. She watched as Akash buried things into the soil, crouching over the
ground just as her father was. Into the soil went a pink rubber ball, a few pieces
of Lego stuck together, a wooden block etched with a star.
"Not too deep," her father said. "Not more than a finger. Can you touch it
still?"
Akash nodded. He picked up a miniature plastic dinosaur, forcing it into the
ground.
"What color is it?" her father asked.
"Red."
"And in Bengali?"
"Lal."
"Good."
"And neel!" Akash cried out, pointing to the sky.
While her father was in the shower, she made tea. It was a ritual she liked, a
formal recognition of the day turning into evening in spite of the sun not setting.
When she was on her own, these hours passed arbitrarily. She was grateful for
the opportunity to sit on the porch with her father, with the teapot and the bowl
of salted cashews and the plate of Nice biscuits, looking at the lake and listening
to the vast breeze work its way through the treetops, a grander version of the
way Akash used to sigh when he was a baby, full of contentment, in the depths

of sleep. The leaves flickered as if with internal light, shivering though the air
was not cold. Akash was asleep, exhausted from playing outdoors all day, and
the house was filled with silence.
"If I lived here I would sleep out here in the summers," her father said
presently. "I would put out a cot."
"You can, you know."
"What?"
"Sleep out here. We have an air mattress." "I am only talking. I am
comfortable where I am. "But," he continued, "if I could, I would build a porch
like this for myself." "Why don't you?"
"The condo would not allow it. It would have been nice in the old house."
When her father mentioned their old house, tears sprang to her eyes. In a
way it was helpful to be in a place her mother had never seen. It was one of the
last conversations she had had with her mother, telling her about Adam's new
job, which back then was only a remote possibility, as they rode together to the
hospital. "Don't go," her mother had said from the front seat.
"It's too far away. I'll never see you again." Six hours after saying this, her
mother was dead. Ruma suddenly wanted to ask her father, as she'd wanted to
ask so many times, if he missed her mother, if he'd ever wept for her death. But
she'd never asked, and he'd never admitted whether he'd felt or done those
things.
"If you were to have built one, where would you have put it?"
He considered. "Off the dining room, I suppose. That side of the house was
coolest."
She tried to think of her parents' house transformed this way. She imagined
a wall in the dining room broken down, imagined speaking to her mother on the
telephone, her mother complaining as the workmen hammered and drilled. Then
she saw her parents sitting in the shade, in wicker chairs, having tea as she and
her father were now. For when she pictured that house in her mind, her mother
was always alive in it, impossible not to see. With the birth of Akash, in his
sudden, perfect presence, Ruma had felt awe for the first time in her life. He still
had the power to stagger her at times-simply the fact that he was breathing, that
all his organs were in their proper places, that blood flowed quietly and
effectively through his small, sturdy limbs. He was her flesh and blood, her
mother had told her in the hospital the day Akash was born. Only the words her
mother used were more literal, enriching the tired phrase with meaning: "He is
made from your meat and bone." It had caused Ruma to acknowledge the
supernatural in everyday life. But death, too, had the power to awe, she knew
this now-that a human being could be alive for years and years, thinking and

breathing and eating, full of a million worries and feelings and thoughts, taking
up space in the world, and then, in an instant, become absent, invisible.
"I'm sorry we haven't seen your new apartment," she said to her father.
"Adam doesn't have any vacation for a while. But we'll come after the baby's
born."
"There is nothing to see there. Just a TV and a sofa and my things. There is
no space for all of you to stay. Not like here."
"I'd like to see it anyway," she said. "We can stay in a hotel."
"There is no need, Ruma. No need to travel all that way, just to see an
apartment," her father said. "You are a mother now," he added. "No need to drag
your children."
"But that's what you and Ma did, taking us to India all those times."
"We had no alternative. Our parents weren't willing to travel. But I will
come here again to see you," he said, looking approvingly into the distance and
taking a sip of his tea. "I like this place."
"My dad's planting flowers in the backyard," she told Adam that night on
the phone.
"Does he plan to be around to take care of them?"
His flippancy irritated her, and she felt defensive on her father's behalf. "I
don't know."
"It's Thursday, Ruma. How long are you going to torture yourself?"
She didn't feel tortured any longer. She had planned to tell Adam this, but
now she changed her mind. Instead she said, "I want to wait a few more days.
Make sure everyone gets along."
"For God's sake, Ruma," Adam said. "He's your father. You've known him
all your life."
And yet, until now, she had not known certain things about him. She had
not known how self-sufficient he could be, how helpful, to the point where she
had not had to wash a dish since he'd arrived. At dinner he was flexible,
appreciating the grilled fish and chicken breasts she began preparing after the
Indian food ran out, making do with a can of soup for lunch. But it was Akash
who brought out a side of her father that surprised Ruma most. In the evenings
her father stood beside her in the bathroom as she gave Akash his bath,
scrubbing the caked-on dirt from his elbows and knees. He helped put on his
pajamas, brush his teeth, and comb back his soft damp hair. When Akash had
fallen asleep one afternoon on the living-room carpet, her father made sure to put
a pillow under his head, drape a cotton blanket over his body. By now Akash
insisted on being read to at night by her father, sleeping downstairs in her

father's bed.
The first night Akash slept with her father she went downstairs to make
sure he'd fallen asleep. She saw a sliver of light under her father's door and heard
the sound of his voice, reading Green Eggs and Ham. She imagined them both
under the covers, their heads reclining against the pillows, the book between
them, Akash turning the pages as her father read. It was obvious that her father
did not know the book by heart, as she did, that he was encountering it for the
first time in his life. He read awkwardly, pausing between the sentences, his
voice oddly animated as it was not in ordinary speech. Still, his effort touched
her, and as she stood by the door she realized that for the first time in his life her
father had fallen in love. She was about to knock and tell her father that it was
past Akash's bedtime, that he should turn out the light. But she stopped herself,
returning upstairs, briefly envious of her own son.
The garden was coming along nicely. It was a futile exercise, he knew. He
could not picture his daughter or his son-in-law caring for it properly, noticing
what needed to be done. In weeks, he guessed, it would be overgrown with
weeds, the leaves chewed up by slugs. Then again, perhaps they would hire
someone to do the job. He would have preferred to put in vegetables, but they
required more work than flowers. It was a modest planting, some slow-growing
myrtle and phlox under the trees, two azalea bushes, a row of hostas, a clematis
to climb one of the posts of the porch, and in honor of his wife, a small
hydrangea. In a plot behind the kitchen, unable to resist, he also put in a few
tomatoes, along with some marigolds and impatiens; there was just time for a
small harvest to come in by the fall. He spaced out the delphiniums, tied them to
stalks, stuck some gladiola bulbs into the ground. He missed working outside,
the solid feeling of dirt under his knees, getting into his nails, the smell of it
lingering on his skin even after he'd scrubbed himself in the shower. It was the
one thing he missed about the old house, and when he thought about his garden
was when he missed his wife most keenly. She had taken that from him. For
years, after the children had grown, it had just been the two of them, but she
managed to use up all the vegetables, putting them into dishes he did not know
how to prepare himself. In addition, when she was alive, they regularly
entertained, their guests marveling that the potatoes were from their own
backyard, taking away bagfuls at the evening's end.
He looked over at Akash's little plot, the dirt carefully mounded up around
his toys, pens and pencils stuck into the ground. Pennies were there, too, all the
spare ones he'd had in his pocket.
"When will the plants come out?" Akash called out from the swimming

pool, where he stood crouching over a little sailboat.
"Soon."
"Tomorrow?"
"Not so soon. These things take time, Akash. Do you remember what I
taught you this morning?"
And Akash recited his numbers in Bengali from one to ten.
In bed that night, after Akash had fallen asleep beside him, he wrote Mrs.
Bagchi a postcard. It was safer, he decided, than sending an e-mail from Ruma's
computer, a mode of communication he could not bring himself fully to trust. He
had bought the card off a rack at the hardware store where he had bought
Akash's swimming pool. The picture was a view of ferries on Elliott Bay, a sight
he had not seen. In Europe he was always careful to buy postcards only of places
he'd been to, feeling dishonest otherwise. But here he had no choice. He
composed the letter in Bengali, an alphabet Ruma would not be able to decipher.
"I am planting Ruma a garden," he began. "Akash has grown and is learning to
swim. The weather is pleasant, no rain here in summer. I am looking forward to
Prague," he ended. He did not sign his name. He looked through his wallet,
where on a folded slip of paper he had written down Mrs. Bagchi's mailing
address. He carried only a few addresses with him: his son and his daughter and
now Mrs. Bagchi, all written on slips of paper that lived behind his driver's
license and Social Security card. He filled out the address in English, and finally,
at the top, her name.
He wondered where the nearest post office was. Would Ruma find it odd if
he were to ask her for a stamp? He could take it back with him to Pennsylvania
and mail it from there, but that seemed silly. He decided he could tell Ruma that
he needed to mail a bill. There was a public mailbox two miles down the road; at
some point before leaving he could drop it there. He didn't know where to put
the postcard now. It was not an easy room to hide things in: the surfaces were
clear, the corners visible, the closet bare apart from his few shirts. At some point
in the day Ruma came downstairs-he never could tell when-in order to make his
bed and check the hamper for laundry and wipe away the water that he
splattered, in the course of brushing his teeth and shaving, at the sides of the
sink. He considered putting the postcard in the pocket of his suitcase, but was
too tired to get out of bed. Instead, he tucked it between the pages of the Seattle
guidebook on the side table, and then, as an extra precaution, put the book into
the table drawer.
He turned to face his sleeping grandson, the long lashes and rounded cheeks
reminding him of his own children when they were young. He was suddenly
conscious that he would probably not live to see Akash into adulthood, that he

would never see his grandson's middle age, his old age, this simple fact of life
saddening him. He imagined the boy years from now, occupying this very room,
shutting the door as Ruma and Romi had. It was inevitable. And yet he knew
that he, too, had turned his back on his parents, by settling in America. In the
name of ambition and accomplishment, none of which mattered anymore, he had
forsaken them. He kissed Akash lightly on the side of his head, smoothing the
curling golden hair with his hand, then switched off the lamp, filling the room
with darkness.
Saturday morning, the day before her father was scheduled to leave, the
garden was finished. After breakfast, he showed Ruma what he'd done. The
shrubs were still small, with mulch around their bases and enough space to
distinguish one from the next, but he said they'd grow taller and closer together,
showing her with his hand the height she could anticipate by next summer. He
told her how often to water, and for how long, to wait until the sun had gone
down. He showed her the bottle of fertilizer he'd bought, and told her when to
add it to the watering. Patiently she listened as Akash dashed in and out of his
pool, but she absorbed little of what her father said.
"Watch out for these beetles," he said, plucking an insect off a leaf and
flicking it away. "The hydrangea won't bloom much this year. The flowers will
be pink or blue depending on the acidity of your soil. You'll have to prune it
back, eventually."
She nodded.
"They were always your mother's favorite," her father added. "In this
country, that is."
Ruma looked at the plant, at the dark green leaves with serrated edges. She
had not known.
"Make sure to keep the tomatoes off the ground." He leaned over,
readjusting one of the plants. "This stake should be enough to support them, or
you could use a little string. Don't let them dry out. If the sun is strong check
them twice a day. If frost comes before they've ripened, pick them and wrap
them up in newspaper. And cut down the delphinium stalks in the fall."
"Maybe you could do that," she suggested.
He stood up awkwardly, a hand gripping the front of his thigh. He took off
his baseball cap and wiped his forehead with his arm. "I have a trip scheduled.
I've already bought the ticket."
"I mean after you get back, Baba."
Her father had been looking down at his dirt-rimmed fingernails, but now
he raised his face and looked around him, at the garden and at the trees.

"It is a good place, Ruma. But this is your home, not mine."
She had expected resistance, so she kept talking. "You can have the whole
downstairs. You can still go on your trips whenever you like. We won't stand in
your way. What do you say, Akash," she called out. "Should Dadu live with us
in here? Would you like that?"
Akash began jumping up and down in the pool, squirting water from a
plastic dolphin, nodding his head.
"I know it would be a big move," Ruma continued. "But it would be good
for you. For all of us." By now she was crying. Her father did not step toward
her to comfort her. He was silent, waiting for the moment to pass.
"I don't want to be a burden," he said after a while.
"You wouldn't. You'd be a help. You don't have to make up your mind now.
Just promise you'll think about it."
He lifted his head and looked at her, a brief sad look that seemed finally to
take her in, and nodded.
"Would you like to do anything special on your last day here?" she asked.
"We could drive into Seattle for lunch."
He seemed to brighten at the suggestion. "How about the boat ride? Is that
still possible?"
She went inside, telling him she was going to get Akash ready and look up
the schedule. He was suddenly desperate to leave, the remaining twenty-four
hours feeling unbearable. He reminded himself that tomorrow he would be on a
plane, heading back to Pennsylvania. And that two weeks after that he would be
going to Prague with Mrs. Bagchi, sleeping next to her at night. He knew that it
was not for his sake that his daughter was asking him to live here. It was for
hers. She needed him, as he'd never felt she'd needed him before, apart from the
obvious things he provided her in the course of his life. And because of this the
offer upset him more. A part of him, the part of him that would never cease to be
a father, felt obligated to accept. But it was not what he wanted. Being here for a
week, however pleasant, had only confirmed the fact. He did not want to be part
of another family, part of the mess, the feuds, the demands, the energy of it. He
did not want to live in the margins of his daughter's life, in the shadow of her
marriage. He didn't want to live again in an enormous house that would only fill
up with things over the years, as the children grew, all the things he'd recently
gotten rid of, all the books and papers and clothes and objects one felt compelled
to possess, to save. Life grew and grew until a certain point. The point he had
reached now.
The only temptation was the boy, but he knew that the boy would forget

him. It was Ruma to whom he would give a new reminder that now that his wife
was gone, even though he was still alive, there was no longer anyone to care for
her. When he saw Ruma now, chasing Akash, picking up after him, wiping his
urine from the floor, responsible for his every need, he realized how much
younger his wife had been when she'd done all that, practically a girl. By the
time his wife was Ruma's age, their children were already approaching
adolescence. The more the children grew, the less they had seemed to resemble
either parent-they spoke differently, dressed differently, seemed foreign in every
way, from the texture of their hair to the shapes of their feet and hands. Oddly, it
was his grandson, who was only half-Bengali to begin with, who did not even
have a Bengali surname, with whom he felt a direct biological connection, a
sense of himself reconstituted in another.
He remembered his children coming home from college, impatient with
him and his wife, enamored of their newfound independence, always wanting to
leave. It had tormented his wife and, though he never admitted it, had pained
him as well. He couldn't help thinking, on those occasions, how young they'd
once been, how helpless in his nervous arms, needing him for their very survival,
knowing no one else. He and his wife were their whole world. But eventually
that need dissipated, dwindled to something amorphous, tenuous, something that
threatened at times to snap. That loss was in store for Ruma, too; her children
would become strangers, avoiding her. And because she was his child he wanted
to protect her from that, as he had tried throughout his life to protect her from so
many things. He wanted to shield her from the deterioration that inevitably took
place in the course of a marriage, and from the conclusion he sometimes feared
was true: that the entire enterprise of having a family, of putting children on this
earth, as gratifying as it sometimes felt, was flawed from the start. But these
were an old man's speculations, an old man who was himself now behaving like
a child.
Her father left early the next morning, while Akash was still asleep. Again
she'd offered to go to the airport, but this time he was even more adamant, telling
her he didn't want to upset Akash's schedule. They were all tired from their day
in Seattle. After the ferry ride they'd gone up the Space Needle and then had
dinner in Pike Place Market before driving home. Joining her father in the
kitchen, she saw that he'd already finished his cereal, the bowl and spoon in the
drainer. The tea bag normally saved for a second cup later in the day had been
tossed out.
"You've got everything?" she asked, seeing his suitcase by the door. He'd
come bearing gifts but had bought nothing to take back with him. Everything

he'd purchased in the past week, all the things from the nursery and the hardware
store, the coiled-up hose and tools and bags of leftover topsoil now neatly
arranged under the porch, had been for her.
"Call when you get home," she said, something her mother would say to her
children when they parted. She asked for his flight information, writing it on the
bottom of the same sheet of paper that was on the refrigerator door with Adam's
itinerary.
"Adam will be here tonight?"
She nodded.
"Good. Things will return to normal then."
She wanted to tell him how normal it had felt, to have her father there. But
she couldn't bring herself to say the words. Her father glanced at his watch, then
poured a bit of his tea into his saucer in order to cool it more quickly. He raised
the saucer to his lips, sipping from the rim.
"It has been a marvelous week, Ruma. I have enjoyed each day."
"Me too."
"These days with Akash have been the greatest gift," he added, his voice
softening. "If you like, I can come for a while after you have the baby. I won't be
as useful as your mother would have been."
"That's not true."
"But please understand, I prefer to stay on my own. I am too old now to
make such a shift."
His gentle words fell on her thickly, too quickly. She understood that he
had not had to think it over, that he had never intended to stay.
"Make time to look into law firms here," he continued. "Don't let all that
hard work go to waste."
He stood up, and before she could stop him, rinsed out his cup and saucer
and put those into the drainer as well. It was time to go.
"Let me go downstairs and give Akash a kiss," he said. He turned to leave
the room, then stopped. "Do you have a spare stamp? I need to put a bill into the
mail."
"In the drawer of the little table in the hall," she said. "There's a roll there."
She heard the drawer opening, then closing, then the sound of his flip-flops
hitting the stairs. When he returned, he went to the entryway to put on his shoes,
tied his laces, fit the flip-flops into the front pocket of his suitcase. He kissed
Ruma on the cheek. "Take care of yourself. Let me know how the garden comes
along." He glanced at her stomach and added, "I am waiting for the good news."
He turned and walked outside to his car, putting the suitcase into the trunk. She
stood watching as he turned on the engine and backed out, wondering when she

would see him again. At the mailbox he paused, and for a moment she thought
he was about to open the window and put his bill inside. But he only waved
through the closed window, leaning toward her, looking lost, and a few seconds
later he was gone.
"Where's Dadu?" Akash asked as she was finishing her tea. "He went home
today."
"Why?"
"Because that's where he lives."
"Why?" In her son's small face she saw the disappointment she also felt.
"Daddy's coming back tonight," she said, trying to change the subject.
"Should we make a cake?"
Akash went to the kitchen door and tried the knob, looking through the
glass at the yard. "I want Dadu."
She opened the door for him and followed him out, both of them padding
barefoot, Ruma treading gingerly, Akash not fearful of stones or twigs. It was
chillier than she expected, still too early for the warmth of the day to have
gathered. She considered going back in for sweaters. "Sweetpea? You cold?" she
asked, folding her arms across her chest, but Akash did not reply. He picked up
the empty watering can her father had left underneath the porch and pretended to
water things in his little plot. She looked at the items poking out of the ground:
pens and pencils, a straw, a Popsicle stick. There were papers, too: old envelopes
from junk mail, the cards that fell out of magazines, seeking subscribers, folded
up like little tents on the soil. Her eye fell to another piece of paper, stiffer than
the rest. She bent down to look at it, recognizing her father's handwriting. She
assumed it was a postcard her father had sent to her, one Akash had removed
from the front of the refrigerator door, or the basket on the hall table. But this
postcard bore no postmark, had not been sent. It was composed in Bengali and
addressed in English to someone on Long Island. A Mrs. Meenakshi Bagchi.
She picked it up. "Akash, what's this?"
He reached out, attempting to snatch it back from her. "It's mine."
"What is it?" she asked, more harshly this time.
"It's for my garden."
"Did Dadu give this to you?"
He shook his head angrily, and then he started to cry.
She stared at the card and instantly she knew, just as she'd known from the
expression on the surgeon's face what had happened to her mother on the
operating table. The woman in the video, the reason for her father's trips, the
reason for his good spirits, the reason he did not want to live in Seattle. The

reason he'd wanted a stamp that morning. Here, in a handful of sentences she
could not even read, was the explanation, the evidence that it was not just with
Akash that her father had fallen in love.
He was in a bookshop in the airport, buying a newspaper to read at the gate,
when he saw, propped by the register on a metal stand, a copy of the same
guidebook to Seattle that had been at his bedside in Ruma's house. He'd searched
everywhere for the book, overturning all the sheets, nearly waking up Akash in
the process. He opened drawers he'd never used, peering on the shelf of the
closet, wedging his hand as far as it would go under all sides of the mattress,
cursing himself for not making the time to mail the card earlier. At last he
spotted the book on the floor beneath the bed, on the side where Akash slept. He
searched frantically through each page, shaking the book by its spine, but the
postcard was missing. For an instant he'd been tempted to wake the boy, to ask if
he'd seen it, put it somewhere. He looked in the bathroom, in the laundry
hamper, in the tub where just that morning he'd bathed. Finally, unable to justify
his search any longer, knowing that he would miss his plane, he left, the unused
stamp from Ruma still floating in his shirt pocket, its value more than a postcard
needed, a weightless thing that filled him with dread.
She took Akash inside, wiped his tears and held him, and then, when he
was calm, prepared his breakfast. She said yes when he asked if he could watch
television, setting him with his cereal bowl behind the coffee table, and returned
to the kitchen to look at the postcard again. Her first impulse was to shred it, but
she stopped herself, staring at the Bengali letters her mother had once tried and
failed to teach Ruma when she was a girl. They were sentences her mother
would have absorbed in an instant, sentences that proved, with more force than
the funeral, more force than all the days since then, that her mother no longer
existed. Where had her mother gone, when life persisted, when Ruma still
needed her to explain so many things?
She walked back outside, across the grass and looked at the hydrangea her
father had planted, that was to bloom pink or blue depending on the soil. It did
not prove to Ruma that her father had loved her mother, or even that he missed
her. And yet he had put it there, honored her before turning to another woman.
Ruma smoothed out the postcard in her hand, scraping away, with her fingernail,
the dirt that obscured a bit of the Zip code. She turned the postcard around and
looked at the front, at the generic view her father had chosen to commemorate
his visit. Then she went back into the house, to the table in the hall. From the
drawer she took out the roll of stamps and affixed one to the card, for the

mailman, later in the day, to take away.

H ell-Heaven
Pranab Chakraborty wasn't technically my father's younger brother. He was
a fellow Bengali from Calcutta who had washed up on the barren shores of my
parents' social life in the early seventies, when they lived in a rented apartment
in Central Square and could number their acquaintances on one hand. But I had
no real uncles in America, and so I was taught to call him Pranab Kaku.
Accordingly, he called my father Shyamal Da, always addressing him in the
polite form, and he called my mother Boudi, which is how Bengalis are
supposed to address an older brother's wife, instead of using her first name,
Aparna. After Pranab Kaku was befriended by my parents, he confessed that on
the day we met him he had followed my mother and me for the better part of an
afternoon around the streets of Cambridge, where she and I tended to roam after
I got out of school. He had trailed behind us along Massachusetts Avenue and in
and out of the Harvard Coop, where my mother liked to look at discounted
housewares. He wandered with us into Harvard Yard, where my mother often sat
on the grass on pleasant days and watched the stream of students and professors
filing busily along the paths, until, finally, as we were climbing the steps to the
Widener Library so that I could use the bathroom,
he tapped my mother on the shoulder and inquired, in English, if she might
be a Bengali. The answer to his question was clear, given that my mother was
wearing the red and white bangles unique to Bengali married women, and a
common Tangail sari, and had a thick stem of vermilion powder in the center
parting of her hair, and the full round face and large dark eyes that are so typical
of Bengali women. He noticed the two or three safety pins she wore fastened to
the thin gold bangles that were behind the red and white ones, which she would
use to replace a missing hook on a blouse or to draw a string through a petticoat
at a moment's notice, a practice he associated strictly with his mother and sisters
and aunts in Calcutta. Moreover, Pranab Kaku had overheard my mother
speaking to me in Bengali, telling me that I couldn't buy an issue of Archie at the
Coop. But back then, he also confessed, he was so new to America that he took
nothing for granted and doubted even the obvious.
My parents and I had lived in Central Square for three years prior to that
day; before that, we lived in Berlin, where I was born and where my father had
finished his training in microbiology before accepting a position as a researcher
at Mass General, and before Berlin my mother and father had lived in India,

where they were strangers to each other, and where their marriage had been
arranged. Central Square is the first place I can recall living, and in my
memories of our apartment, in a dark brown shingled house on Ashburton Place,
Pranab Kaku is always there. According to the story he liked to recall often, my
mother invited him to accompany us back to our apartment that very afternoon
and prepared tea for the two of them; then, after learning that he had not had a
proper Bengali meal in more than three months, she served him the leftover
curried mackerel and rice that we had eaten for dinner the night before. He
remained into the evening for a second dinner after my father got home, and
after that he showed up for dinner almost every night, occupying the fourth chair
at our square Formica kitchen table and becoming a part of our family in practice
as well as in name.
He was from a wealthy family in Calcutta and had never had to do so much
as pour himself a glass of water before moving to America, to study engineering
at MIT. Life as a graduate student in Boston was a cruel shock, and in his first
month he lost nearly twenty pounds. He had arrived in January, in the middle of
a snowstorm, and at the end of a week he had packed his bags and gone to
Logan, prepared to abandon the opportunity he'd worked toward all his life, only
to change his mind at the last minute. He was living on Trowbridge Street in the
home of a divorced woman with two young children who were always
screaming and crying. He rented a room in the attic and was permitted to use the
kitchen only at specified times of the day and instructed always to wipe down
the stove with Windex and a sponge. My parents agreed that it was a terrible
situation, and if they'd had a bedroom to spare they would have offered it to him.
Instead, they welcomed him to our meals and opened up our apartment to him at
any time, and soon it was there he went between classes and on his days off,
always leaving behind some vestige of himself: a nearly finished pack of
cigarettes, a newspaper, a piece of mail he had not bothered to open, a sweater
he had taken off and forgotten in the course of his stay.
I remember vividly the sound of his exuberant laughter and the sight of his
lanky body slouched or sprawled on the dull, mismatched furniture that had
come with our apartment. He had a striking face, with a high forehead and a
thick mustache, and overgrown, untamed hair that my mother said made him
look like the American hippies who were everywhere in those days. His long
legs jiggled rapidly up and down wherever he sat, and his elegant hands
trembled when he held a cigarette between his fingers, tapping the ashes into a
teacup that my mother began to set aside for this exclusive purpose. Though he
was a scientist by training, there was nothing rigid or predictable or orderly
about him. He always seemed to be starving, walking through the door and

announcing that he hadn't had lunch, and then he would eat ravenously, reaching
behind my mother to steal cutlets as she was frying them, before she had a
chance to set them properly on a plate with red onion salad. In private, my
parents remarked that he was a brilliant student, a star at Jadavpur who had come
to MIT with an impressive assistantship, but Pranab Kaku was cavalier about his
classes, skipping them with frequency. "These Americans are learning equations
I knew at Usha's age," he would complain. He was stunned that my second-grade
teacher didn't assign any homework and that at the age of seven I hadn't yet been
taught square roots or the concept of pi.
He appeared without warning, never phoning beforehand but simply
knocking on the door the way people did in Calcutta and calling out "Boudi!" as
he waited for my mother to let him in. Before we met him, I would return from
school and find my mother with her purse in her lap and her trench coat on,
desperate to escape the apartment where she had spent the day alone. But now I
would find her in the kitchen, rolling out dough for luchis, which she normally
made only on Sundays for my father and me, or putting up new curtains she'd
bought at Woolworth's. I did not know, back then, that Pranab Kaku's visits were
what my mother looked forward to all day, that she changed into a new sari and
combed her hair in anticipation of his arrival, and that she planned, days in
advance, the snacks she would serve him with such nonchalance. That she lived
for the moment she heard him call out "Boudi!" from the porch and that she was
in a foul humor on the days he didn't materialize.
It must have pleased her that I looked forward to his visits as well. He
showed me card tricks and an optical illusion in which he appeared to be
severing his own thumb with enormous struggle and strength and taught me to
memorize multiplication tables well before I had to learn them in school. His
hobby was photography. He owned an expensive camera that required thought
before you pressed the shutter, and I quickly became his favorite subject, roundfaced, missing teeth, my thick bangs in need of a trim. They are still the pictures
of myself I like best, for they convey that confidence of youth I no longer
possess, especially in front of a camera. I remember having to run back and forth
in Harvard Yard as he stood with the camera, trying to capture me in motion, or
posing on the steps of university buildings and on the street and against the
trunks of trees. There is only one photograph in which my mother appears; she is
holding me as I sit straddling her lap, her head tilted toward me, her hands
pressed to my ears as if to prevent me from hearing something. In that picture,
Pranab Kaku's shadow, his two arms raised at angles to hold the camera to his
face, hovers in the corner of the frame, his darkened, featureless shape
superimposed on one side of my mother's body. It was always the three of us. I

was always there when he visited. It would have been inappropriate for my
mother to receive him in the apartment alone; this was something that went
without saying.
They had in common all the things she and my father did not: a love of
music, film, leftist politics, poetry. They were from the same neighborhood in
North Calcutta, their family homes within walking distance, the facades familiar
to them once the exact locations were described. They knew the same shops, the
same bus and tram routes, the same holes-in-the-wall for the best jelabis and
moghlai parathas. My father, on the other hand, came from a suburb twenty
miles outside Calcutta, an area that my mother considered the wilderness, and
even in her bleakest hours of homesickness she was grateful that my father had
at least spared her a life in the stern house of her in-laws, where she would have
had to keep her head covered with the end of her sari at all times and use an
outhouse that was nothing but a raised platform with a hole, and where, in the
rooms, there was not a single painting hanging on the walls. Within a few weeks,
Pranab Kaku had brought his reel-to-reel over to our apartment, and he played
for my mother medley after medley of songs from the Hindi films of their youth.
They were cheerful songs of courtship, which transformed the quiet life in our
apartment and transported my mother back to the world she'd left behind in order
to marry my father. She and Pranab Kaku would try to recall which scene in
which movie the songs were from, who the actors were and what they were
wearing. My mother would describe Raj Kapoor and Nargis singing under
umbrellas in the rain, or Dev Anand strumming a guitar on the beach in Goa.
She and Pranab Kaku would argue passionately about these matters, raising their
voices in playful combat, confronting each other in a way she and my father
never did.
Because he played the part of a younger brother, she felt free to call him
Pranab, whereas she never called my father by his first name. My father was
thirty-seven then, nine years older than my mother. Pranab Kaku was twentyfive. My father was a lover of silence and solitude. He had married my mother to
placate his parents; they were willing to accept his desertion as long as he had a
wife. He was wedded to his work, his research, and he existed in a shell that
neither my mother nor I could penetrate. Conversation was a chore for him; it
required an effort he preferred to expend at the lab. He disliked excess in
anything, voiced no cravings or needs apart from the frugal elements of his daily
routine: cereal and tea in the mornings, a cup of tea after he got home, and two
different vegetable dishes every night with dinner. He did not eat with the
reckless appetite of Pranab Kaku. My father had a survivor's mentality. From
time to time, he liked to remark, in mixed company and often with no relevant

provocation, that starving Russians under Stalin had resorted to eating the glue
off the back of their wallpaper. One might think that he would have felt slightly
jealous, or at the very least suspicious, about the regularity of Pranab Kaku's
visits and the effect they had on my mother's behavior and mood. But my guess
is that my father was grateful to Pranab Kaku for the companionship he
provided, freed from the sense of responsibility he must have felt for forcing her
to leave India, and relieved, perhaps, to see her happy for a change.
In the summer, Pranab Kaku bought a navy-blue Volkswagen Beetle and
began to take my mother and me for drives through Boston and Cambridge, and
soon outside the city, flying down the highway. He would take us to India Tea
and Spices in Watertown, and one time he drove us all the way to New
Hampshire to look at the mountains. As the weather grew hotter, we started
going, once or twice a week, to Walden Pond. My mother always prepared a
picnic of hard-boiled eggs and cucumber sandwiches and talked fondly about the
winter picnics of her youth, grand expeditions with fifty of her relatives, all
taking the train into the West Bengal countryside. Pranab Kaku listened to these
stories with interest, absorbing the vanishing details of her past. He did not turn a
deaf ear to her nostalgia, like my father, or listen uncomprehending, like me. At
Walden Pond, Pranab Kaku would coax my mother through the woods, and lead
her down the steep slope to the water's edge. She would unpack the picnic things
and sit and watch us as we swam. His chest was matted with thick dark hair, all
the way to his waist. He was an odd sight, with his pole-thin legs and a small,
flaccid belly, like an otherwise svelte woman who has had a baby and not
bothered to tone her abdomen. "You're making me fat, Boudi," he would
complain after gorging himself on my mother's cooking. He swam noisily,
clumsily, his head always above the water; he didn't know how to blow bubbles
or hold his breath, as I had learned in swimming class. Wherever we went, any
stranger would have naturally assumed that Pranab Kaku was my father, that my
mother was his wife.
It is clear to me now that my mother was in love with him. He wooed her as
no other man had, with the innocent affection of a brother-in-law. In my mind,
he was just a family member, a cross between an uncle and a much older
brother, for in certain respects my parents sheltered and cared for him in much
the same way they cared for me. He was respectful of my father, always seeking
his advice about making a life in the West, about setting up a bank account and
getting a job, and deferring to his opinions about Kissinger and Watergate.
Occasionally, my mother would tease him about women, asking about female
Indian students at MIT or showing him pictures of her younger cousins in India.
"What do you think of her?" she would ask. "Isn't she pretty?" She knew that she

could never have Pranab Kaku for herself, and I suppose it was her attempt to
keep him in the family. But, most important, in the beginning he was totally
dependent on her, needing her for those months in a way my father never did in
the whole history of their marriage. He brought to my mother the first and, I
suspect, the only pure happiness she ever felt. I don't think even my birth made
her as happy. I was evidence of her marriage to my father, an assumed
consequence of the life she had been raised to lead. But Pranab Kaku was
different. He was the one totally unanticipated pleasure in her life.
In the fall of 1974, Pranab Kaku met a student at Radcliffe named Deborah,
an American, and she began to accompany him to our house. I called Deborah
by her first name, as my parents did, but Pranab Kaku taught her to call my
father Shyamal Da and my mother Boudi, something with which Deborah gladly
complied. Before they came to dinner for the first time, I asked my mother, as
she was straightening up the living room, if I ought to address her as Deborah
Kakima, turning her into an aunt as I had turned Pranab into an uncle. "What's
the point?" my mother said, looking back at me sharply. "In a few weeks, the fun
will be over and she'll leave him." And yet Deborah remained by his side,
attending the weekend parties that Pranab Kaku and my parents were becoming
more involved with, gatherings that were exclusively Bengali with the exception
of her. Deborah was very tall, taller than both my parents and nearly as tall as
Pranab Kaku. She wore her long brass-colored hair center-parted, as my mother
did, but it was gathered into a low ponytail instead of a braid, or it spilled
messily over her shoulders and down her back in a way that my mother
considered indecent. She wore small silver spectacles and not a trace of makeup,
and she studied philosophy. I found her utterly beautiful, but according to my
mother she had spots on her face, and her hips were too small.
For a while, Pranab Kaku still showed up once a week for dinner on his
own, mostly asking my mother what she thought of Deborah. He sought her
approval, telling her that Deborah was the daughter of professors at Boston
College, that her father published poetry, and that both her parents had PhDs.
When he wasn't around, my mother complained about Deborah's visits, about
having to make the food less spicy, even though Deborah said she liked spicy
food, and feeling embarrassed to put a fried fish head in the dal. Pranab Kaku
taught Deborah to say khub bhalo and aacha and to pick up certain foods with
her fingers instead of with a fork. Sometimes they ended up feeding each other,
allowing their fingers to linger in each other's mouth, causing my parents to look
down at their plates and wait for the moment to pass. At larger gatherings, they
kissed and held hands in front of everyone, and when they were out of earshot

my mother would talk to the other Bengali women. "He used to be so different. I
don't understand how a person can change so suddenly. It's just hell-heaven, the
difference," she would say, always using the English words for her selfconcocted, backward metaphor.
The more my mother began to resent Deborah's visits, the more I began to
anticipate them. I fell in love with Deborah, the way young girls often fall in
love with women who are not their mothers. I loved her serene gray eyes, the
ponchos and denim wrap skirts and sandals she wore, her straight hair that she
let me manipulate into all sorts of silly styles. I longed for her casual appearance;
my mother insisted whenever there was a gathering that I wear one of my anklelength, faintly Victorian dresses, which she referred to as maxis, and have party
hair, which meant taking a strand from either side of my head and joining them
with a barrette at the back. At parties, Deborah would, eventually, politely slip
away, much to the relief of the Bengali women with whom she was expected to
carry on a conversation, and she would play with me. I was older than all my
parents' friends' children, but with Deborah I had a companion. She knew all
about the books I read, about Pippi Long-stocking and Anne of Green Gables.
She gave me the sorts of gifts my parents had neither the money nor the
inspiration to buy: a large book of Grimm's Fairy Tales with watercolor
illustrations on thick, silken pages, wooden puppets with hair fashioned from
yarn. She told me about her family, three older sisters and two brothers, the
youngest of whom was closer to my age than to hers. Once, after visiting her
parents, she brought back three Nancy Drews, her name written in a girlish hand
at the top of the first page, and an old toy she'd had, a small paper theater set
with interchangeable backdrops, the exterior of a castle and a ballroom and an
open field. Deborah and I spoke freely in English, a language in which, by that
age, I expressed myself more easily than Bengali, which I was required to speak
at home. Sometimes she asked me how to say this or that in Bengali; once, she
asked me what asobbho meant. I hesitated, then told her it was what my mother
called me if I had done something extremely naughty, and Deborah's face
clouded. I felt protective of her, aware that she was unwanted, that she was
resented, aware of the nasty things people said.
Outings in the Volkswagen now involved the four of us, Deborah in the
front, her hand over Pranab Kaku's while it rested on the gearshift, my mother
and I in the back. Soon, my mother began coming up with reasons to excuse
herself, headaches and incipient colds, and so I became part of a new triangle.
To my surprise, my mother allowed me to go with them, to the Museum of Fine
Arts and the Public Garden and the Aquarium. She was waiting for the affair to
end, for Deborah to break Pranab Kaku's heart and for him to return to us,

scarred and penitent. I saw no sign of their relationship foundering. Their open
affection for each other, their easily expressed happiness, was a new and
romantic thing to me. Having me in the backseat allowed Pranab Kaku and
Deborah to practice for the future, to try on the idea of a family of their own.
Countless photographs were taken of me and Deborah, of me sitting on
Deborah's lap, holding her hand, kissing her on the cheek. We exchanged what I
believed were secret smiles, and in those moments I felt that she understood me
better than anyone else in the world. Anyone would have said that Deborah
would make an excellent mother one day. But my mother refused to
acknowledge such a thing. I did not know at the time that my mother allowed me
to go off with Pranab Kaku and Deborah because she was pregnant for the fifth
time since my birth and was so sick and exhausted and fearful of losing another
baby that she slept most of the day. After ten weeks, she miscarried once again
and was advised by her doctor to stop trying.
By summer, there was a diamond on Deborah's left hand, something my
mother had never been given. Because his own family lived so far away, Pranab
Kaku came to the house alone one day, to ask for my parents' blessing before
giving her the ring. He showed us the box, opening it and taking out the diamond
nestled inside. "I want to see how it looks on someone," he said, urging my
mother to try it on, but she refused. I was the one who stuck out my hand, feeling
the weight of the ring suspended at the base of my finger. Then he asked for a
second thing: he wanted my parents to write to his parents, saying that they had
met Deborah and that they thought highly of her. He was nervous, naturally,
about telling his family that he intended to marry an American girl. He had told
his parents all about us, and at one point my parents had received a letter from
them, expressing appreciation for taking such good care of their son and for
giving him a proper home in America. "It needn't be long," Pranab Kaku said.
"Just a few lines. They'll accept it more easily if it comes from you." My father
thought neither ill nor well of Deborah, never commenting or criticizing as my
mother did, but he assured Pranab Kaku that a letter of endorsement would be on
its way to Calcutta by the end of the week. My mother nodded her assent, but the
following day I saw the teacup Pranab Kaku had used all this time as an ashtray
in the kitchen garbage can, in pieces, and three Band-Aids taped to my mother's
hand.
Pranab Kaku's parents were horrified by the thought of their only son
marrying an American woman, and a few weeks later our telephone rang in the
middle of the night: it was Mr. Chakraborty telling my father that they could not
possibly bless such a marriage, that it was out of the question, that if Pranab
Kaku dared to marry Deborah he would no longer acknowledge him as a son.

Then his wife got on the phone, asking to speak to my mother and attacked her
as if they were intimate, blaming my mother for allowing the affair to develop.
She said that they had already chosen a wife for him in Calcutta, that he'd left for
America with the understanding that he'd go back after he had finished his
studies and marry this girl. They had bought the neighboring flat in their
building for Pranab and his betrothed, and it was sitting empty, waiting for his
return. "We thought we could trust you, and yet you have betrayed us so deeply,"
his mother said, taking out her anger on a stranger in a way she could not with
her son. "Is this what happens to people in America?" For Pranab Kaku's sake,
my mother defended the engagement, telling his mother that Deborah was a
polite girl from a decent family. Pranab Kaku's parents pleaded with mine to talk
him out of it, but my father refused, deciding that it was not their place to get
embroiled. "We are not his parents," he told my mother. "We can tell him they
don't approve but nothing more." And so my parents told Pranab Kaku nothing
about how his parents had berated them and blamed them, and threatened to
disown Pranab Kaku, only that they had refused to give him their blessing. In the
face of this refusal, Pranab Kaku shrugged. "I don't care. Not everyone can be as
open-minded as you," he told my parents. "Your blessing is blessing enough."
After the engagement, Pranab Kaku and Deborah began drifting out of our
lives. They moved in together, to an apartment in Boston, in the South End, a
part of the city my parents considered unsafe. We moved as well, to a house in
Natick. Though my parents had bought the house, they occupied it as if they
were still tenants, touching up scuff marks with leftover paint and reluctant to
put holes in the walls, and every afternoon when the sun shone through the
living-room window my mother closed the blinds so that our new furniture
would not fade. A few weeks before the wedding, my parents invited Pranab
Kaku to the house alone, and my mother prepared a special meal to mark the end
of his bachelorhood. It would be the only Bengali aspect of the wedding; the rest
of it would be strictly American, with a cake and a minister and Deborah in a
long white dress and veil. There is a photograph of the dinner, taken by my
father, the only picture, to my knowledge, in which my mother and Pranab Kaku
appear together. The picture is slightly blurry; I remember Pranab Kaku
explaining to my father how to work the camera, and so he is captured looking
up from the kitchen table and the elaborate array of food my mother had
prepared in his honor, his mouth open, his long arm outstretched and his finger
pointing, instructing my father how to read the light meter or some such thing.
My mother stands beside him, one hand placed on top of his head in a gesture of
blessing, the first and last time she was to touch him in her life. "She will leave

him," my mother told her friends afterward. "He is throwing his life away."
The wedding was at a church in Ipswich, with a reception at a country club.
It was going to be a small ceremony, which my parents took to mean one or two
hundred people as opposed to three or four hundred. My mother was shocked
that fewer than thirty people had been invited, and she was more perplexed than
honored that, of all the Bengalis Pranab Kaku knew by then, we were the only
ones on the list. At the wedding we sat, like the other guests, first on the hard
wooden pews of the church and then at a long table that had been set up for
lunch. Though we were the closest thing Pranab Kaku had to a family that day,
we were not included in the group photographs that were taken on the grounds of
the country club, with Deborah's parents and grandparents and her many
siblings, and neither my mother nor my father got up to make a toast. My mother
did not appreciate the fact that Deborah had made sure that my parents, who did
not eat beef, were given fish instead of filet mignon like everyone else. She kept
speaking in Bengali, complaining about the formality of the proceedings, and the
fact that Pranab Kaku, wearing a tuxedo, barely said a word to us because he
was too busy leaning over the shoulders of his new American in-laws as he
circled the table. As usual, my father said nothing in response to my mother's
commentary, quietly and methodically working though his meal, his fork and
knife occasionally squeaking against the surface of the china, because he was
accustomed to eating with his hands. He cleared his plate and then my mother's,
for she had pronounced the food inedible, and then he announced that he had
overeaten and had a stomachache. The only time my mother forced a smile was
when Deborah appeared behind her chair, kissing her on the cheek and asking if
we were enjoying ourselves.
When the dancing started, my parents remained at the table, drinking tea,
and after two or three songs they decided that it was time for us to go home, my
mother shooting me looks to that effect across the room, where I was dancing in
a circle with Pranab Kaku and Deborah and the other children at the wedding. I
wanted to stay, and when, reluctantly, I walked over to where my parents sat,
Deborah followed me. "Boudi, let Usha stay. She's having such a good time,"
she said to my mother. "Lots of people will be heading back your way, someone
can drop her off in a little while." But my mother said no, I had had plenty of fun
already and forced me to put on my coat over my long puff-sleeved dress. As we
drove home from the wedding I told my mother, for the first but not the last time
in my life, that I hated her.
The following year, we received a birth announcement from the
Chakrabortys, a picture of twin girls, which my mother did not paste into an

album or display on the refrigerator door. The girls were named Srabani and
Sabitri but were called Bonny and Sara. Apart from a thank-you card for our
wedding gift, it was their only communication; we were not invited to the new
house in Marblehead, bought after Pranab Kaku got a high-paying job at Stone
& Webster. For a while, my parents and their friends continued to invite the
Chakrabortys to gatherings, but because they never came, or left after staying
only an hour, the invitations stopped. Their absences were attributed, by my
parents and their circle, to Deborah, and it was universally agreed that she had
stripped Pranab Kaku not only of his origins but of his independence. She was
the enemy, he was her prey, and their example was invoked as a warning, and as
vindication, that mixed marriages were a doomed enterprise. Occasionally, they
surprised everyone, appearing at a pujo for a few hours with their two identical
little girls who barely looked Bengali and spoke only English and were being
raised so differently from me and most of the other children. They were not
taken to Calcutta every summer, they did not have parents who were clinging to
another way of life and exhorting their children to do the same. Because of
Deborah, they were exempt from all that, and for this reason I envied them.
"Usha, look at you, all grown up and so pretty," Deborah would say whenever
she saw me, rekindling, if only for a minute, our bond of years before. She had
cut off her beautiful long hair by then, and had a bob. "I bet you'll be old enough
to babysit soon," she would say. "I'll call you-the girls would love that." But she
never did.
I began to grow out of my girlhood, entering middle school and developing
crushes on the American boys in my class. The crushes amounted to nothing; in
spite of Deborah's compliments, I was always overlooked at that age. But my
mother must have picked up on something, for she forbade me to attend the
dances that were held the last Friday of every month in the school cafeteria, and
it was an unspoken law that I was not allowed to date. "Don't think you'll get
away with marrying an American, the way Pranab Kaku did," she would say
from time to time. I was thirteen, the thought of marriage irrelevant to my life.
Still, her words upset me, and I felt her grip on me tighten. She would fly into a
rage when I told her I wanted to start wearing a bra, or if I wanted to go to
Harvard Square with a friend. In the middle of our arguments, she often conjured
Deborah as her antithesis, the sort of woman she refused to be. "If she were your
mother, she would let you do whatever you wanted, because she wouldn't care.
Is that what you want, Usha, a mother who doesn't care?" When I began
menstruating, the summer before I started ninth grade, my mother gave me a
speech, telling me that I was to let no boy touch me, and then she asked if I knew

how a woman became pregnant. I told her what I had been taught in science,
about the sperm fertilizing the egg, and then she asked if I knew how, exactly,
that happened. I saw the terror in her eyes and so, though I knew that aspect of
procreation as well, I lied, and told her it hadn't been explained to us.
I began keeping other secrets from her, evading her with the aid of my
friends. I told her I was sleeping over at a friend's when really I went to parties,
drinking beer and allowing boys to kiss me and fondle my breasts and press their
erections against my hip as we lay groping on a sofa or the backseat of a car. I
began to pity my mother; the older I got, the more I saw what a desolate life she
led. She had never worked, and during the day she watched soap operas to pass
the time. Her only job, every day, was to clean and cook for my father and me.
We rarely went to restaurants, my father always pointing out, even in cheap
ones, how expensive they were compared with eating at home. When my mother
complained to him about how much she hated life in the suburbs and how lonely
she felt, he said nothing to placate her. "If you are so unhappy, go back to
Calcutta," he would offer, making it clear that their separation would not affect
him one way or the other. I began to take my cues from my father in dealing
with her, isolating her doubly. When she screamed at me for talking too long on
the telephone, or for staying too long in my room, I learned to scream back,
telling her that she was pathetic, that she knew nothing about me, and it was
clear to us both that I had stopped needing her, definitively and abruptly, just as
Pranab Kaku had.
Then, the year before I went off to college, my parents and I were invited to
the Chakrabortys' home for Thanksgiving. We were not the only guests from my
parents' old Cambridge crowd; it turned out that Pranab Kaku and Deborah
wanted to have a sort of reunion of all the people they had been friendly with
back then. Normally, my parents did not celebrate Thanksgiving; the ritual of a
large sit-down dinner and the foods that one was supposed to eat was lost on
them. They treated it as if it were Memorial Day or Veterans Day-just another
holiday in the American year. But we drove out to Marblehead, to an impressive
stone-faced house with a semicircular gravel driveway clogged with cars. The
house was a short walk from the ocean; on our way, we had driven by the harbor
overlooking the cold, glittering Atlantic, and when we stepped out of the car we
were greeted by the sound of gulls and waves. Most of the living-room furniture
had been moved to the basement and extra tables joined to the main one to form
a giant U. They were covered with tablecloths, set with white plates and
silverware, and had centerpieces of gourds. I was struck by the toys and dolls
that were everywhere, dogs that shed long yellow hairs on everything, all the
photographs of Bonny and Sara and Deborah decorating the walls, still more

plastering the refrigerator door. Food was being prepared when we arrived,
something my mother always frowned upon, the kitchen a chaos of people and
smells and enormous dirtied bowls.
Deborah's family, whom we remembered dimly from the wedding, was
there, her parents and her brothers and sisters and their husbands and wives and
boyfriends and babies. Her sisters were in their thirties, but, like Deborah, they
could have been mistaken for college students, wearing jeans and clogs and
fisherman sweaters, and her brother Matty, with whom I had danced in a circle at
the wedding, was now a freshman at Amherst, with wide-set green eyes and
wispy brown hair and a complexion that reddened easily. As soon as I saw
Deborah's siblings, joking with one another as they chopped and stirred things in
the kitchen, I was furious with my mother for making a scene before we left the
house and forcing me to wear a shal-war kameez. I knew they assumed, from my
clothing, that I had more in common with the other Bengalis than with them. But
Deborah insisted on including me, setting me to work peeling apples with Matty,
and out of my parents' sight I was given beer to drink. When the meal was ready,
we were told where to sit, in an alternating boy-girl formation that made the
Bengalis uncomfortable. Bottles of wine were lined up on the table. Two turkeys
were brought out, one stuffed with sausage and one without. My mouth watered
at the food, but I knew that afterward, on our way home, my mother would
complain that it was all tasteless and bland. "Impossible," my mother said,
shaking her hand over the top of her glass when someone tried to pour her a little
wine.
Deborah's father, Gene, got up to say grace, and asked everyone at the table
to join hands. He bowed his head and closed his eyes. "Dear Lord, we thank you
today for the food we are about to receive," he began. My parents were seated
next to each other, and I was stunned to see that they complied, that my father's
brown fingers lightly clasped my mother's pale ones. I noticed Matty seated on
the other side of the room and saw him glancing at me as his father spoke. After
the chorus of Amens, Gene raised his glass and said, "Forgive me, but I never
thought I'd have the opportunity to say this: Here's to Thanksgiving with the
Indians." Only a few people laughed at the joke.
Then Pranab Kaku stood up and thanked everyone for coming. He was
relaxed from alcohol, his once wiry body beginning to thicken. He started to talk
sentimentally about his early days in Cambridge, and then suddenly he recounted
the story of meeting me and my mother for the first time, telling the guests about
how he had followed us that afternoon. The people who did not know us
laughed, amused by the description of the encounter, and by Pranab Kaku's
desperation. He walked around the room to where my mother was sitting and

draped a lanky arm around her shoulder, forcing her, for a brief moment, to
stand up. "This woman," he declared, pulling her close to his side, "this woman
hosted my first real Thanksgiving in America. It might have been an afternoon in
May, but that first meal at Boudi's table was Thanksgiving to me. If it weren't for
that meal, I would have gone back to Calcutta." My mother looked away,
embarrassed. She was thirty-eight, already going gray, and she looked closer to
my father's age than to Pranab Kaku's; regardless of his waistline, he retained his
handsome, carefree looks. Pranab Kaku went back to his place at the head of the
table, next to Deborah, and concluded, "And if that had been the case I'd have
never met you, my darling," and he kissed her on the mouth in front of everyone,
to much applause, as if it were their wedding day all over again.
After the turkey, smaller forks were distributed and orders were taken for
three different kinds of pie, written on small pads by Deborah's sisters, as if they
were waitresses. After dessert, the dogs needed to go out, and Pranab Kaku
volunteered to take them. "How about a walk on the beach?" he suggested, and
Deborah's side of the family agreed that that was an excellent idea. None of the
Bengalis wanted to go, preferring to sit with their tea and cluster together, at last,
at one end of the room, speaking freely after the forced chitchat with the
Americans during the meal. Matty came over and sat in the chair beside me that
was now empty, encouraging me to join the walk. When I hesitated, pointing to
my inappropriate clothes and shoes but also aware of my mother's silent fury at
the sight of us together, he said, "I'm sure Deb can lend you something." So I
went upstairs, where Deborah gave me a pair of her jeans and a thick sweater
and some sneakers, so that I looked like her and her sisters.
She sat on the edge of her bed, watching me change, as if we were
girlfriends, and she asked if I had a boyfriend. When I told her no, she said,
"Matty thinks you're cute."
"He told you?"
"No, but I can tell."
As I walked back downstairs, emboldened by this information, in the jeans
I'd had to roll up and in which I felt finally like myself, I noticed my mother lift
her eyes from her teacup and stare at me, but she said nothing, and off I went,
with Pranab Kaku and his dogs and his in-laws, along a road and then down
some steep wooden steps to the water. Deborah and one of her sisters stayed
behind, to begin the cleanup and see to the needs of those who remained.
Initially, we all walked together, in a single row across the sand, but then I
noticed Matty hanging back, and so the two of us trailed behind, the distance
between us and the others increasing. We began flirting, talking of things I no
longer remember, and eventually we wandered into a rocky inlet and Matty

fished a joint out of his pocket. We turned our backs to the wind and smoked it,
our cold fingers touching in the process, our lips pressed to the same damp
section of the rolling paper. At first I didn't feel any effect, but then, listening to
him talk about the band he was in, I was aware that his voice sounded miles
away, and that I had the urge to laugh, even though what he was saying was not
terribly funny. It felt as if we were apart from the group for hours, but when we
wandered back to the sand we could still see them, walking out onto a
promontory to watch the sun set.
It was dark by the time we all headed back to the house, and I dreaded
seeing my parents while I was still high. But when we got there Deborah told me
that my parents, feeling tired, had left, agreeing to let someone drive me home
later. A fire had been lit and I was told to relax and have more pie as the
leftovers were put away and the living room slowly put back in order. Of course,
it was Matty who drove me home, and sitting in my parents' driveway I kissed
him, at once thrilled and terrified that my mother might walk onto the lawn in
her nightgown and discover us. I gave Matty my phone number, and for a few
weeks I thought of him constantly, and hoped foolishly that he would call.
In the end, my mother was right, and fourteen years after that
Thanksgiving, after twenty-three years of marriage, Pranab Kaku and Deborah
got divorced. It was he who had strayed, falling in love with a married Bengali
woman, destroying two families in the process. The other woman was someone
my parents knew, though not very well. Deborah was in her forties by then,
Bonny and Sara away at college. In her shock and grief, it was my mother whom
Deborah turned to, calling and weeping into the phone. Somehow, through all
the years, she had continued to regard us as quasi in-laws, sending flowers when
my grandparents died and giving me a compact edition of the O.E.D. as a
college-graduation present. "You knew him so well. How could he do something
like this?" Deborah asked my mother. And then, "Did you know anything about
it?" My mother answered truthfully that she did not. Their hearts had been
broken by the same man, only my mother's had long ago mended, and in an odd
way, as my parents approached their old age, she and my father had grown fond
of each other, out of habit if nothing else. I believe my absence from the house,
once I left for college, had something to do with this, because over the years,
when I visited, I noticed a warmth between my parents that had not been there
before, a quiet teasing, a solidarity, a concern when one of them fell ill. My
mother and I had also made peace; she had accepted the fact that I was not only
her daughter but a child of America as well. Slowly, she accepted that I dated
one American man, and then another, and then yet another, that I slept with

them, and even that I lived with one though we were not married. She welcomed
my boyfriends into our home and when things didn't work out she told me I
would find someone better. After years of being idle, she decided, when she
turned fifty, to get a degree in library science at a nearby university.
On the phone, Deborah admitted something that surprised my mother: that
all these years she had felt hopelessly shut out of a part of Pranab Kaku's life. "I
was so horribly jealous of you back then, for knowing him, understanding him in
a way I never could. He turned his back on his family, on all of you, really, but I
still felt threatened. I could never get over that." She told my mother that she had
tried, for years, to get Pranab Kaku to reconcile with his parents, and that she
had also encouraged him to maintain ties with other Bengalis, but he had
resisted. It had been Deborah's idea to invite us to their Thanksgiving; ironically,
the other woman had been there, too. "I hope you don't blame me for taking him
away from your lives, Boudi. I always worried that you did."
My mother assured Deborah that she blamed her for nothing. She confessed
nothing to Deborah about her own jealousy of decades before, only that she was
sorry for what had happened, that it was a sad and terrible thing for their family.
She did not tell Deborah that a few weeks after Pranab Kaku's wedding, while I
was at a Girl Scout meeting and my father was at work, she had gone through
the house, gathering up all the safety pins that lurked in drawers and tins, and
adding them to the few fastened to her bracelets. When she'd found enough, she
pinned them to her sari one by one, attaching the front piece to the layer of
material underneath, so that no one would be able to pull the garment off her
body. Then she took a can of lighter fluid and a box of kitchen matches and
stepped outside, into our chilly backyard, which was full of leaves needing to be
raked. Over her sari she was wearing a knee-length lilac trench coat, and to any
neighbor she must have looked as though she'd simply stepped out for some
fresh air. She opened up the coat and removed the tip from the can of lighter
fluid and doused herself, then buttoned and belted the coat. She walked over to
the garbage barrel behind our house and disposed of the fluid, then returned to
the middle of the yard with the box of matches in her coat pocket. For nearly an
hour she stood there, looking at our house, trying to work up the courage to
strike a match. It was not I who saved her, or my father, but our next-door
neighbor, Mrs. Holcomb, with whom my mother had never been particularly
friendly. She came out to rake the leaves in her yard, calling out to my mother
and remarking how beautiful the sunset was. "I see you've been admiring it for a
while now," she said. My mother agreed, and then she went back into the house.
By the time my father and I came home in the early evening, she was in the
kitchen boiling rice for our dinner, as if it were any other day.

My mother told Deborah none of this. It was to me that she confessed, after
my own heart was broken by a man I'd hoped to marry.

A Choice of Accommodations
From the outside the hotel looked promising, like an old ski lodge in the
mountains: chocolate brown siding, a steeply pitched roof, red trim around the
windows. But as soon as they entered the lobby of the Chadwick Inn, Amit was
disappointed: the place was without character, renovated in pastel colors,
squiggly gray lines a part of the wallpaper's design, as if someone had repeatedly
been testing the ink in a pen and ultimately had nothing to say. By the front desk
a revolving brass rack was filled with tourist brochures about the Berkshires, and
Megan grabbed a handful as Amit checked in. Now the brochures were scattered
across one of the two double beds in their room. Megan unfolded the cover of a
brochure to reveal a map. "Where are we, exactly?" she asked, her finger trailing
too far to the north.
"Here," Amit said, pointing to the town. "There's the lake, see? The one that
sort of looks like a rabbit." "I don't see it," Megan said.
"Right here." Amit took Megan's finger and drew it firmly to the spot.
"I mean, I don't get how the lake's supposed to look like a rabbit."
It had been a long drive from New York and Amit was in the mood for a
drink. But there was no minibar, and no room service. The two double beds were
covered in flowery maroon quilts, and across from them, a wide dresser held a
television set at its center. A small paper pyramid sat on a square table between
the beds, listing the local cable channels. The only pleasant feature in the room
was a cathedral ceiling with exposed beams. In spite of this the room was dark;
even with the curtains to the balcony drawn apart, all the lights needed to be
turned on.
They were here for Pam Borden's wedding, which was to take place that
evening at Langford Academy, a boarding school where Pam's father was
headmaster, and from where Amit had graduated eighteen years ago. There had
been an option to sleep, for twenty dollars a person, at one of the Langford
dorms, empty now because it was August. But Amit had decided to splurge on
the Chadwick Inn, which was slightly removed from campus, and offered a pool,
a tennis court, a restaurant with two stars, and access to the shaded lake in which
he'd been taught, as a teenager, to kayak and canoe. Talking it over with Megan,
they'd agreed to drop off the girls at her parents' place on Long Island and book a
room for both Saturday and Sunday, making a short vacation out of Pam's
wedding, just the two of them.
Amit unlocked the sliding glass door and stepped out onto the balcony, a

strip of cement containing two plastic chairs. The Northeast was in the middle of
a heat wave and even up in the mountains it was sultry, but the purity of the air,
with its sharp scent of pine, felt restorative. He was unsettled by how quiet it
was. No little girls' voices calling out to one another, no reprimands or
endearments coming from Megan. The car ride had been the same, Megan
asleep, the backseat empty even though he kept looking in the rearview mirror,
expecting to see his daughters' faces as they dozed or quarreled or chewed on
bagels. He sat down now in one of the chairs, which was not very comfortable.
He felt cheated. "I can't believe they charge two hundred and fifty dollars a night
for this," he said.
"It's crazy," Megan said, joining him. "But I guess they can get away with
it, given that we're in the middle of nowhere."
It was true, they were in the middle of nowhere, though he did not feel the
same way. He'd known, without having to review a map, which roads to take
after exiting the highway, remembered which direction the town was in. But he
had never been to this hotel. His parents had not stayed here for parents'
weekends; when Amit was at Langford they had lived in India, in New Delhi.
They hadn't made it to his graduation, either. They'd been planning to, but Amit's
father, an ophthalmologist at one of Delhi's best hospitals, was requested to
perform cataract surgery on a member of Parliament, and so Bengali
acquaintances of his parents' from Worcester attended in their stead. After
graduating, Amit had not kept in touch with his Langford friends. He had no
nostalgia for the school, and when letters came seeking alumni contributions or
inviting him to the succession of reunions, he threw them out without opening
them. Apart from his loose connection with Pam, and a sweatshirt he still owned
with the school's wrinkled name across the chest, there was nothing to remind
him of those years of his life. He couldn't imagine sending his daughters to
Langford-couldn't imagine letting go of them as his parents had let go of him.
He looked out at the hotel grounds. A pine tree growing directly in front of
their balcony obstructed most of the immediate view. The pool was small and
uninviting, surrounded by a chain-link fence, with no one swimming or
sunbathing on its periphery. To the right were the tennis courts, concealed by
more pine trees, but he could hear the soft thwack of a ball flying back and forth,
a sound that made him tired.
"It's a shame about this tree," he said.
"If only it were a few feet that way," Megan agreed. "Maybe we should ask
for another room. It wouldn't be the first time."
Amit and Megan had a tradition, in their relationship, of switching hotel
rooms. On the first trip they'd taken together after they met, to Puerto Rico,

they'd gotten a room on the ground floor, and there was a dead lizard in the
bathroom. Megan complained and they were switched to a deluxe suite
overlooking the mesmerizing blue-green ocean and the contrasting blue of the
sky. For the entirety of their stay they kept the curtains open to that view,
making love sideways on the bed as they faced it, waking to it in the mornings,
the effect being as if the whole room, and the bed, and they themselves, were
somehow afloat on the sea. A similar thing had happened in Venice, where
they'd gone to celebrate their first anniversary-after one night facing a stone
wall, they moved to a room by a canal, where a small barge docked each
morning selling fruits and vegetables. In this case, Amit reflected, they were
already on the desirable side of the hotel-the rooms at the front would overlook
the parking lot.
"It's not worth it, for just two nights," Megan said. She leaned slightly
forward in her chair and peered over the railing of the balcony, craning her neck.
"Is the wedding here at the hotel?"
"I told you, it's at Langford."
"Well, another couple is about to get married in that gazebo. I see
bridesmaids."
Amit looked on the other side of the pine tree and saw people filing out
along a flagstone path that led from the terrace of the hotel restaurant. A
photographer leaned over a tripod, surrounded by bags of equipment, and in
front of him, a group of young women posed in matching lavender dresses.
"Pam's wedding will be different," he said.
"What do you mean?"
"She won't have bridesmaids." "How do you know?" "She's not the type."
"You never know," Megan said. "A lot of women do things that are out of
character on their wedding day. Even women like Pam."
Her slight derision washed over him, not penetrating. He knew Megan had
been surprised that he'd accepted the invitation to Pam's wedding, given that he
and Pam rarely saw each other. And though Megan hadn't protested, he
understood that on some level he had dragged her here, to an unfamiliar place
full of unfamiliar people, to a piece of his past that had nothing to do with the
life he and Megan shared. He knew that though Megan refused to admit it, she
was insecure about Pam, defensive the one or two times they'd met, as if Amit
and Pam had once been lovers. When Amit and Megan had first met they'd
traded their histories, divulging the succession of romantic interests that led them
to each other, but he'd never mentioned Pam in that context. He had loved her, it
was true, but because she'd never been his girlfriend there had been nothing to
explain.He slouched in his chair, resting his neck on the hard plastic edge and

shut his eyes. "I could use a drink."
They stepped back into the air-conditioned room and he opened the suitcase
they were sharing for the weekend. He pulled out the thick envelope containing
the invitation, directions, a small map of Langford's campus with the ceremony
and reception locations marked with a highlighter. He sat on the bed, leaning
against a pile of extremely soft pillows, sinking down. Then he looked at the
digital clock that was beside the paper pyramid on the bedside table. "The
wedding starts in an hour. We should get pillows like this at home."
"Then we'd better get ready." Megan regarded him with a look of
professional concern, as if he were a patient on her rounds. "What's wrong?"
"Nothing. I was just hoping we'd have some time beforehand, to go for a
walk or swim in the lake. I was thinking about a swim all the way up here. I
didn't think the traffic would be so bad."
"We'll swim tomorrow," she said. "We have a whole weekend."
He nodded. "Right." He stood up and went into the bathroom, to shave and
to shower. These everyday rituals felt like a chore. He was uninspired to put on
his suit and socialize with ghosts from his adolescence. He undressed, then stood
in front of the mirror spreading shaving cream on his face. Since Monika's birth
three years ago, this was their first trip without either of the girls. They were
overdue for a vacation. Normally, every summer, they rented a cabin for two
weeks in the Adiron-dacks. But Megan was in the last year of her residency at
Mount Sinai, and her schedule did not allow it. She'd just finished a rotation in
the cardiac intensive-care unit, working thirty-six-hour shifts, returning to the
apartment at dawn, falling asleep just as Amit and the girls were beginning their
day. Amit, who worked as the managing editor for a medical journal, had a more
flexible schedule. Summer was a slow time at the journal, and since June he'd
been overseeing the girls' breakfasts and baths, scheduling playdates, dropping
Maya off at a day camp in the mornings and picking her up again. Reducing
their nanny's hours for the summer months was one of the ways he and Megan
had decided to cut back on expenses; the down payment on their new apartment,
two stories of a brownstone on West Seventy-fifth Street, had depleted their
savings.
He sensed Megan's relief at not having Maya and Monika around, at being
free. Amit wanted to share that relief, that sense of escape he'd been looking
forward to all summer, after the invitation to Pam's wedding had come and
they'd made their plan. But now that they were alone he was nagged by the
thought of Monika's runny nose, and wondered if his motherin-law would
remember that strawberries gave Maya a rash. He was tempted to ask Megan,
but he stopped himself, knowing that she would accuse him of not trusting his

in-laws. As a parent she was less fussy, less cautious than he was. On her days
off she indulged them, baking with them in the kitchen, not minding if they
skipped dinner because they were too full of cookies and cake. He knew that it
was partly out of guilt that she tended to be lenient, but it was also her nature.
She had not been horrified, as he had, when Maya found a wad of flattened
chewing gum at the playing ground and put it into her mouth, or when Monika
wandered off during a picnic they were having in Central Park and began
playing, with her tiny fingers, with dog shit. Megan laughed at such moments,
wiping off their hands and faces, convinced that her children could survive
anything. She spent her days with people who were fighting for their lives, and
could not be shaken by a scraped elbow or a hundred-degree fever.
It was Amit, who had studied enough about the body to know its inherent
fragility, who had dissected enough cadavers to know what a horizontal chest
incision would reveal, who was plagued by his daughters' vulnerability, both to
illness and to accidents of all kinds. He was still haunted by an incident in the
cafeteria of the Museum of Natural History, when Monika, a year old, had nearly
choked on a piece of dried apricot. A woman at a neighboring table who
happened to be a nurse had leapt up at the sound of Monika's coughing and
efficiently swept her finger through the girl's mouth; in spite of two years of
medical school, Amit lacked the simple instinct, the confidence, to do such a
thing. He had been unable to look at either of his daughters for the rest of the
day, to enjoy their time at the museum. He kept picturing the apricot piece
lodged in Monika's windpipe, and how it might have silenced her forever. When
he read articles in the newspaper about taxis suddenly swerving onto sidewalks
and killing half a dozen pedestrians, it was always himself he pictured, holding
Monika and Maya by the hand. Or he imagined a wave at Jones Beach, where he
had been taking them once a week during the summer, dragging one of them
down, or a pile of sand suffocating them as he was flipping, a few feet away,
through a magazine. In each of these scenarios, he saw himself surviving, the
girls perishing under his supervision. Megan would blame him, naturally, and
then she would divorce him, and all of it, his life with her and the girls, would
end. A brief glance in the wrong direction, he knew, could toss his existence
over a cliff.
He lay down his razor and turned on the shower to warm up the room. He
heard a knock, and then Megan opened the door.
"I can't go to the wedding," she said, shaking her head. She said this
definitively, the way she told the girls that they weren't allowed to watch another
program on television, or spend another five minutes in the tub.
"What are you talking about?"

"Look," she said, pointing to the skirt she'd put on. Above it she wore only
her bra, flesh-colored and dingy at the straps. The skirt reached her ankles, and it
was made of a diaphanous, smoky gray material, layered over a silk panel of a
slightly darker shade. She held up a section, and his eyes went immediately to a
spot in the fabric. At first he thought it was a stain, but then he realized it was a
burn that had created a small empty patch, charred around the edges. Beneath it,
the silk lining looked unsightly, like the bright flesh exposed when a scab is
forcibly lifted away.
"It looks awful," she said. "There's no way to hide it."
"Did you pack a spare outfit?"
She shook her head, looking at him with annoyance. "Did you?"
Amit wiped his hands on a towel and sat on the lid of the toilet seat.
Running his hands between the two layers of fabric, he felt the gauzy material
brushing his palm, the silk at the back of his fingers. In medical school he'd
considered being a surgeon, learning to piece together the most minuscule
tissues of the body. But he'd never made it to any rotations, had only learned
from textbooks and labs. As far as he could see there was no hope for repairing
the skirt. It was so simple, so sheer, that the missing patch, through which the
pad of one of his fingers was now visible, had ruined it.
"I can't believe I didn't notice when I was packing," Megan said. "It must
have happened the last time I wore it. Sparks from a cigarette or something."
He knew it wasn't her fault, and yet he couldn't stop himself from blaming
her a little, for not paying closer attention. And he couldn't help but wonder if it
was an unconscious move on her part, to avoid Pam's wedding, to sabotage
things. It occurred to him that with the excuse of Megan's skirt they might blow
off the wedding altogether and spend the night in the hotel, watching movies in
bed. Their absence would go unnoticed in such a big crowd, their place settings
ignored as the waiters circled the tables. Had the Chadwick Inn been nicer he
might have been tempted.
"Is there a store nearby?" Megan asked. "Somewhere I could dash out and
buy something else while you get ready?"
"There used to be a mall, but it was about an hour's drive from here. I don't
remember any clothing stores in town. Not nice ones."
She turned the skirt to one side, so that the burn was no longer visible from
the front. Then she stood beside him in front of the mirror over the sink, their
bare arms touching. Normally Megan did not wear makeup, but for the occasion
she had painted her mouth with a reddish lipstick. He found it distracting,
preferred the intelligent, old-fashioned beauty of her face. It was the face of
someone he could imagine living in a previous era, a simpler time, in an

America that was oblivious to India altogether. Her dark brown hair was wound
up as always, pulled away without fuss from her face and her long pale neck.
She wore glasses, frameless oval lenses that seemed necessary to protect her
sensitive gaze. They were the same height, five foot nine, tall for a woman but
short for a man, and she was five years older, forty-two. And yet of the two of
them it was Amit who already looked, at first glance, middle-aged, for by the
age of twenty-one his hair had turned completely gray. It was here, at Langford,
that it had begun, when he was in the sixth form. At first it was just a few
strands, well concealed in his black hair. But by the time he was a junior at
Columbia it was the black hairs he could count on one hand. He'd read it was
possible, after a traumatic experience, for a person's hair to turn gray in youth.
But there had been no sudden death he could point to, no accident. No profound
life change, apart from his parents sending him to Langford.
"I suppose if you stood right next to me all night, no one would notice,"
Megan said, pressing up against him. He felt the warmth of her arms and a
twitch of desire, too mired by exhaustion to act upon.
"Do you really think you can survive a whole evening without leaving my
side?" he asked her.
"I can if you can." There was a note of challenge in her voice, and Amit
smiled, amused by the idea, motivated to go to the wedding now that he would
have a specific task to perform. At the same time he thought that in the early
days of their love this would not have been an issue, their bodies continuously
touching through the course of an evening, something that would have been
taken for granted.
"It's a deal," he said.
They looked at their reflections in the mirror, she in her torn skirt and dingy
bra, he naked, his penis flaccid, his face covered with bright white shaving
cream. Megan shook her head. "What a vision we'll be."
He'd assumed they'd walk to the school-it was just across the road, a few
minutes over a sloping field. But Megan was wearing heels and didn't want to
get them muddy, so they got into the car. The seats were still full of evidence of
their daughters-abandoned books, tiny dolls, the plastic horses Maya had begun
collecting. Only the car seats were gone, transferred into his in-laws' car for the
weekend. He thought of the girls now at their grandparents', playing in the
treehouse his father-in-law had built for their occasional visits, his motherin-law
providing slices of pound cake and juice boxes for a tea party. His daughters
looked nothing like him, nothing like his family, and in spite of the distance
Amit felt from his parents, this fact bothered him, that his mother and father had
passed down nothing, physically, to his children. Both Maya and Monika had

inherited Megan's coloring, without a trace of Amit's deeply tan skin and black
eyes, so that apart from their vaguely Indian names they appeared fully
American. "Are they yours?" people sometimes asked when he was alone with
them, in stores, or at the playground in the park.
After just two minutes they pulled off the road and turned up the wide treelined drive that led to the gates of the school. The leaves were glossy and
abundant, but his memories were of the blazing branches of autumn and the
purplish light of the mountains, the shadows that spread in their curves and dips,
and the snow that covered the tops of the gates in winter. The school itself was
more or less as he remembered it, embarrassingly large and well maintained,
pieces of rounded abstract sculpture here and there on the grass.
"This place is nicer than where I went to college," Megan said as they
walked across the campus, taking in the pristine buildings, the sculptures.
"It's a bit over the top," he said. When they'd first met
Megan had been impressed by his prep school education, but at the same
time she'd teased him about it. She was not bitter toward the privileged, but she
was sometimes judgmental; were he not Indian, Megan would have probably
avoided someone like him. She was the youngest of five children, her father a
policeman, her mother a kindergarten teacher. She'd gotten a job after graduating
from high school, in a photocopy store during the days and as a telemarketer in
the evenings, not beginning college until she was twenty, going part time
because she'd had to continue working. In that sense, she worked harder than
anyone he'd ever known, including his own father and his parents' uniformly
successful crowd of Bengali friends. Megan's ordinary background had
displeased his parents, as had the fact that she was five years older than he was.
Her stark prettiness, her refusal to wear contact lenses, her height, had not
charmed them. The fact that she was a doctor did not make up for it. If anything,
it made their disappointment in Amit worse.
He noticed new wings tacked onto some of the buildings, modern elements
of steel and glass alongside the brick and white cupolas. His parents had plucked
him out of public school in Winchester, Massachusetts, where he'd been raised,
and sent him here, for they'd decided when Amit was in the eighth grade to move
back to India. He still remembered the night his parents told him their plans.
They were sitting in a seafood restaurant on the Cape, in Cotuit, overlooking the
water, the table heaped with the bright red claws and shells from which his
father had effortlessly extracted the meat for all of them. His father began by
saying he was growing restless on the faculty of Harvard Medical School, that
there was a hospital in Delhi where he believed he was needed. Amit had been
stunned by his parents' decision-his parents, unlike most other Bengalis in

Massachusetts, had always been dismissive, even critical, of India, never
homesick or sentimental. His mother had short hair and wore trousers, putting on
saris only for special occasions. His father kept a liquor cabinet and liked a gin
and tonic before his meals. They both came from wealthy families, had both
summered in hill stations and attended boarding schools in India themselves.
The relative affluence of America never impressed them; in many ways they had
lived more privileged lives in India, but they left the country and had not looked
back.
At the restaurant his father pulled out the admissions packet for Langford,
showing photographs of the campus, smiling students gathered around classroom
tables, teachers standing in front of blackboards, caught midsentence by the
camera's lens. Academically it was far superior to the school he'd been attending,
his father told him, mentioning the percentage of Langford graduates who went
on to Ivy League colleges. Amit realized, as his father spoke, that the position in
Delhi had been accepted, their house in Winchester already put up for sale.
There was no question of his going to school in Delhi; it wasn't worth the trouble
to adjust to education in a different country, his father said, given that eventually
Amit would be attending an American college.
From Langford, during Christmas after each academic year came to an end,
Amit went to Delhi to be with his parents, staying in their flat full of servants in
Chittaranjan Park, in a barren room set aside for his stays. He never enjoyed his
visits to Delhi, his broken Bengali of no use in that city. It made him miss
Calcutta, where all his relatives lived, where he was used to going. His parents
had moved to Delhi the year of Indira Gandhi's assassination, and the riots that
subsequently raged there, the curfews and the constant vigilance with which his
parents had to live, meant that Amit remained cooped up inside, without friends,
without anything to do. In that sense it was a relief to him to return to this
peaceful town. Four years later his parents were back in America, moving to
Houston. In Delhi his father had perfected a laser technique to correct
astigmatism that earned him invitations to work and teach in hospitals all over
the world. After five years in Houston they'd moved yet again, to Lausanne,
Switzerland. They lived in Saudi Arabia now.
At Langford, Amit was the only Indian student, and people always assumed
that he'd been born and raised in that country and not in Massachusetts. They
complimented him on his accent, always telling him how good his English was.
He'd arrived when he was fifteen, for sophomore year, which at Langford was
called the fourth form, and by that time friendships and alliances among the boys
of his class were already in place. At his high school in Winchester he'd been a
star student, but suddenly he'd had to work doggedly to maintain his grades. He

had to wear a jacket every morning to his classes and call his teachers "masters"
and attend chapel on Sundays. Quickly he learned that his parents' wealth was
laughable compared to the majority of Langford boys. There was no escape at
the end of the day, and though he admitted it to no one, especially not his parents
when they called from Delhi every weekend, he was crippled with
homesickness, missing his parents to the point where tears often filled his eyes,
in those first months, without warning. He sought traces of his parents' faces and
voices among the people who surrounded and cared for him, but there was
absolutely nothing, no one, at Langford to remind him of them. After that first
semester he had slipped as best as he could into this world, swimming
competitively, calling boys by their last names, always wearing khakis because
jeans were not allowed. He learned to live without his mother and father, as
everyone else did, shedding his daily dependence on them even though he was
still a boy, and even to enjoy it. Still, he refused to forgive them.
Every Thanksgiving, he and the other students who had nowhere to go were
taken in by Pam's family-boys who were from Santiago and Tehran and other
troubled parts of the world, or were the sons of diplomats and journalists who
moved around even more frequently than Amit's parents. They would eat in the
Bordens' house, located at one end of the campus, with Pam and her three
brothers, all of whom went to different boarding schools but always came home
for the holidays. For Amit it was the highlight of each year. He and all the other
boys were in love with Pam, who was the only girl in her family, the only girl on
campus, the only girl, it had felt back then, in the world. They would pray to be
seated close to her at the table, and for weeks afterward they would talk about
her, imagining her life at Northfield Mount Hermon, imagining what her breasts
looked like, or the feel of her light brown poker-straight hair, wondering what it
was like in the morning, messily trailing over her back. They wondered about
the room upstairs, where Pam slept when she came home. They noticed if she ate
white meat or dark, and they noticed the year she did not eat any turkey at all.
She seemed fully aware of their admiration, flattered but off-limits. She was
that rare, unsettling thing, a teenage girl already conscious of her power over
men while at the same time uninterested in them. She was comfortable with the
opposite sex in a way most girls were not, perhaps because she'd grown up in a
house full of boys. The Bordens were forthright people, all of them, even the
children, trained to act as friendly hosts for the students who washed up at their
holiday table. Pam would talk to Amit and the others, asking each of them about
their courses as if she were her mother's age and not a girl of fifteen. And then
they would disappear from her consciousness until the following year. After the
meal, Headmaster Borden would take them out onto the lawn for a game of

touch football with Pam's brothers. Or they stayed inside, where Mrs. Borden,
who taught French at the school, would conduct complicated word games or
charades.
In his final year at Langford Amit was admitted to Columbia University.
No one else from his class was going there, but then one day Headmaster Borden
told Amit that Pam had decided on Columbia, too. "Keep an eye on her for me,"
the headmaster said, but it was Pam who'd called first in that same ambassadorial
way her parents had, even though New York City, and the world of college, was
as foreign to her as it was to him. Suddenly, because she had decided so, they
were friends. They would go to dinner twice a week after the religion class they
took together, either to Cafe Pertutti, treating themselves to creamy plates of
pasta, or to La Rosita for caffe con leche and rice and beans. After that they
would study in the same small room in Butler Library, sitting across from each
other on armchairs, reading Milton and Marx. Odd things made him love her.
The fact that she never put her books into a backpack or a bag, hugging them
instead against her chest. That she always appeared somehow underdressed, still
wearing a fringed suede jacket at a time of year when everyone else was bundled
in wool and down. That the last two letters in her name were the first two in his,
a silly thing he never mentioned to her but caused him to believe that they were
bound together.
He'd wondered at first if it was romantic but quickly realized that she was
involved in affairs, that he was just a friend. She was used to being surrounded
by men who, like her brothers, were protective of her, loyal to her, who paid
court without seducing her. And she had appointed Amit to play that role while
they were in college. She would ask him to investigate boys she was curious
about, learning about their reputations, their history, before deciding whether to
pursue them. In exchange she would give him advice on how to approach other
girls, how most effectively to flirt with them. It was Pam who had coached Amit
through his first college relationship, with
Ellen Craddock, going out of her way and befriending Ellen just for the
sake of being able to throw her and Amit together on College Walk.
Only once had Amit worked up the nerve to make a pass at Pam, in their
sophomore year, kissing her after getting drunk at a party and putting his hand
on her breast, on top of a dark green turtleneck sweater she was wearing. She
had kissed him back, allowed him to touch her, but then she'd drawn away, as if
she'd known all along that one day this would happen. "Now we know what that
feels like," she told him, and he knew then that it was impossible, that she did
not like him in that way. She had indulged him, just as her family had indulged
him once a year in their home, offering a small piece of herself and then shutting

the door.
Although Pam still lived in New York, selling foreign rights at a literary
agency, these days they saw each other, at best, once or twice a year, usually by
accident, on a subway or a street corner or a crowded exhibit at the Metropolitan.
But he was permanently on her mailing list, and therefore he received cards at
Christmas, and even on his birthday-she was the type to remember that sort of
thing. When she learned that Amit and Megan had gotten married, she sent them
candlesticks from Tiffany's. And when the girls were born, expensive gifts
arrived, European dresses and cashmere blankets for their strollers. There had
been no phone call from her to tell him she was getting married, only the
invitation. And after all these years, Amit felt both quietly elated and solicitous,
as contact from Pam and the Bordens had always made him feel, causing him to
set aside whatever it was that he was doing and pay them his full attention.
Guests were gathered under a beautiful tree where a bar had been set up,
offering cocktails before the ceremony. On the lawn were rows of white folding
chairs, overlooking the deceptively gentle milky-blue mountains. Over them, the
sun was just beginning to set. It was here, at this precise spot, that he'd
graduated. He'd looked different that day, leaner in frame, his hair still
predominantly black. It was Pam, in college, who'd forbidden him to color it,
telling him it was distinguished, that women would be drawn to it. He hadn't
believed her but she was right; every woman he'd ever been involved with had
confessed, at one point or another, that they found his gray hair sexy.
"Other side," Megan said as they approached the crowd. He moved over to
her left and matched his stride to hers. Side by side they took their place in the
line for drinks. There was the usual array of bottles, and two punch bowls full of
lemonade. "Spiked or unspiked?" the bartender asked. They got two glasses of
the spiked and approached the lawn, sipping their sweet, potent drinks. He
looked around at the faces, at men carrying toddlers on their shoulders, mothers
shushing babies in their carriers, nannies chasing after older children. The
nannies seemed young, high school students, he guessed, hired for the occasion.
The fathers were pointing to the trees, to the clouds that spread and shifted over
the valley. He recognized no one and missed his daughters.
"Lots of kids here," Megan said.
"The girls would have enjoyed this."
"But then we wouldn't be able to enjoy ourselves. Cheers."
"Cheers." Because they were standing side by side they raised their glasses
into the air in front of them, without looking at each other.
It felt strange to be drinking at the school. He remembered the covert

parties, the bottles that would be smuggled into the dorms and consumed Friday
and Saturday nights, always fearful of the proctor's rounds.
"I feel old," he said to Megan. He saw a face that was familiar, smiling at
him, walking over. The stylish tortoiseshell glasses were new, but he
remembered the friendly blue eyes, the wavy brown hair, the cleft in the chin.
They had shared a number of classes, been lab partners, he suddenly
remembered, in chemistry. His father and Pam's father had grown up together;
he had always referred to the headmaster as "Uncle Borden." He remembered the
last name, Schultz, but not the first.
"Sarkar," Schultz said. "Amit Sarkar, right?"
Amit extended a hand, Schultz's first name coming to him just then. "Great
to see you. This is my wife, Megan. Megan, this is Tim."
The smile disappeared from Schultz's face. "It's Ted."
"Ted, of course, Ted. I'm so sorry. Ted, meet my wife, Megan." He felt like
an idiot, as mortified by his error as he would have been in his first term at
Langford, when he worked so hard to please. He berated himself for using a
name at all, for not letting it emerge naturally in the course of conversation. "I'm
sorry," he said again as Ted and Megan shook hands. "It's been a long day. A
long drive."
"Don't worry about it," Ted said, in a way that only made Amit feel worse.
"Your parents still in India?"
"They came back. And then they left again."
"Where are you living these days?"
It turned out that Ted lived in Manhattan, too. He was divorced and
working at a law firm.
"Do you guys know this guy Pam's marrying? The one she's finally going to
settle for instead of one of us?"
"I've never met Ryan," Amit said, wondering what Megan would make of
Ted's comment.
"All I know is he writes for television," Ted said. "One of those law shows
that makes my job look glamorous. That's why they're moving to L.A.
Apparently one of the actors for the show is supposed to be here."
They looked around for someone who might be a celebrity. It was an
attractive crowd, many of the women in black cocktail dresses. Amit
remembered Megan's skirt and took a step toward her, putting his arm around
her waist.
"How did you two meet?" Ted asked.
"Med school," Megan said.
"Oh. Dr. Sarkar, I'm impressed."

"Just her," Amit said. "She stuck it out. I didn't."
A string quartet began to play and people drifted toward their seats. Amit
and Megan chose chairs at the back, Megan complaining that her heels were
sinking into the grass. They put their empty glasses under their seats. Everyone
turned around as the man Pam was about to marry walked between the chairs
and took his place at the center where a clergyman was standing. Ryan looked
well into his forties, tall, tanned, with a salt and pepper beard, his handsome
features lined. And then Pam appeared, coming down the aisle with her father,
then her mother and her brothers behind. Mrs. Borden was unchanged, her
cropped sandy hair styled in the same practical way, her figure still trim. She
turned her head to smile reassuringly at the guests on either side of her. All their
lives the Bordens had presided over similarly large gatherings, weekly
assemblies and homecoming games and graduations, and in a way this was no
different. The only person he didn't recognize was a girl of about twelve or so,
with a long, pretty face and a somber expression, carrying a bouquet of flowers.
He guessed it was one of Pam's nieces or younger cousins. Pam wore a
sleeveless dress with a train, made of crumpled ivory material. The effect was
not so much a dress as a long bedsheet that she had wrapped around herself, a
careless yet perfect vision. She carried yellow freesias casually in one hand,
smiling and waving to people with the other. To this day she was the most
beautiful woman he had ever known.
The couple stood with their backs to the guests, facing the minister and the
mountains and the setting sun. It was a brief, simple ceremony, without
bridesmaids or a best man, as Amit had predicted. Someone got up and read a
poem he could not hear because there was no microphone. Still, visually, it was
spectacular, the sky deepening into a combination of dark peach and plum over
the mountains, the lush grounds of the school unpopulated save for the spot
where the wedding was taking place. He watched strands of Pam's hair, loosened
by the wind that had settled over them, causing women to put shawls around
their shoulders, that cold mountain air that always replaced the day's heat. She
was thirty-seven now, his age, but from the back she looked like a girl of
nineteen. And yet she was marrying late, so much later than he had.
As he witnessed the ceremony he felt grateful for the faint connection he
and Pam had maintained, enough for him to be sitting there, watching her marry,
witnessing the very beginning of that phase of her existence. Amit anticipated
only a continuation of the things he knew: Megan, his job, life in New York, the
girls. The most profound thing, having Maya and Monika, had already
happened; nothing would be more life-altering than that. He wanted to change
none of it, and yet a part of him sometimes longed to return to the beginning of

his relationship with Megan, if only for the pleasure of anticipating and
experiencing those things again.
There was a round of applause as Pam and Ryan kissed, their eyes open
from the excitement, and then the music started up and the wedding party
receded down the grassy aisle. Amit rose, this time positioning himself on
Megan's left without having to be told, and together they took their places behind
the others in the receiving line. Pam tossed back her head and laughed at things
people said, leaning over to kiss them or put a hand comfortingly to their upper
arms. "Where are your beautiful little girls?" she cried out as soon as she saw
Amit, extending her neck so that he could kiss her on one cheek, then the other.
Her skin was the same, disconcertingly soft, but now that he faced her he saw
Mrs. Borden's crow's-feet forming around her eyes.
"We left them with Megan's parents. It's our weekend of reckless freedom."
"I want to stay up until five in the morning," Megan announced cheerfully.
"I want to celebrate all night and watch the sun rise from our balcony."
Amit glanced at Megan, puzzled that she'd never mentioned this to him. He
had assumed her main objective for the weekend was to sleep undisturbed. "You
do?"
Megan didn't answer him. Instead she said to Pam, "You look lovely. It's
such a pretty dress." She said this genuinely, not intimidated by Pam as she'd
been in the past. Amit wondered if it was because Pam was married now,
belonging to another man and therefore not even a little bit to Amit.
They shook hands with Ryan. "Pam's told me so much about you," Ryan
said to Amit.
"Congratulations," Amit replied. "All the best."
"We'll see if I can make a California girl out of her."
"Ryan's kids are running around here, somewhere," Pam said. "That was
Claire, carrying the flowers." She corrected herself, kissing Ryan on the cheek.
"Sorry, sweetie. Our kids." She caught Amit's eye, as if to say, Can you believe
I'm a stepmother? So this was a second marriage for Ryan, another woman's
children involved. The long-faced girl in the wedding procession was now Pam's
stepdaughter. It was not what Amit would have predicted for Pam, such
complications, Pam who could have had any man.
"I was really hoping to see your girls," Pam said. "Do you have a picture?"
Megan looked in her bag, but she was carrying a small beaded evening
purse and had left her wallet in the hotel room.
"I've got some," Amit said. He flipped to two pictures, each taken when
Maya and Monika were newborns, their eyes beady, their mouths drawn to fine
points. "They look nothing like that now."

"You'll have to bring them to L.A. You'll all have to come and stay with us
at Ryan's beach house." She laughed. "I mean, our beach house."
"We'd love that," Megan said. But Amit knew it would never happen, that
this was the end of the road, that there would never be a reason for him to step
into Pam's world again.
"There's a brunch tomorrow, on campus," Pam said. "We'll see you there?"
She said it in her old way, looking at Amit as if there were something of extreme
urgency she needed to discuss with him-notes for an exam they were about to
take together, or an analysis of his latest college infatuation.
"Of course," he told her.
"It's great of you to come, Amit. It's so good to see you," Pam said. For a
moment he felt a flicker of their old bond, their odd friendship. He had always
been devoted to her, more so, she'd once admitted, than even her brothers, and he
felt that she was acknowledging that again, now, in her glance.
"We wouldn't have missed it," he said.
The line pushed them along, into the crowd of the party. Megan said she
needed to use the restroom. "Do you know where one is?"
He looked around. Across the lawn where people stood eating hors
d'oeuvres was the admissions building, a massive Victorian mansion with
wraparound porches. The double doors at the back were open, and waiters
dashed in and out with their trays. He remembered going there with his parents,
being interviewed by an unpleasant man named Mr. Plotkin. Mr. Plotkin had
asked Amit why he wanted to attend Langford, and because his parents were
sitting outside the room, Amit had replied, truthfully, that his parents were
moving to India and didn't want him to go to school there. "I'm afraid that reply
isn't the mark of a Langford boy, Mr. Sarkar," Mr. Plotkin told him across the
desk where Amit's report cards and recommendations lay. And then he folded
his hands together and waited until Amit had provided a more adequate reply.
"There's probably bathrooms in there," he said now to Megan. He walked
with her, still positioned faithfully at her left, toward the building, but inside they
discovered a long line for the ladies' room.
"What should we do?" Megan whispered.
"Well, I can't wait in that line with you. It's all women. I'm sure no one will
notice the skirt."
"You think?" She fiddled with her purse, adjusting her wrist so that the
purse rested over the burnt material. Over the skirt she was wearing a white
buttoned shirt, open to reveal part of a pink camisole below. Her neck was bare.
She never wore the jewels his mother had given her eventually, that were too
ornate for her taste.

"You look great," he said. He meant it, but he hadn't told her yet. "I'll get us
more drinks and meet you back here. Another lemonade?"
"Okay."
He left her there, still fiddling with the purse. It took him longer than he
expected to get the drinks. The line at the bar contained a few of his old teachers,
most of them in advanced middle age, a few looking on the brink of retirement.
There was Mrs. Randall, his physics teacher, to whom he waved, and Mr.
Plotkin, whose eyes he avoided. Then he saw Mr. Nagle, one of his English
teachers, who'd also been the adviser for the school newspaper, The Langford
Legend, that Amit wrote for and eventually edited. Mr. Nagle had been one of
the youngest members of the faculty, just out of college when Amit was a
student, and he still looked refreshingly young, his dark hair and drooping
mustache reminding Amit of a shorter, thinner version of Ringo Starr. Mr. Nagle
was originally from
Winchester, a graduate of the high school there, and Amit always felt a
connection with him because of that.
"Let me guess. You're writing for The New York Times," Mr. Nagle said.
"Actually, I work for a medical journal."
"Is that right? I didn't think you were interested in the sciences."
He hadn't been. He'd wanted to be a journalist, it was true. He had loved
working on the eight-page weekly paper, loved going with Mr. Nagle and the
rest of the editorial staff to the offices of the local town paper once a week to do
the layout. He remembered sitting in the library, thinking up story ideas,
interviewing members of the faculty, and the famous people who sometimes
came to Langford to speak at assemblies. Taking an active, reporter's interest in
the life of the school had helped him to endure the fact that he hated it there. But
he knew that journalism wasn't an option as a career, that his parents would
never indulge such thinking. It was the one battle he hadn't had the courage to
fight-his parents' expectation that he go to medical school, their assumption that
he become a doctor like his father.
He'd had the aptitude for science and so he'd gone ahead with it, majoring
in biology at Columbia and then starting medical school there. He lasted two
years, mainly because he met Megan and fell in love with her. But the more he
got to know her, the clearer it became that he lacked her dedication, her drive.
One night in the middle of studying for a pharmacy exam, he'd gone out for a
cup of coffee. He walked a few blocks to stretch his legs, and then a few more.
He kept walking down Broadway, one hundred blocks from his dorm in
Washington Heights to Lincoln Center, and then continuing all the way to
Chinatown where, at daybreak, feeling close to delirious, he finally stopped. Fish

and vegetables were being unloaded from trucks, life creeping back onto the
streets. He entered a bakery, had hot tea and coconut bread, watched a group of
Chinese women sitting at a round table at the back, sorting through a mountain
of spinach. He took the train back uptown, slept through his exam. He began to
cut one class, then another. A week went by, and in spite of his total passivity, he
felt that he was accomplishing the greatest feat of his life. He dropped out, not
telling his parents until the semester ended. He'd expected Megan to break up
with him, but she'd respected his decision and remained. On a lark, after
dropping out of med school, he applied to the journalism school at Columbia but
was not accepted. Megan urged him to write anyway, to work freelance and put
together some clips. But the job at the medical journal was easier, more
predictable work. It demanded less of him, and Amit could no longer imagine
doing anything else.
"I had you pegged as a newspaperman," Mr. Nagle said. "We won that
wonderful award the year you graduated. Never managed to win it again. They
still have the plaque up in the library."
A third person joined them, a man who was introduced to Amit as the
newly appointed director of alumni affairs. He took an immediate interest in
Amit, asking whether he planned to attend the next reunion, talking about plans
for Langford's new gymnasium.
"Excuse me," Amit said when there was a pause in the conversation, "I
need to find my wife." He realized that in the course of talking to Mr. Nagle he'd
finished his drink and now had only the one for Megan. So he stood in the line
again and got another spiked lemonade. He began to weave among the guests,
going into the admissions building, looking for her. But she wasn't there, and he
realized she'd probably gone out to look for him. It was getting dark, and the
only lit-up area was the tent where they would all sit to dine. When he found
Megan she was talking to Ted Schultz, her left hand still placed strategically
over her skirt. The sight of Ted made Amit feel foolish all over again, for calling
him by the wrong name.
"I got you this," Amit said, handing Megan the lemonade.
"Oh." She looked at the drink, shaking her head. There was a glass of
champagne in her other hand. "I got this off a tray."
"I was just telling Megan about what it was like here when we were
students," Ted said. "Before these ugly new buildings went up. Where did you
live?"
"Ingalls my first year. And then Harkness." He felt unsure about the names,
as if they, too, might be incorrect.
"Guess what," Megan said. "Our cell phone doesn't work up here. I tried to

call the girls but there's no service."
"I'm sure there's a pay phone somewhere," Amit said. "I'll call them before
their bedtime." He was tired of standing, longed for the opportunity to sit down
and fill his stomach with something solid. A few elderly people were already
under the tent, along with some mothers nursing their babies, and he wondered if
it would be improper of him to take his seat as well. He waited for a gap in Ted
and Megan's conversation, to suggest going to their table, but then he felt a tap
on the back and turned to see Pam's parents. He proceeded to catch up with
them, congratulating them, pulling out his wallet again and showing the pictures
of the girls. "They look just like their mother," Mrs. Borden said in her usual
forthright way.
When he turned back to Megan he saw that her champagne glass was
empty. She had moved closer to Ted, and her hand was playing with her
diamond earring, a habit of hers when she was nervous. Could it be that Megan
was flirting with Ted? Instead of being jealous Amit felt oddly liberated,
relieved of his responsibility to Megan, to show her a good time. His head was
pounding. He needed a glass of water, needed to dilute the alcohol that had
rushed too quickly into his brain. The evening had barely begun but it was as if
he'd been drinking for hours. Then he saw that the hand by Megan's ear was the
one that had been formerly concealing her skirt. Now that she'd had a few drinks
herself she no longer cared, and Amit realized he was free of his duty to stand by
her side.
At dinner they were seated at a table with three other couples. Two of them
were friends of Ryan's from California, and after introductions were made they
talked among themselves. The women were in their fifties, both dressed in silk
jackets and with heavy pieces of silver jewelry, and Amit suspected they had
something to do with television. The men were dark-haired and voluble and
seemed to be very old friends. The other couple was engaged to be married. The
woman, Felicia, was a friend of Pam's, and her fiance's name was Jared. Jared
was an architect, with very fair wispy hair, who seemed to be faintly smiling at
everyone and everything, until Amit realized it was the set expression of his
face, his thin mouth permanently pulled back at the corners. Jared's current
commission was a new wing in a hospital, and he and Megan immediately fell
into conversation, Megan telling him all the things that needed to be improved,
in her opinion, when it came to the design of hospitals.
As their wine and water glasses were filled and a salmon ter-rine was
served, Felicia talked to Amit about her and Jared's wedding plans. She was a
petite woman, her girlish figure encased in a high-necked beige sleeveless dress.

Her features, though pleasant, seemed too small for her face, as if yet to fill it up
properly, the distance between the bottom of her nose and her top lip distracting.
She spoke in a tired way, each word weighted down. They were in the process of
deciding on a venue, Felicia said, and weren't sure of the number of guests.
"This wedding is huge," she remarked. "How many people, would you
guess?"
He looked around at the tables, counted eight bodies at each. "Around two
hundred, I think." He drained his water glass and looked over at Megan, her
animated face without a trace of discomfort.
"Where was your wedding?" Felicia asked.
"We eloped eight years ago. City Hall." It had seemed like the right thing to
do at the time-instead of asking his parents to fly in from Lausanne, and Megan's
parents to go to the expense, and figuring out how to make everybody happy. He
was twenty-nine, Megan thirty-four. It had been exhilarating-the joy of getting
married combined with the fact that it would all be in secret, without planning,
without involvement from anyone else. His parents had not even met her. He
was aware of what an insult it was to them. For all their liberal Western ways he
knew they wanted him to marry a Bengali girl, raised and educated as he had
been.
"Do you regret it at all?" Felicia asked.
"I think our daughters do." For they were at the age now when they
expected tales of a wedding cake, pictures of their mother in a white gown.
Felicia asked how old the girls were, and again, clumsily, he pulled out the
photos in his wallet. "Megan has better ones. More recent, I mean. But they're at
the hotel."
"Did you have to try for a while?"
He thought it a bold question, coming from a stranger. But he was honest
with her, his thoughts still loose from the spiked lemonade. "Would you believe,
with Maya it happened the first time," he said. He remembered how proud he'd
felt, how powerful. The first time in his life he'd had sex without contraception a
life had begun.
"Will you go for a third?"
"It's hard to imagine." He thought back to when his daughters were infants,
when swings and play-saucers crowded the rooms and the sticky tray of the high
chair had to be scrubbed in the shower at the end of each night. His girls had
already turned mysterious, both out of diapers, withdrawing to their room to read
or play games, talking in secret languages, bursting into peals of laughter at the
table for no apparent reason. He'd been more eager than Megan to start a family.
It was exotic, the world of parenting, fulfilling him in a way his job did not. It

was Amit who'd pushed for a second. Megan was content with one, telling him
she'd paid the price for being from a large family. But Amit hadn't wanted Maya
to be an only child, to lead the lonely existence he remembered. Megan had
given in, gotten pregnant again even though she was almost forty, but since
Monika's birth she'd worn an IUD.
A spoon clinked on a glass and they all turned their attention to the front of
the tent, to the first round of toasts. They listened to friends of Pam's from prep
school and then from college, a few of whom he vaguely remembered drinking
with at the Marlin. They were followed by members of both families, and
coworkers of Pam's and Ryan's. Amit was distracted by a pale gray spider that
crawled up the side of the tablecloth and then into the space between the cuff of
Jared's shirt and jacket. He was tempted to say something, but Jared hadn't
noticed; instead he sat there, the same faint smile still fixed on his face, no doubt
anticipating the day people would stand up and offer toasts at his own wedding.
The entree was served, plates of prime rib with asparagus and potatoes.
"How was it, going from one child to two?" Felicia inquired, picking up the
conversation where they'd left it. "A friend of mine told me that one plus one
equals three. Is it true?" She sliced into her prime rib, causing blood from the
meat to seep into the potatoes.
He considered for a moment. "Actually, it was after the second that our
marriage sort of"-he paused, searching for the right word-"disappeared." He
realized it was a funny word to use, but something had been lost, something had
fallen through their fingers, and that was the only way he could put it.
"What do you mean?" Felicia asked. She set down her fork and squinted at
him with her small eyes, her voice suddenly cold.
He looked over at Megan, full of the radiance that had graced her this
evening, still talking to Jared. In the hotel they had vowed not to leave each
other's side, but she was miles away from him. He felt the same resentment that
often seized him after he cleaned up the kitchen and bathed Maya and Monika
and put them to bed, and then watched television alone, knowing that he had
seen his children through another day, that again Megan had not been a part of it.
She lived in the apartment, she slept in his bed, her heart belonged to no one but
him and the girls, and yet there were times Amit felt as alone as he had first been
at Langford. And there were times he hated Megan, simply for this. Had he been
sober he would have repressed the thought, reminding himself that it was for his
sake, and the girls, that she worked so hard. He would have reminded himself
that in a year or so their lives would change, that Megan hoped to find a job in a
private practice, so they would once again be able to go on family vacations and
throw dinner parties for their friends. But tonight nothing censored his

peevishness; he embraced it, felt justified by his very ability to acknowledge
what was true.
"It disappeared," he repeated, with more force this time. "I guess it does for
everyone, sooner or later."
But Felicia's face had hardened. "What an awful thing to say," she said, not
hiding her disgust. "At a wedding, of all places."
And yet he felt justified. Wasn't it since Monika's birth that so much of his
and Megan's energy was devoted not to doing things together but devising ways
so that each could have some time alone, she taking the girls so that he could go
running in the park on her days off, or vice versa, so that she could browse in a
bookstore or get her nails done? And wasn't it terrible, how much he looked
forward to those moments, so much so that sometimes even a ride by himself on
the subway was the best part of the day? Wasn't it terrible that after all the work
one put into finding a person to spend one's life with, after making a family with
that person, even in spite of missing that person, as Amit missed Megan night
after night, that solitude was what one relished most, the only thing that, even in
fleeting, diminished doses, kept one sane?
He considered explaining this to Felicia, but he saw that she no longer
wanted to talk to him. She'd been hanging on his every word but now she turned
her attention to one of the women in silver jewelry. He looked at his watch and
saw that it was almost eight thirty. The girls would be in their nightgowns,
reading stories before bedtime. He had not finished his meal, had eaten very
little of it in fact, but the plate was cleared away and strawberry shortcake was in
its place. He looked up and saw that most of the tables were empty. Dancing had
begun, couples clinging to each other under a neighboring tent, surrounded by
the mountains, the black night. The band was playing a Gershwin song. Jared led
Felicia away, and though Amit knew he would never have to see her again, he
was relieved to see her go, taking away the depressing evidence of their
conversation. Jared was bending down to hear something Felicia was whispering
and Amit wondered if she was relaying what he'd said to her. How inappropriate,
they would think, to talk that way to a person who was engaged. And they would
promise each other not to let that happen in their own marraige, that even after
twelve children they would never feel that way.
He saw Ted drifting over, asking Megan if it was all right to sit in the
empty chair beside her. "That was quite a meal. I didn't eat half as well at my
own wedding," he said.
"I should call the girls," Megan said. "We promised them we would."
"I'll go," Amit offered. "You stay, Meg. Enjoy yourself."
"I won't run off with her," Ted said, winking. "I promise."

"Are you sure you're okay?" Megan asked Amit. From the way she was
looking at him he saw, without his having to say anything, that she knew he'd
had too much to drink, that she had still paid attention to him while speaking to
other men all evening.
"I'm fine. I'll go find a pay phone and then I'll be right back. A walk will do
me good."
"But then we dance the night away and watch the sun rise, okay?" She
smiled at him, and he felt her love for him suddenly-that unshakable belief in
him and in their marriage that she never questioned, never denigrated, as he had
tonight.
"Okay." He walked over to where she was sitting, bent down and kissed her
on the cheek, then went up to the admissions building where the bathrooms
were. Two large rooms had been opened up for the children to play in. Some
were running around, some crying, others sprawled fast asleep on the leather
club chairs and sofas. He wandered around, looking for a pay phone. There were
only the kind limited to the campus exchange, or private ones, sitting on desks.
He saw them through the glass doors of offices. But when he tried the knobs
they were all locked.
He walked outside, to see if maybe there was a phone there. He found
nothing. And yet he had to call the girls, wanted to hear their voices, this was the
sole thought in his mind. He began to cut across the field in the dark, in the
direction of the hotel, forgetting that the car was parked at the school. Instead he
stumbled across the field, silent except for the faint sound of the music carried
across the air, and the sound of his own breathing. He stopped and looked up at
the sky and the stars, the constellations that were so piercing outside the city. He
thought of Megan, thought maybe he should go back and tell her he was going to
the hotel. But he continued walking, unable to see his feet as they marched
across the ground.
There were no lights apart from the stars and he was unsure which direction
the hotel was in. And then again he stopped, to listen to the serenade of the frogs
that lived around the lake, like the repeated, random plucking of a bowed
instrument in an orchestra, endlessly tuning itself before a performance. It was a
sound he had forgotten, one that had haunted him and kept him awake his first
nights in a Langford dormitory, at the end of another August when he was
fifteen years old. All the incoming students heard it as they slept in their new
rooms, in their strange beds, missing their parents, their homes; they were told at
their first assembly that the frogs were calling for their mates, defending their
territory by the water's edge before burying themselves under mud for the
winter. The deafening thrum spoke to Amit tonight as it had then, of everything

in the world that teemed beyond his vision, that was beyond his grasp.
He saw the hotel. It had taken no time at all; Megan wouldn't even notice
he'd been gone. He went into the room and sat on the bed that was empty, as
opposed to the one used for their discarded clothes and luggage, and picked up
the telephone. He looked around the room, and what he had earlier found
disappointing he now found comforting. He dialed his in-laws' area code. But he
could not remember the rest of the number.
He sat there for a long time, the phone in his lap, trying to remember the
digits. But he did not know them by memory, it was Megan who always called.
He studied the paper pyramid from all sides, as if that might hold the answer.
But no, those were television channels. He would have to go back to the
wedding, ask Megan, and then come back again to the hotel. That was what he
would do. He stood up, walking across the room to the door. Then he
remembered that he could call directory assistance. He returned to the phone and
was about to press the buttons. But his head throbbed and things began to spin,
the paper pyramid on the bedside table no longer where it had been a second
ago, and the need to be horizontal overwhelmed him, pulling him back to the
pillows on the bed.
He woke up dressed in his suit, polished black shoes on his feet. The light
was on in the dark room, the curtain to the balcony drawn. He first thought that it
was still nighttime and that he had to get back to the wedding. But then he
looked at the digital clock on the bedside table and saw that it was eleven in the
morning.
"Megan?" he called out. He could barely form the word. His voice was
ragged, and he realized that for a long time in his sleep he'd been craving a glass
of water. He sat up a little and became aware of an excruciating band of pressure
around his head. Looking at the neighboring bed he saw that it had not been slept
in, that the open suitcase and clothes had not been moved aside.
He sat up fully and then stood. "Megan?" he called out again. He took off
his jacket, went to the bathroom, drank water from the basin. He couldn't bear to
turn the light on. The night began to come back to him in pieces. He
remembered sitting on the toilet seat, just minutes ago, it seemed, inspecting
Megan's skirt. Then he remembered watching Pam Borden getting married and
waiting in a long line for a drink, and a conversation at dinner with a woman
who was engaged. He remembered leaving Megan at the table with another man.
Suddenly he jerked on the light and saw that her glasses were not by the basin
where she normally left them during the night, that she had not come back to the
hotel.

He returned to the bed in which he'd slept, searching for some sign of her
on the other side of it. But the cover had not been turned back; there were only
the creases indicating where he'd lain. Again he crossed the room. He yanked
open the closet, which contained just a few empty hangers on the rod. He
decided to go to the front desk and ask if she'd returned. He felt chilly and put on
his jacket again. Then he saw that the door to the balcony was partly open.
She was sitting in a chair, in jeans and a fleece pullover she'd wisely
packed, thinking it might be cold in the mountains. The diamond studs he'd
given her after Maya's birth sparkled in her ears. She was sipping coffee from a
paper cup and was staring at the pine tree that blocked the view.
"Well, I made it to watch the sun rise, like I said I would," she said. "Only
the sunrise wasn't visible today." He looked at the sky. It was full of daylight but
uniformly gray. The air was cool and rain seemed imminent.
He eyed the empty chair next to Megan, knowing he wasn't welcome. She
had not turned around to face him, had not looked up, and he stood partly behind
her, shivering, his arms crossed in front of him. "When did you get back?" he
asked her.
"Oh, it must have been around three. That was when the party finally broke
up. My feet are killing me. I haven't danced like that in years."
Her words made him think that perhaps his memories had been part of a
terrible dream. "Did we dance last night at the wedding?"
"It was only for about an hour that I was out of my mind with worry. We
looked for you everywhere. I asked strange men to check underneath bathroom
stalls. I even considered calling the police. But then something told me you'd
ended up back here, and when I called the hotel that's exactly what they told
me." She said all of this calmly, as if addressing the tree in front of her, and yet
he felt her fury in each word. "I couldn't find a pay phone," he said.
She turned to him then, jerking the chair around while still sitting in it, her
eyes wet with tears. "Neither could I. But I asked Pam's father and he opened up
one of the offices."
Amit looked down at his feet, at his muddied wing tips. "I left the car up
there. Did you drive it back?"
"How could I, when the keys were in your pocket?"
"How did you get here, then?" He felt as if he might be sick, remembering
Ted, thinking of him accompanying her to the hotel in the middle of the night.
"Oh, that nice couple at our table gave me a ride. Jared and Felicia."
He knew that she'd been virtuous, that she was telling him the truth. At the
same time, feeling sick again, he wondered if Felicia had told Megan what he'd
said. "How are the girls?"

"They're fine, they're having a blast. I told my parents we'll be there by
afternoon."
"But we're staying here until tomorrow. That was the plan."
"It's a bit silly, don't you think, given the weather? The concierge said it's
only supposed to get worse."
Ten years ago it wouldn't have mattered. They would have laughed at the
rain, gone for a walk anyway, then holed up in the room and made love.
"I'm sorry, Meg. The drinks went straight to my head. I don't even
remember having that many. I didn't mean to abandon you."
She didn't acknowledge his apology. Instead she said, "I've had breakfast. I
can go get the car before the rain starts, while you pack up. The hotel restaurant's
not bad. You should probably eat something. I'm tired, and I want you to be able
to drive back."
"You're always tired," he wanted to tell her. "The only time you haven't
been tired in years was last night." But he knew that he was in no position to
accuse her.
"Well?" she said.
"There's a brunch," he remembered, and suddenly he felt hopeful, that there
was still a bit of the wedding left, that he could make an appearance, make up for
what he'd missed. "I can eat there. I'd like to go and say good-bye to Pam and
Ryan," he said. "Let's go over together. Please."
She opened her mouth to say something, then stopped. His head was
pounding and his voice was cracking, and from the sad look in her eyes he knew
that he looked pathetic, that it was out of pity that she refused to raise her voice,
to berate him. Eventually she said, "If that's what you want."
"You'll go with me?"
"I've spent enough time at this wedding by myself."
She sat on the balcony reading the local paper while he changed out of his
suit and into his ordinary clothes. Then he packed up their things, throwing all
the tourist brochures into the garbage. They walked across the road and across
the field to Langford. They were halfway there when the rain started. It was an
undramatic drizzle, filling the air with the faintest sound, but by the time they
reached the edge of campus their hair was damp, their feet drenched and cold. At
one point they paused to take in a view of the lake. In spite of the rain, a man
swam in the dark gray water, quite far out.
They went past the small cemetery on the grounds of the school, along a
path that led them to a sign taped to a stake that said BRUNCH, with an arrow.
They headed in that direction, keeping their eye out for another sign. The tents
under which people had dined and danced were still up, empty now, the tables

folded and stacked in piles. The chairs on which they'd sat to watch the
ceremony were still arranged more messily, on the lawn. There was a truck
parked in front of the alumni building, where two maintenance men in overalls
were clearing up.
"Is the brunch in here?" Amit asked.
"Don't know anything about a brunch," one of them said.
They walked in the direction of the chapel and the observatory. They
passed the parking lot, where a few cars stood, including their own. They
reached the front gates of the school, then turned back again.
"I don't see any other signs," Megan said. "Did she say which building?"
Amit shook his head, and they continued on. United in their quest, he
wondered if her rage was dissipating. And yet they did not walk side by side; she
was ahead of him, leading the way even though she did not know it. When doors
were open they entered, wandering down musty carpeted hallways, into naked
stairwells, past empty classrooms with clean blackboards and the round wooden
tables at which Langford students always sat. In less than a month students
would return to those tables. He was free of the school, it no longer touched his
life in any way. But instead of feeling grateful, he wanted to relive those
confused days, that life of discovery, to be bound to those round tables and
lectures and exams. There were things he had always meant to understand better:
Russian history, the succession of Roman emperors, Greek philosophy. He
wanted to read what he was told each evening, to do as he was told. There were
the great writers he had never read, would never read. His daughters would
begin that journey soon enough, the world opening up for them in its awesome
entirety. But there was no time now, not even to look at the whole paper on
Sundays.
In the music complex, they found a room with an assortment of couches
and practice stands. There was a baby grand piano in the corner, and in front of
it, two trash bins filled with coffee cups and crushed boxes from a bakery. A
long folding table held a coffee percolator, a stack of unused cups.
"We found it," Amit said, feeling triumphant. And then, just as instantly, he
felt thwarted. He saw an open box on the table containing a few eclairs. The
sight made his stomach churn up in hunger, and he picked one up, consumed it
without pause.
"Looks like we missed brunch," Megan said. After a while she added, "You
have chocolate icing around your mouth."
Lacking a napkin or the wipes he always had with him when he was with
the girls, he drew the back of his hand across his lips. The bells of the chapel
chimed as if for the two of them alone. He thought of Pam and Ryan on their

way to the airport, to their honeymoon in Scotland. He thought of the other
guests heading back, pleasantly hungover, and the Bordens relaxing at home,
commenting on the evening, saluting themselves on a job well done.
They headed toward the parking lot to get the car. The rain was heavy now,
the sound of it percussive against the leaves of the trees. Had the wedding been
today instead of yesterday, Amit thought to himself, everything would have been
different; they would have gathered in the chapel, everyone would have
remarked what a shame it was. The rain came down harder and they both began
picking up their pace, half-jogging side by side, Megan keeping a hand pressed
over her head. They approached Standish Hall, the dorm in which they could
have stayed. The front door was open, held by a large rock.
"Let's wait this out for a few minutes," Amit said, panting for breath. "I
need to use the bathroom."
In the entryway, on a bulletin board, was a list of room assignments for the
wedding guests. He left Megan standing there, reading the names on the list,
while he went to the bathroom. All along the hallway the doors were open, beds
stripped, sheets folded up on top of them. In the bathroom, the shower stalls,
separated by slabs of gray marble, still had beads of water on them from the
morning's use. When he returned, Megan was no longer in the entryway. He
began walking down the remaining length of the hall and found her in one of the
rooms, perched on the edge of a desk. She was looking at a xeroxed sheet of
paper that someone had stepped on, leaving the dusty imprint of a shoe's sole.
"The brunch ended at eleven," she said.
The arrangement of the room was familiar to him but things had been
redone since his time here. There was a new fire alarm, blond wood furniture.
The mattress looked firmer, without the black-and-white ticking he remembered.
There was a tan carpet covering the floor. The shade half-pulled on the window
was fresh, with a ring attached to the string. The effect was more sanitized, less
charming, a lot like the inside of the Chadwick Inn. He opened the closet, barely
deep enough for a hanger.
"You know, we should have just stayed here," Megan said. "We would
have saved two hundred dollars, and I wouldn't have spent half the night worried
you'd vanished into thin air."
He closed the closet, then shut the door to the room. There was no way to
lock it from the inside. "My fault for trying to have a romantic getaway."
"But this is so much more romantic." She spoke objectively, but he also
detected a note of regret. When he turned to her she was preoccupied, slightly
frowning. She had removed her glasses, raised her fleece pullover, and was
wiping the delicate lenses on the T-shirt underneath. Her pulled-back hair was

slick against her head, her cheeks flushed from running. She held out the glasses
in front of her face, inspecting them before putting them back on. "Was it in a
room like this that you had sex for the first time?"
It was something, after all these years, that she didn't know about him. In
spite of her anger his past still preyed on her, if only because she hadn't been a
part of it. "I didn't have sex at Langford. Anyway, it was a boys' school back
then."
"I refuse to believe there weren't ways to sneak girls in."
"There were, but I never did. I've told you a million times I was miserable
here."
"What about Pam?" Megan asked, folding her arms across her chest,
glancing over at the bed. "Did you ever have sex with her?"
"No."
She took a step toward him, looking at the shirt that clung coldly to his
body, then directly into his eyes. "What, then? Something passed between you
two, it's obvious."
"It was nothing, Meg. We were friends and for a while I had a crush on her.
But nothing happened. Is that so terrible?"
The information fell between them, valuable for the years he'd kept it from
her, negligible now that he'd told. Through the window he saw the workmen in
the rain, folding up the chairs and stacking them onto a cart. He went to the
window and pulled down the shade completely, darkening the room. Then he
turned back to Megan, close to her now. He kneeled on the floor and put his
arms around her legs, pressing his face against her jeans. She did not walk away
as he feared, did not detangle herself from his awkward embrace. Then he felt
her hand on top of his head, her long fingers grazing the gray hairs of his skull,
and instantly, powerfully, he felt an erection. He began to kiss her legs, grasping
at her belt loops and pulling her down so that she was kneeling on the carpet,
too. He put a hand up against the thick inseam of her jeans, knowing exactly
what it was like to touch her there, the combination of skin and bone and hair.
He looked at her and he saw that although her face was turned away, she had
relaxed her body, adjusting herself to accommodate his hand.
"We can't do this here," she whispered, and yet she was tipping back her
head, allowing him to push up her fleece pullover.
"Why not?" He was kissing her neck now, and then her mouth, strong,
open-mouthed kisses that she was returning. He took her hand and placed it
under his belt.
She looked at him then, with slight tenderness, and shook her head. "It's a
dorm room, Amit. Kids live here."

But he continued, guiding her hand to his belt buckle while forcing off her
clothes, the fleece, the soft T-shirt below that. Her hair came undone. He pulled
down her jeans, revealing thighs that were chilled and reddened, as if from a
sunburn. They took off their shoes and socks, a mess of wet grass clippings
falling onto the carpet, then positioned themselves on the mattress. He couldn't
remember the last time they'd done this outside their apartment, outside their
bedroom, where they were always nervous that the girls would walk in. They
were nervous now, but they were excited, too, knowing they could get caught.
He entered her and felt her hands on his back, warming him, her ankles around
the backs of his legs, and the shock of her tongue in his ear. She offered to turn
over, knowing this was the quickest way. But he wanted to face her. He placed
his hands on her hips, over the stretch marks that were like inlaid streaks of
mother-of-pearl that would never fade, whose brilliance spoke only for the
body's decay. He put his mouth to one of her breasts, flattened and drained after
nursing two children, tasting the film of perspiration that had gathered. Her
breathing became audible and then she cried out, loudly enough for anyone in
the neighboring rooms to know what was taking place. But no one discovered
them, no workmen came to clean up, no guest from the wedding strayed in, no
little girls intruded giggling into the room. He came inside her and sat up,
knowing they could not linger. He was looking at the clothes they needed to put
on again. Megan's eyes were on his face, an arm stretched in front of her and a
hand pressed to his chest, as if to prevent him, now that they were finished, from
collapsing on top of her again. But he hoped that he was forgiven, and for a few
moments they remained together on the narrow bed in the little room, his heart
beating rapidly, vigorously, plainly striking the skin of her palm.
O nly Goodness
It was Sudha who'd introduced Rahul to alcohol, one weekend he came to
visit her at Penn-to his first drink from a keg and then, the next morning in the
dining hall, his first cup of coffee. He'd pronounced both beverages revolting,
preferring Schnapps to the beer and emptying a dozen packets of sugar in his
coffee cup. That had been his junior year of high school. When she was home
the following summer he asked her to buy him some six-packs, planning to have
a party one weekend when their parents were going to be in Connecticut
overnight. He'd shot up to six feet, braces off his teeth, whiskers sprouting
around his mouth, dark pimples occasionally studding his cheekbones, her little
brother in name only. She went to a local liquor store, helping Rahul divvy up
the cans between his room and hers so that their parents wouldn't discover them.
After her parents were asleep she brought some cans into Rahul's room. He

snuck downstairs, bringing back a cup of ice cubes to chill down the warm
Budweiser. They shared one cupful, then another, listening to the Stones and the
Doors on Rahul's record player, smoking cigarettes next to the open window and
exhaling through the screen. It was as if Sudha were in
high school again, doing things she once hadn't had the wits or guts for. She
felt a new bond with her brother, a sense, after years of regarding him as just a
kid, that they were finally friends.
Sudha had waited until college to disobey her parents. Before then she had
lived according to their expectations, her persona scholarly, her social life
limited to other demure girls in her class, if only to ensure that one day she
would be set free. Out of sight in Philadelphia she studied diligently, doublemajoring in economics and math, but on weekends she learned to let loose,
going to parties and allowing boys into her bed. She began drinking, something
her parents did not do. They were prudish about alcohol to the point of seeming
Puritanical, frowning upon the members of their Bengali circle-the men, that was
to say-who liked to sip whiskey at gatherings. In her freshman year there had
been nights when she got so drunk that she was sick on the streets of campus,
splattering the sidewalk and stumbling back to her dorm with friends. But she
learned what her limits were. The idea of excess, of being out of control, did not
appeal to Sudha. Competence: this was the trait that fundamentally defined her.
After Rahul graduated from high school their parents celebrated, having in
their opinion now successfully raised two children in America. Rahul was going
to Cornell, and Sudha was still in Philadelphia, getting a master's in international
relations. Their parents threw a party, inviting nearly two hundred people, and
bought Rahul a car, justifying it as a necessity for his life in Ithaca. They
bragged about the school, more impressed by it than they'd been with Penn. "Our
job is done," her father declared at the end of the party, posing for pictures with
Rahul and Sudha at either side. For years they had been compared to other
Bengali children, told about gold medals brought back from science fairs,
colleges that offered full scholarships. Sometimes Sudha's father would clip
newspaper articles about unusually gifted adolescents-the boy who finished a
PhD at twenty, the girl who went to Stanford at twelve-and tape them to the
refrigerator. When Sudha was fourteen her father had written to Harvard
Medical School, requested an application, and placed it on her desk.
Sudha's example had taught her parents that there was nothing to fear about
sending a child to college. Rahul took it in stride as well, not overly anxious as
Sudha had been the summer before she'd gone away. He was almost indifferent
to the changes ahead, his attitude reminding her that he'd always been the

smarter one. Sudha had struggled to keep her place on the honor roll, to become
salutatorian of her high school class. But Rahul never lifted a finger, never
cracked a book unless it appealed to him, precocious enough to have skipped
third grade.
At the end of the summer, Sudha went to Wayland to help him pack, but
when she got there she saw that there was nothing left for her to do. He had
already stuffed his bags, filled some milk crates with records, grabbed sheets and
towels from the linen closet, wrapped the cord around his electric typewriter. He
told her she didn't need to go all the way to Ithaca, but she insisted, riding beside
him as he drove his new car, their parents following behind. The campus was on
a hilltop surrounded by farms and lakes and waterfalls, nothing like Penn. She
helped unload his things, carrying boxes across the quadrangle along with the
other families of incoming freshmen. When it was time to say good-bye their
mother wept, and Sudha cried a little, too, at the thought of abandoning her little
brother, still not eighteen, in that remote, majestic place. But Rahul did not
behave as if he were being either abandoned or liberated. He pocketed the
money their father counted out and gave him as they parted, and he turned back
toward his dormitory before Sudha and her parents had pulled away.
The next time she saw him was Christmas. At dinner he had nothing
specific to say about his classes, or his professors, or the new friends he'd made.
His hair had grown long enough to conceal his neck and to tuck behind his ears.
He wore a checked flannel shirt, and around his wrist, a knotted woven bracelet.
He did not eat the enormous amounts Sudha still did when she sat at her mother's
table. He seemed bored, watching but not helping when Sudha and her mother
decorated the tree with the ornaments she and Rahul had made when they were
little. Sudha remembered always seeming to come down with the flu over
Christmas break, collapsing once she was free of the pressure of exams, and
thought that Rahul might do so, too. But later that evening, finding her upstairs
where she was wrapping gifts in her room, he seemed to have perked up. "Hey.
Where did you hide it?" he asked.
"Hide what?"
"Don't tell me you came home empty-handed."
"Oh," she said, realizing what he meant. "It didn't occur to me. I just
thought, since you're in college-" It was true, it hadn't occurred to her this time to
stick a six-pack into her bag. She preferred wine now, a glass with dinner when
she went out with friends in Philadelphia, but she did not expect it when she
came home to Wayland.
"I'm still not old enough to buy anything here." He glanced around the room
as if it might contain what he sought, looking at her closet and her chest of

drawers, at the bed that was covered with wrapping paper and a box from
Filene's containing a nightgown for her mother.
"Trip to the liquor store?" he suggested, sitting on top of the bed, crushing
some wrapping paper she'd unrolled. His hand sifted through the gift tags, the
tape, picking up each item and then dropping it again.
"Now?" she asked.
"Do you have any other plans for the evening?"
"Well, no. But Ma and Baba are going to think it's weird if we go out all of
a sudden."
He rolled his eyes. "Jesus, Didi. You're almost twenty-four. Do you really
still care what they think?"
"I was about to get into my pajamas."
He picked up the scissors, his eyes focused on the slow opening and closing
of the blades, as if discovering their function for the first time. "Since when did
you get so boring?"
She knew he was joking, but the remark hurt her nevertheless. "Tomorrow,
I promise."
He stood up, distant again as he had been at dinner, and she felt herself
faltering. "I guess it's still open," she said, looking at her watch. And so she'd
gone, lying to her parents that she needed to get something last minute at the
mall, Rahul saying he'd drive her there.
"You're the best," Rahul told her as they headed into town. He rolled down
the window on his side, filling the car with freezing air, and fished in his coat
pocket for a pack of cigarettes. He pushed in the lighter on the dashboard and
offered her one, but she shook her head, turning up the heat. She told him that
she'd applied to go to London the following year, to do a second master's at the
London School of Economics.
"You're going to London for a whole year?"
"You can visit me."
"Why do you need another master's degree?" He sounded distressed, and
also disapproving. It was the sort of reaction she expected from her parents. Her
parents hadn't allowed her to do a junior year abroad at Oxford, telling her then
that she was too young to live in a foreign county alone. But now they were
excited by the prospect of Sudha going to London, where they'd first lived after
getting married and where Sudha had been born, talking about visiting and
reconnecting with old friends.
She explained that LSE had one of the best programs in developmental
economics, that she was thinking of doing NGO work, eventually. But Rahul
didn't seem to be listening, and she was annoyed with him, with herself, really,

for agreeing to go out so late at night. "You want a six-pack?" she asked when
they got to the liquor store.
"I'd prefer a case."
In the past she had paid for things without a second thought, but she was
aware, now, that he did not reach for his wallet.
"And a bottle of vodka, too," he added. "Vodka?"
He drew another cigarette out of its pack. "It's a long vacation."
Their parents were in bed by the time they returned, but Sudha insisted they
hide things as they had before. Thinking that their mother might have reason to
enter Rahul's room for the weeks that he was home, to clean up or put away his
laundry, she kept the liquor in her room, a few cans at the back of her closet,
some in a gap behind a bookcase, the bottle of Smirnoff wrapped in an old pilly
sweater in her chest of drawers. She told Rahul it was safer that way, and he
didn't seem to care. He took a couple of cans for the night, pecking her on the
cheek before he left her, not insisting when she said she was too tired to join
him.
He had been born when Sudha was six, and the night her mother went into
labor was the first sustained memory of her life. She remembered being at a
party in the home of one of her parents' Bengali friends in Peabody, being left
there overnight because her father had to take her mother straight to Boston
without the suitcase Sudha had helped pack containing the toothbrush and cold
cream and robe her mother would need in the hospital. Though Sudha
understood that a baby was about to be born, had felt it with her hand as it
sometimes threatened to pound clear through her mother's belly, she was
terrified nevertheless that her mother, moaning with her forehead pressed against
a wall, was dying. "Go away," she said, when Sudha tried to stroke her mother's
hand, in a tone that had stung. "I don't want you to see me this way." After her
parents' departure the party continued. Sudha was expected to play in the
basement with the other children, among the washer and dryer, as dinner was
served to adults. The host and hostess did not have children of their own. Sudha
had slept on a cot in a spare room containing no permanent furniture other than
an ironing board and a closet devoted to cleaning supplies. In the morning there
were no Frosted Flakes for her to eat, only toast with margarine, and it was then,
during that restrained and disappointing adult breakfast, that the phone rang with
news of her brother's arrival.
She had been hoping for a sister but was delighted nevertheless no longer to
be an only child, to have someone help fill the emptiness she felt in her parents'
home. The few things they owned were always in their places, the two most

current issues of Time in the same spot on the coffee table. Sudha preferred the
homes of her American friends, crammed and piled with things, toothpaste
caking their sinks, their soft beds unmade. Finally, with Rahul's arrival, there
was a similar swelling and disorder: his lotions and diapers heaped on the top of
the dresser, stockpots clattering with boiling bottles on the stove, an infant's
strong, milky odor pervading the rooms. She remembered how excited she had
been, moving her things to one side to make space in her bedroom for Rahul's
bassinet, his changing table, his mobile of stuffed bumblebees. Toys and other
gifts accumulated in the crib he would eventually use; her favorite was a stuffed
white rabbit that played a tune if a key at its throat was turned. She had not
minded when her mother came in in the middle of the night to comfort Rahul,
sitting in a rocking chair, singing a song in Bengali, something about a fishbone
piercing the foot of a little boy, a song that would lull Sudha back to sleep also.
Birth announcements were bought at the drugstore, the card of Sudha's choosing,
and she helped to put them in their envelopes, dampening stamps with her father
on a wet sponge. Countless photographs were taken-Rahul sleeping in his
bassinet, being bathed in a plastic tub-and she took it upon herself to arrange
these in a special album, with a blue denim cover because he was a boy.
There was not the same documentation of Sudha's infancy. In London, after
she was born, her parents had rented two rooms in Balham from a Bengali
landlord named Mr. Pal, and it was he who had taken the few baby pictures of
Sudha that existed, wearing a white lace dress intended for a christening but that
her mother had simply thought pretty. Mr. Pal had opened his doors to her
parents when her mother was pregnant with Sudha, providing refuge from their
previous landlady, an elderly British woman who did not allow children under
her roof. Her parents told her that half the rentals in London in the sixties said
whites only, and the combination of being Indian and pregnant limited her
parents to the point where her father considered sending her mother back to
India to give birth, until they met Mr. Pal. To Sudha this story was like an
episode out of a Greek myth or the Bible, rich with blessing and portent,
marking her family as survivors in strange intolerant seas.
Four years later they moved to Massachusetts, her father transferring from
Badger to Raytheon, transporting no evidence of their years in London, no trace
apart from her mother's fondness for the McVitie's biscuits she ate every
morning with tea and her lifelong belief in the quality of British brassieres,
which she asked friends in the UK to mail her every so often. None of Sudha's
toys had made it on the journey across the Atlantic, no baby clothing or bedding
or keepsake of any kind. In grade school, when Sudha had been required to
present her autobiography to the class, a project for which the other students

brought in blankets and scuffed shoes and blackened spoons, she came only with
an envelope containing pictures Mr. Pal had taken, boring her classmates as she
stood at the front of the room.
None of this mattered after Rahul arrived. Sudha had slipped through the
cracks, but she was determined that her little brother should leave his mark as a
child in America. She sought out all the right toys for him, scavenging from yard
sales the Fisher Price barn, Tonka trucks, the Speak and Say that made animal
sounds, and other things that she'd discovered in the playrooms of her friends.
She asked her parents to buy him the books she'd been read by her first teachers,
Peter Rabbit and Frog and Toad. "What's the point of buying books for someone
who can't read?" her parents asked, legitimately enough, and so she checked
them out of her school library and read them to Rahul herself. She told her
parents to set up sprinklers on the lawn for him to run through in the summer,
and she convinced her father to put a swing set in the yard. She thought up
elaborate Halloween costumes, turning him into an elephant or a refrigerator,
while hers had come from boxes, a flimsy apron and a weightless mask. At times
she engaged with Rahul's upbringing more than he did-it was she, too heavy by
then for the seats, who would swing in the yard after school, she who spent
hours building towns out of Lincoln Logs that he would destroy with a gleeful
swipe of the hand.
Though she doted on him and adored him, she began to envy him in small
ways. She envied him for his lean limbs while she grew slightly pudgy once her
period came, and she envied him because people could call him Raoul, that he
could introduce himself in crowds without questions. She envied him for his
beauty; even when he was a child there was a clear sense of the handsome man
he would become. His face defied the family mold. Sudha, with her father's
rounded chin and her mother's low hairline, was transparently their offspring, but
Rahul looked little like either of them, his genes pulled not from the surface but
from some deeper, forgotten source. His complexion was darker, his skin an
unmistakable brown, his pronounced features lacking the indeterminate quality
she and her parents shared. He was allowed to wear shorts in summer, to play
sports in school, things her mother considered inappropriate for a girl. Sudha
supposed it was a combination of his being a boy and being younger, and her
parents being more at ease with the way things worked in America by then.
Sudha had no fondness for her younger self, no sentimental affection for the way
she had looked or the things she had done. what she felt was an overwhelming
sense of regret, for what exactly she did not know. She had looked, of course,
perfectly ordinary, her black hair worn in pigtails or braids, grown to her waist
one year and cut like Dorothy Hamill's the next. And she had done ordinary

things: attended slumber parties and played clarinet in the school band and sold
chocolate bars from door to door. And yet she could not forgive herself. Even as
an adult, she wished only that she could go back and change things: the ungainly
things she'd worn, the insecurity she'd felt, all the innocent mistakes she'd made.
Thanks to Rahul there was also someone else to witness the perplexing fact
of her parents' marriage. It was neither happy nor unhappy, and the lack of
emotion in either extreme was what upset Sudha most. She would have
understood quarrels, she believed she would even have understood divorce. She
always hoped some sign of love would manifest itself; the only things that
consoled her were a few pictures taken during their London years. Her mother
looked unrecognizably slim, hair styled at a salon, a woven purse shaped like a
cornucopia dangling from the crook of her elbow. Even her saris were
glamorous back then, tightly wrapped to show off her figure, patterned with a
spidery brown batik. Her father seemed vaguely mod, wearing suits with narrow
dark ties and sunglasses. Those were the days, Sudha, supposed, when
immigration was still an adventure, living with paraffin heaters, seeing snow for
the first time.
Wayland was the shock. Suddenly they were stuck, her parents aware that
they faced a life sentence of being foreign. In London her mother had been
working toward a certificate in Montessori education, but in America she did not
work, did not drive. She put on twenty pounds after Rahul was born, and her
father put away his mod suits and shopped at Sears. In Wayland they became
passive, wary, the rituals of small-town New England more confounding than
negotiating two of the world's largest cities. They relied on their children, on
Sudha especially. It was she who had to explain to her father that he had to
gather up the leaves in bags, not just drag them with his rake to the woods
opposite the house. She, with her perfect English, who called the repair
department at Lechmere to have their appliances serviced. Rahul never
considered it his duty to help their parents in this way. While Sudha regarded her
parents' separation from India as an ailment that ebbed and flowed like a cancer,
Rahul was impermeable to that aspect of their life as well. "No one dragged
them here," he would say. "Baba left India to get rich, and Ma married him
because she had nothing else to do." That was Rahul, always aware of the
family's weaknesses, never sparing Sudha from the things she least wanted to
face.
Another semester passed before she saw him again. She was accepted at
LSE, and in June she came home to Wayland for a week. During her visit, Sudha
gave herself fully to her parents, watching wimbledon with her father on

television, helping her mother cook and order new blinds for the bedrooms. She
was always in the house, while Rahul drifted in and out without explanation. He
was waiting tables part time at a seafood restaurant out in Scituate, thirty-five
miles away, sleeping most days, working dinner shifts, out with friends after
that. These were no longer friends from high school, boys Sudha had known
since Rahul started kindergarten. Instead, they were people he met working at
the restaurant, people he never bothered to invite home.
His aloofness troubled Sudha, but her parents said nothing. He seemed
always to be in a slightly bad mood and in urgent need to get somewhere-to his
job, to a gym where he went to lift weights, to the video store to return one of the
foreign films he would watch when everyone else was asleep. She and Rahul
never argued, but there were moments, when she crossed paths with him in the
hallway or asked him to pass her the remote control, when she was briefly
convinced he despised her. It was nothing he said or did-even in his avoidance
he was always coolly polite-but she sensed that he had revised his opinion of
her, that the Rahul who had once looked up to her and confided in her was
replaced by a person she could only offend. She wondered when he would
approach her for another run to the liquor store, but he never mentioned it. She
gathered he had his own supply, stashed away somewhere; one night, when she
was up late reading a magazine, she heard the sound of the ice machine grinding
in the refrigerator, cubes dropping into a glass.
She learned from her mother that his second-semester grades had been bad;
the first semester the lowest was a B, but now he'd gotten mostly C's. He had
dropped biology and organic chemistry and taken up film and English literature
instead. "Can you talk to him?" her mother asked Sudha. "Find out what went
wrong?" Sudha came to Rahul's defense, saying that it was an enormous
adjustment going from high school to college, that a lot of students had a hard
time. Her father did not hide his disapproval, and while he did not confront
Rahul, one day he said to Sudha, "He is floundering." He did not approve of
paying an astronomical tuition just so Rahul could watch French movies in a
classroom. Her father had no patience for failure, for indulgences. He never let
his children forget that there had been no one to help him as he helped them, so
that no matter how well Sudha did, she felt that her good fortune had been
handed to her, not earned. Both her parents came from humble backgrounds;
both their grandmothers had given up the gold on their arms to put roofs over
their families' heads and food on their plates. This mentality, as tiresome as it
sometimes felt, also reassured Sudha, for it was something her parents
understood and respected about each other, and she suspected it was the glue that
held them together.

Late one night, she knocked on Rahul's door. He was lying in bed, listening
to music on his headphones, leafing through a tattered copy of Beckett's plays.
He put the book on his chest when he saw her but didn't remove the headphones.
She saw a mug on the floor by the bed, filled with ice cubes and a clear liquid.
He didn't offer any, was playing their old game without her.
"So, what's going on at school?" she asked.
He looked up at her. His eyes were reddish. "I'm on vacation."
"Your grades weren't good, Rahul. You need to work a little harder."
"I did work hard," he said.
"I know the first year can be tough."
"I did work hard," he repeated. "My professors hate me. Is that my fault?"
"I'm sure they don't hate you," she said. She considered crossing the room
and sitting on the edge of the bed but remained where she was.
"what the fuck do you know?" he said, giving her a start.
"Look, I'm just trying to help."
"I'm not asking you to help. You don't need to fix anything. Has it ever
occurred to you that my life might be fine the way it is?"
His words silenced her, cut to the bone. She'd always had a heavy hand in
his life, it was true, striving not to control it but to improve it somehow. She had
always considered this her responsibility to him. She had not known how to be a
sister any other way.
"You don't even live here," he continued. "You think you can stroll in and
make everything perfect before you disappear to London? Is that what you want
to do?"
She looked at him, and then at the mug at the side of his bed, wondering
how much he'd consumed in the course of the evening, where the bottle was
hidden. She thought of her parents sleeping down the hall, unaware of what he
was doing, and she felt indignant on their behalf. "You're smart, Rahul. You're a
lot smarter than me. I don't get it."
He leaned over and picked up the cup from the floor. He took a sip and
swallowed, then slid the cup under the bed, out of sight. "You don't have to get
it, Didi. You don't have to get everything all the time."
On Sudha's last night before heading back to Philadelphia he surprised
them, agreeing to go out to a restaurant to celebrate her impending departure for
England. Their parents were in good moods, reminiscing about London, trying to
remember the order of stops on the Piccadilly Line. Rahul was jovial, too, telling
Sudha about all the writers' homes and graves she should visit while she was
there. He spoke with an aggressive authority, as if he'd been to Marx's tomb

himself, and for the first time it occurred to Sudha that perhaps Rahul was
jealous of those years she and her parents had lived in England, those years
when Rahul did not exist. He ordered a Singapore Sling and nursed it slowly
through the meal. He mentioned nothing about having plans later on, but before
the check came he looked at his watch and leapt up from the table, saying he was
late for something, and left in his own car.
Sudha went home with her parents, was up watching Spellbound on the
VCR when the phone rang. It was Rahul calling from the local police station.
He'd been pulled over on a quiet road near Mill Pond for wavering in his lane.
His blood alcohol content was not extreme, but because he was under twentyone it was enough to get him arrested. He asked Sudha to come to the station
alone, to bring three hundred dollars in cash. But it was past midnight, and
besides, the keys to her parents' car were in the pocket of her father's pants, in
their bedroom. She woke up her father, told him to get dressed. Together they
went to post bail and release Rahul from the cell. Her father drove, his face
creased with sleep, seeming disoriented in the town he'd lived in for years. They
stopped at an ATM and withdrew money. "You go," her father said when they
reached the station. "I prefer to wait in the car." His voice faltered as he spoke,
as it had the day he'd called Sudha in college, to tell her his father died. And so
she spared her father that humiliation, that pain, entering a place where
handcuffed criminals were brought. When she saw Rahul he was sober, the pads
of his fingers blackened from ink. It was a Sunday night, the arraignment
scheduled for the following day. "Will you go with me?" he asked as they
walked back to the car, and he was shaken enough for her to assure him that she
would.
"It's ridiculous," her mother said the next morning as Rahul slept. She
blamed the police for overreacting. "It's not like he had an accident. He was only
going forty miles an hour. They probably stopped him just for being Indian." Her
father said nothing. He sat sipping his tea and reading the Sunday Globe. He'd
said nothing on the way home.
"That wasn't the problem," Sudha said slowly, forcing cold butter across the
surface of her toast.
"what are you saying, Sudha?" her mother asked, sounding bothered. Her
father did not put down his paper, but she sensed that he had stopped reading.
Sudha knew that what she was about to say was something they expected and
also viscer-ally feared, like disobedient children who are about to be slapped.
That it was up to her to deliver the blow.
"I think Rahul might have a drinking problem."
"Sudha, please," her mother said. After a pause she added, "I gather

everyone at American colleges drinks." She spoke as if drinking were an
undergraduate hobby, a phase one outgrew.
"Not like that."
"Didn't you drink in college?"
"Not like that," Sudha repeated. Not enough to get arrested, she was
tempted to say.
"That's the problem with this country," her mother said. "Too many
freedoms, too much having fun. when we were young, life wasn't always about
fun."
Sudha pitied her mother, pitied her refusal to accommodate such an
unpleasant and alien fact, her need to blame America and its laws instead of her
son. She sensed that her father understood, but he refused to engage in the
conversation, refused to confront Rahul when he eventually came downstairs,
showered and penitent, promising never to do such a thing again. Her parents
had always been blind to the things that plagued their children: being teased at
school for the color of their skin or for the funny things their mother
occasionally put into their lunch boxes, potato curry sandwiches that tinted
wonderbread green. what could there possibly be to be unhappy about? her
parents would have thought. "Depression" was a foreign word to them, an
American thing. In their opinion their children were immune from the hardships
and injustices they had left behind in India, as if the inoculations the pediatrician
had given Sudha and Rahul when they were babies guaranteed them an existence
free of suffering.
She was excited to be in London, curious to know the land of her birth.
Before leaving she had applied for her British passport, a document her parents
had not obtained for her when she was born, and when she presented it at
Heathrow the immigration officer welcomed her home. Her parents went with
her and stayed ten days, settling her into her hall of residence off Tottenham
Court Road. They reminded her to look right before crossing the street, bought
her cardigans from Marks and Spencer's to see her through the winter. They took
her to Balham on the Tube to show her the house where she'd been an infant.
Together they made a trip to Sheffield, three hours away through the
countryside, where their old landlord Mr. Pal now lived with his family. They
did not speak of Rahul unless forced to by friends, and when they did, it was
always the same unobjectionably impressive facts about him-that he was at
Cornell, a sophomore now. These facts gave her parents a feeble hope: as if
college, where he'd begun to fall apart, would magically put him together again.
After her parents left she grew busy with her classes, and with the new

friends she made who came from all over the world, joining them to study and
sightsee and visit pubs. Perhaps because it was her birthplace, she felt an
instinctive connection to London, a sense of belonging though she barely knew
her way around. In spite of the ocean that now separated her from her parents,
she felt closer to them, but she also felt free, for the first time in her life, of her
family's weight. Still, she could not drink anymore without thinking of Rahul,
always conscious that the second pint she drained, satisfied at the end of a night
out, would not have been enough for him. At the arraignment she'd sat next to
him in the crowded courtroom, waiting for his name to be called, listening as the
charges were read. She was there to stand by him, to support him, but in that
place of judgment she was not on his side. His license was suspended for six
months and he was ordered to attend some alcohol education classes in Ithaca. In
the end her father had had to pay nearly two thousand dollars in fines and fees.
The arrest was mentioned in The Wayland Town Crier, a paper her parents
received.
In November, wandering through the National Gallery, she met a man. She
had been admiring The Arnolfini Marriage by van Eyck, lingering in front of it
after a cluster of people had passed. It was an oil painting of a couple in a
bedroom holding hands, with a small dog standing at their feet. The man wore a
fur-trimmed purple cape and an overly large black straw hat. The woman wore
an emerald-green gown that trailed like a heavy curtain onto the floor, some of
the material gathered up in her left hand. She had a white veil on her head and
looked possibly pregnant, Sudha wasn't sure. There was a window behind the
man, with a piece of fruit, an apricot or a tangerine, on the sill. On the wall hung
a convex mirror that reflected everything in the painting.
"Come closer," the man next to Sudha said, ushering her a few steps
forward so that no one could cross their line of vision. "Otherwise you can't
really see." He started talking about the mirror, how it was the focal point of the
painting, capturing the floor and the ceiling, the room and the world outside, and
then she saw that it reflected not only the couple but also a pair of men standing
in the doorway, peering into the room just as she was. "One of them is van
Eyck," the man said. "That's what the inscription above the mirror says. It's Latin
for 'van Eyck was here.' " He spoke softly, as if for Sudha alone, with the
singsong British cadence that was already influencing Sudha's speech. His dark
hair was slightly long, and he kept raking it with his fingers away from his face.
She could smell the slightly spiced soap on his skin. He wore a tweed blazer and
corduroy pants, and carried a raincoat draped over one arm. He told her that the
two men in the doorway of the painting were witnessing the couple's union,
adding that the painting was intended to serve as a marriage certificate. "Of

course, that's just one interpretation," the man said. "Some argue that it's a
betrothal scene."
She studied the details he spoke of, the glow of the paint, conscious of their
shared gaze. "What about the shoes? Do they mean something?" Sudha heard
herself asking, pointing to a pair of abandoned wooden clogs in the foreground,
and then to some red slippers by the carpet.
The man turned to Sudha then. He was older than she expected, closer to
forty judging from the eyes, clear blue eyes that settled calmly upon different
points of her face. His expression was serious, placidly cast, but the sides of his
mouth now rose up in a smile. "I suspect it means they're standing on holy
ground. Either that or she just went shopping."
She had not known that day what a famous painting it was, but the man
never made her feel ignorant. They walked to other paintings, the man bending
his head down toward Sudha's and talking about them, and eventually he asked if
she would like to join him for tea. His name was Roger Feather-stone. He had a
PhD in art history, was an editor at an art magazine and had also written a book
about Renaissance portraiture. He wooed Sudha consistently, romantically:
flowers every time he knocked on the door, gifts of gloves and earrings and
perfume. He was an only child who had grown up in English boarding schools;
his father had worked overseas for Singer sewing machines and now both his
parents were dead. Roger was born in India, spent the first three years of his life
in
Bombay but remembered nothing. He had been married in his twenties to a
girl he'd known at Cambridge; after two years she left him, renounced her
possessions, and joined a Buddhist monastery in Tibet.
He took responsibility for things, booking theater tickets, making
reservations at restaurants, packing picnics and dragging Sudha off to
Hampstead Heath. He was the first man she'd dated who was never late, never
forgot to call when he said he would, and Sudha quickly recognized in him the
same strain of competence she possessed. He enjoyed food and cooking, inspired
to get up early and walk to a favorite bakery for pastries, surprising Sudha, the
first morning she woke up in his flat in Shepherd's Bush, with breakfast on a
tray. He had lived alone for many years but quickly opened his life to her, giving
her a key, lined drawers in his bureau, a glass shelf in his medicine cabinet. In
his youth he had dreamed of being a painter, had enrolled at Chelsea Art School,
but after a teacher told him he would not go far he never touched a canvas again.
He was not bitter about this turn of events; like Sudha, he was a person who
understood what his limits were. At the same time he could be exacting, writing
withering reviews for his magazine, insisting on the best table at restaurants,

sending back wine. Like Sudha he was moderate with alcohol, always ordering a
bottle for the table but seldom consuming more than a glass or two.
As Christmas approached she told her parents she had too much work and
did not come home, when in fact she and Roger went away together, to Seville
and then to the Costa del Sol. When she returned from Spain there was a
message at the switchboard of her dormitory from her parents, asking her to call.
When she did, from one of the pay phones in the lobby of the dorm, they told her
that Rahul's grades had not improved, that a letter had come from an adviser,
expressing concern. He was in Wayland now for Christmas break; after one
explosive fight, he'd stopped speaking to them. She was glad that Roger wasn't
there to overhear the call, that he'd kissed her good-bye in the taxi and gone back
to his flat. She'd painted a hazy image of her family that he absorbed as if it were
an endnote in a book, something stemming from her but safely tucked out of
sight. "I can't wait to meet them," he told her, words that, Sudha hoped, made his
intentions clear. Beyond the basic details he did not probe. And so she did not
tell Roger about Rahul's drinking, about his arrest, about the fact that she had not
talked to her brother in months.
Her parents asked her to speak to Rahul, saying he'd gone out for a walk, to
try in a little while. She waited a few days. She was surprised after all these
months by how upset she felt. And she was upset at her parents, too, for still
depending on her to help. She called from Roger's flat, putting the charges on a
card while Roger was at work. Rahul had turned twenty in the first week of
January, a thing she'd let pass without acknowledgment. He picked up the phone,
and she wished him happy birthday now. It was noon in Massachusetts, early
evening in London. The sky was dark through Roger's kitchen window; at the
counter, Sudha was setting out cheese and crackers and olives for her and Roger
to eat together when he got home.
"Things okay?" she asked.
"Everything's fine. Ma and Baba are getting totally hysterical over nothing."
Rahul spoke as if no strain existed between them, asking her how London was.
"They said you failed two classes."
"They were lousy classes."
"Are you even going to your classes?"
"Lay off, Didi," he said, his mood turning.
"Are you?" she persisted.
There was a pause. She heard the flicking of a lighter, the first pent-up
exhale of a cigarette. "I don't want to be doing this."
"What do you want to do?" she asked, not bothering to conceal her
exasperation. "I'm writing a play."

She was surprised by this information and found it promising that he was
actually doing something. He had always been a good writer; once, when he was
in high school, he'd written a response to one of the take-home essay questions
she had on a philosophy exam at Penn, a question about Plato's Euthyphro that
her professor had approved of with a lengthy comment.
She put an olive in her mouth, extracted the thin purple pit, and placed it on
a painted dish she and Roger had bought together in Seville. "That's great,
Rahul. But you have to study, too."
"I want to drop out."
"Ma and Baba aren't going to go for that. Finish college and then you can
do whatever you want."
"I'm sick of wasting time. And I want my car back. I hate not driving. I feel
trapped."
She controlled herself, not telling him that it was ludicrous to expect their
parents to trust him on the road again. "It's just two more years of your life,
Rahul. Try to stick it out. Otherwise you'll end up hating yourself."
"Jesus, you sound just like them," he said and hung up on her.
She returned to Boston in April, during the break after the Lent term, a
diamond ring from Roger concealed on a chain beneath her sweater, and this
made her feel dipped in a protective coating from her family. After January her
parents had not bothered her again about Rahul, telling her, the one time she
asked, that he'd gone back to school. She felt guilty for distancing herself but not
enough to counsel her parents, not enough to speak to Rahul. She had a tenthousand-word dissertation to write on deregulation for her degree, and she had
Roger, had moved in with him by then. She was surprised to see Rahul standing
at the airport with her parents. All three of them looked sad, preoccupied, her
parents perking up only when they caught sight of her behind her trolley piled
with bags.
"Hey," she said, walking up to him, hugging him, though initially his long
arms remained at his side. "It's good to see you."
"Welcome home," he said, and when he stepped back, she saw that he was
not smiling.
"Is your semester finished already?"
He shook his head, still refusing to meet her gaze, and then a small, oddsounding laugh escaped from him. "I live here now."
She had come home to tell her family about Roger, to tell them she planned
to move permanently to London and marry him, but it was Rahul they had to talk
about first. During the ride home from the airport she pieced together what had

happened. It was her mother who did the talking; her father drove, muttering to
himself now and then about the condition of the traffic, and Rahul spent most of
the time staring out the window, as if he occupied the back of a cab. Though he
returned to Ithaca after Christmas break, he'd stopped going to classes, and two
weeks ago, after being formally dismissed from the university, he moved back to
Wayland.
From what Sudha could tell, he was living in the house as if it were simply
another vacation. He stayed in his room or watched television during the day.
Their parents had sold his car, and so he never went out. Previously when he'd
avoided them, there was something bristling in him, something about to explode.
That energy was missing now. He no longer seemed upset with them, or with the
fact that he was at home. For a while her parents told their friends that he was
taking a leave of absence and then that he was in the process of transferring to
BU. "Rahul needs a city in order to thrive," they said; but he never applied to
other schools. They told people Rahul was looking for a job, and then the lie
became more elaborate, and Rahul had a job, a consulting job from home, when
in fact he stayed home all day doing nothing. Their mother, who had always
hoped her children would live under her roof, was now ashamed that this was the
case.
Eventually he got a job managing a Laundromat in Wayland three days a
week. Her parents bought a cheap used car so that Rahul could drive into town.
Sudha knew that the job embarrassed her parents. They had not minded him
washing dishes in the past, but now they lived in fear of the day someone they
knew would see their son weighing sacks of dirty clothes on a scale. Other
Bengalis gossiped about him and prayed their own children would not ruin their
lives in the same way. And so he became what all parents feared, a blot, a
failure, someone who was not contributing to the grand circle of
accomplishments Bengali children were making across the country, as surgeons
or attorneys or scientists, or writing articles for the front page of The New York
Times.
Sudha was among those successful children now, her collection of higher
degrees framed and filling up her parents' upstairs hall. She was working as a
project manager for an organization in London that promoted micro loans in
poor countries. And she was spoken for. In the summer, she and Roger flew to
Massachusetts so that he could meet Sudha's family and ask formally for her
hand. At Roger's request they stayed not in Wayland but in a hotel in Boston; by
now she knew him well enough to accept that he would maintain a limited
exposure to her family, just as he guarded his body, on the beach, from the rays
of the sun. "Better to be up front about these things at the start," Roger had told

Sudha in his kind but firm way, and she took this as another sign of his
responsible nature, his vigilance toward their life together. The hotel
arrangement was accepted by her parents without protest; Rahul had stripped
them of their capacity to fight back. They accepted that she and Roger planned
to have a registry wedding in London, that they were willing to have only a
reception in Massachusetts, that Roger had been previously married, that he and
Sudha had a fourteen-year gap. They approved of his academic qualifications,
his ability, thanks to his wisely invested inheritance, to buy a house for himself
and Sudha in Kilburn. It helped that he'd been born in India, that he was English
and not American, drinking tea, not coffee, and saying "zed" not "zee,"
superficial things that allowed her parents to relate to him. Sudha felt that they
were not so much making room for Roger in the family as allowing him to take
her away. But Rahul had not loosened his grip; he asked Roger questions,
combing through the current issue of Roger's art magazine that her parents had
admired and set aside, doing his part to inspect his sister's future husband for
flaws.
"Roger's a good guy," Rahul told her when the two of them were alone in
the kitchen clearing plates. "Congratulations."
"Thanks. Thanks for being here," she said. She meant it; she'd never
brought a man to the house, hadn't realized how nervous she'd be.
"Got nowhere else to go."
"So, how are things?" she asked. "It's not driving you crazy, living at home
this way?"
"It's not so bad."
She was grateful that he was talking to her, afraid to pressure him. She was
aware of a horrible imbalance between them. She felt accused, simply because
her life wasn't broken in the same way.
"How's the Laundromat?" He shrugged.
"Are you still writing your play?"
"It was stupid."
Not knowing what else to do she stepped forward to hug him, and it was
then that she smelled the liquor, sweet, strong, unmistakable. During lunch he'd
gotten up from the table once; now she realized he'd gone wherever the bottle
was hidden. He was not drunk, there was nothing about his behavior to indicate
that he'd had more than a single drink. But the fact that he'd consumed the
alcohol in stealth, that he could not endure her family's company without it,
made her realize that Rahul was not simply fond of drinking, or a social drinker,
or a binge drinker, which were all the ways she'd rationalized it until now.
"You're welcome to visit us in London any time," she offered, saddened by

the fact that she did not mean it.
"I don't have any money."
"I'm sure Baba would buy you a ticket."
"I don't want his money," Rahul said.
You live in his house, she wanted to point out. You eat the food Ma puts on
the table. You let them put gas in your car. But she said none of this, knowing
that if she did, the door he tentatively held open for her benefit would slam once
more in her face.
In the months before Sudha's wedding reception, planned for the fall, Rahul
began dating a woman named Elena. Elena was an aspiring actress, and she was
a waitress at a diner in Waltham. He had conveyed these facts to Sudha when
she came back to Wayland ten days before the reception, without Roger, who
would be flying in for the party alone. "I've never felt this way before, Didi," he
told her. A few days before the reception he brought Elena home. Sudha was a
married woman now, but being without Roger made her anxious, that protective
coating he provided suddenly thinning. Elena was thirty, eight years older than
Rahul. But she could have passed for a high school student, wearing tight jeans
and a tank top, her long brown hair fastened at one side with a barrette, dark
liner rimming her eyes. She was quiet, speaking only when spoken to, not
working to charm Sudha's parents as Roger had. She told them she'd grown up in
Mattapoisett and had gone to Emerson. She did not eat the rice Sudha's mother
served with lunch, saying it caused her bloating. Rahul kept his arm around her
thin shoulders, kissing her dreamily in front of everyone. He spoke on Elena's
behalf, saying she had once made a commercial for an allergy medicine. He kept
mentioning someone named Crystal; it turned out that Crystal was Elena's
daughter from a previous boyfriend.
Sudha's parents said nothing as this information was divulged. They had
welcomed Elena, filled their table in her honor as they had done for Roger,
making chitchat about the Big Dig and the menu for Sudha and Roger's
reception. But then, as Sudha and her mother were bringing out tea and a bowl
of pantuas in their syrupy bath, Rahul announced that he and Elena were
engaged.
Sudha froze behind a chair, gripping the spoons she was in the process of
distributing. The room seemed to tilt; she pressed down on the tablecloth as if a
forceful wind were about to come and blow everything away. She looked down
at the diamond on her finger, imagining the same thing on Elena's hand,
wondering where in the world her brother would get the money to buy a ring.
The Darjeeling brought out for special occasions grew too strong in the pot, the

reddish-brown pantuas still crowded together in their serving bowl.
"That's not possible," their father said finally, breaking the silence that he
had been maintaining, it seemed to Sudha, for over a year.
"What's not possible about it?" Rahul asked. He still had an arm around
Elena, his index finger stroking the side of her neck.
"You are only a boy. You have no career, no goal, no path in life. You are
in no position to be getting married. And this woman," their father said,
registering Elena's presence only for an instant before turning away, "is
practically old enough to be your mother."
They were even, equilibrium, if it could be called that, restored to the room.
But Sudha knew that it was the furthest thing from equilibrium, that in fact it
was war.
"You're a snob," Rahul said. "You're nothing but a pathetic old snob."
There was no rage in his voice, none of the violence Sudha had expected. He
stood up in a fluid motion, seeming to lift Elena to her feet as well, as if his arm
were a magnet for her form, and then the two of them left the house. Sudha and
her parents waited until they heard the sound of Elena's car backing out of the
driveway, and then her mother began to pour the tea.
"I have been thinking," her father said, turning to Sudha, breaking the
silence for the second time. "The restaurant where we will have the wedding
reception. There is a bar?"
"All restaurants have bars, Baba."
"I am concerned about Rahul. He has no control when it comes to-" He
paused, searching for the word he wished to use. "When it comes to that."
Sudha shut her eyes, thinking she might cry. All this time she had been
waiting for her parents to acknowledge Rahul's drinking, but hearing her father
say it now, after what had just happened, was too much.
"Maybe we should hold it somewhere else," her mother suggested.
"Somewhere without drinks."
"It's too late for that. And it's not fair," Sudha said. Sudha and Roger
expected to be able to drink at their own wedding reception, she maintained.
Why should everyone be punished because of Rahul?
"Can't you ask him not to drink too much that day?" her mother asked.
"No," Sudha said, pushing back her chair and standing up. She had been
fiddling all this time with her teaspoon, and she flung it now, ineffectually, on
the carpeted floor of the dining room, where it fell without sound. "I can't talk to
him anymore. I can't fix him. I can't keep fixing what's wrong with this family,"
she said, and like her brother only a little while earlier, she stormed out of the
room.

During the reception Rahul made a toast. It was a tribute to Sudha and
Roger, but Sudha held her breath as he spoke, wanting him only to sit down. He
was without Elena. The day after walking out with her he'd returned abject,
alone. Sudha wondered if Elena had broken up with him, but she didn't ask. She
wondered if Rahul would not attend the reception, but he was at the restaurant an
hour early, maintaining his rightful place in the family, greeting people as they
arrived, showing them to the sign-in book. They were almost all friends of
Sudha's parents, almost all Bengali. No one from Roger's side had come.
The toast went on, the words becoming slurred. Before the reception, her
father had spoken with the bartender, paying him extra to monitor Rahul's
drinks; Sudha did not have the heart to tell her father that Rahul was beyond
such measures, that alcohol dwelled in his pockets where most men's wallets
were, that the two glasses of champagne he'd had openly were just for show.
Rahul began telling a story about Sudha's childhood, dredging up an anecdote
about going on a vacation long ago in Bar Harbor, Sudha needing to use the
bathroom and there not being a gas station for miles. Then their father got up,
stood next to Rahul, and whispered something in his ear, motioning for him to sit
down.
"Excuse me, I'm not finished." People laughed, not realizing Rahul had not
meant to be funny, that it wasn't some sort of comic routine. The microphone
made a screeching sound.
Their father took him by the elbow then, and Rahul flinched, giving a
shove. "You-don't-touch me," Rahul hissed, the words amplified by the
microphone.
One of Sudha's parents' friends got up to make another toast, but Sudha
didn't hear it. She was aware of guests talking among themselves in front of their
plates of pink tandoori and her brother heading toward the bar. When she got up
to look for him, he was no longer there, his car missing from the parking lot. She
alerted her parents, prepared herself for another call from the police. But no one
was in the position to search for him in the middle of the reception, and without
him there, perversely, her parents began to relax. Only Sudha couldn't relax.
Roger, who had had a little too much champagne himself, told her not to worry.
"He's been going through a rough time," he observed dispassionately as he led
her on the dance floor. "He's young."
She stared at her husband, wanting to scream at him for believing in Rahul
in a way she no longer could. She had never told Roger about the old game of
hiding beer cans, a fact that now tortured her. But once again she chose not to
tell Roger, fearing that he would blame her, that he would judge Rahul. It was

like the painting they'd first looked at together in London, the small mirror at the
back revealing more than the room at first appeared to contain. And what was
the point of making Roger lean in close, to see what she was already forced to?
It turned out Rahul hadn't gone far, only back to their parents' house, where
they found him, at the end of the night, in his bedroom asleep. The following
morning Roger and Sudha flew off for their honeymoon. She felt neutralized in
the air, sealed off in the cabin, the unnaturally strong sunlight bleaching out the
events of the night before, but as soon as they touched down in St. Thomas she
felt tainted all over again, hearing Rahul hissing into the microphone, insulting
her father and pushing him in front of all their friends. Life went on. Sudha and
Roger returned to London, settling into their new house, writing cards to thank
their guests for helping to make it such a special day. But Sudha could not
forgive Rahul for what had happened, those dreadful minutes he stood at the
microphone the only thing she remembered when she looked at the photographs
of her reception, all the posed portraits on the grass in which they were smiling,
leading up to that.
And then he disappeared for good. There was no note, no explanation. He
simply left one night, her parents said, and had not returned. By then his
comings and goings were so erratic that their parents had not fully absorbed the
fact of his absence until a few days had passed. Then they realized that his
toothbrush was not in the bathroom, and that one of the big suitcases normally
used for trips to India was not in the basement. He must have decided to visit a
friend, her parents said, but they knew none of Rahul's new friends and were
unable to make calls. They reported that the car was missing, and it was located
the next day, abandoned at the bus station in Framing-ham. Roger, trying to be
helpful, suggested they contact Elena, but they had never known Elena's last
name.
After a week a letter came, with a postmark from Columbus, Ohio. It was
not addressed to anyone; he had not even put their family surname on the
envelope. "Don't bother looking for me here," he'd written, "I'm only spending
the night. I don't want to hear from any of you. Please leave me alone." They
wondered how he got to Ohio, since he had no money, wondered if he'd hitched
rides. A week passed before her mother noticed that the small zippered pouches
she kept hidden at the backs of her drawers, behind her jumble of British
brassieres, containing all the gold jewels she'd acquired over her lifetime, all the
pieces representative of her husband's success in America, much of which was
intended to go to whatever woman Rahul eventually married, were missing.
He had been gone two months when Sudha discovered that she was

pregnant; one night during her miserable honeymoon, her body had begun to
make a life. Suddenly alongside the terrible there was now the wonderful, the
good news reviving her parents. Sudha thought of Rahul often during her
pregnancy, invaded by memories and dreams of their childhood, recalling the
existence that had produced them both, an experience that was both within her
and behind her and that Roger would never understand. In her first trimester her
emotions dipped and soared without warning. On good days she believed that
Rahul needed to get away in order to put his life back together. On bad days she
feared that the police would call her parents saying his body had been found in a
ditch. He was absent the following Christmas, which Sudha and Roger spent in
Wayland, absent at the hospital in London the night she gave birth to Neel. And
she got used to it, used to having a brother she never saw.
Wrapped up with Neel, her parents got used to it, too, coming to London
now at every opportunity, their tiny grandson plugging up the monstrous hole
Rahul left in his wake. For hours they stared into the bassinet, at the stern downy
creature with Roger's pale skin and Sudha's dark hair and a destiny all his own.
After a few months Sudha returned to work, first three days a week, then five,
leaving the house at eight thirty and returning at six, taking Neel from the nanny
and spending just two hours with him, first in the bath and then nursing him to
sleep in the rocker. She felt awful, always, that it was for such a brief piece of
her day that she actually cared for Neel, but she reminded herself that he was too
young to resent her for it, his face lighting up at the sight of her, leaping into her
arms as if she were the most wonderful being on earth.
It was then, at a time when her life was at its most demanding and also
gratifying, that she returned home one cold Saturday from grocery shopping and
found, on the other side of the door slot, an envelope from America addressed in
Rahul's hand.
She stood in the entryway of the house, with the brown-and-gold wallpaper
she and Roger kept meaning to tear down, staring at that simple but certain proof
of Rahul's existence. She wondered how he'd gotten her new address, but then
she remembered, when she was home for her wedding reception, writing it on a
piece of paper and taping it to her parents' refrigerator. Neel napped in his
stroller, not knowing the existence of his uncle, not knowing the shock that filled
his mother's eyes with tears. There was a faded postmark from New York, and
on the back of the envelope, a post office box somewhere upstate. Before
opening the envelope she pulled out an atlas. The town was north of Ithaca. She
was stunned-she had assumed he'd gone as far as possible, to Oregon or
California. She never thought he'd want to return anywhere near the place where
he'd so spectacularly failed. Inside was a single sheet of paper that he'd stuck

into a typewriter.
Dear Didi,
I hope this is you. First, I want to say that I'm sorry. For everything. I know
I screwed up, but things are better now. I have a job at a restaurant, as a line
cook. I discovered that I really like cooking. Nothing fancy, but I've gotten really
good at omelettes. Also, I'm writing another play. I showed it to someone I met
here, a guy who's directed some things at Syracuse, and he said it still needs
work but that I should stick with it! I'm living with Elena-remember her? We got
back together and I convinced her to come up here. Crystal's in fifth grade and
Elena got a job doing human resources at the university. Think what you will
about Elena, but she got me to start rehab. So like I said, things are better.
Anyway, I'm sorry for everything and I hope you (and Roger) can forgive me for
being a jerk at your wedding. I really am happy for you guys. And I'd like to
come to London and see you, if that's okay. I've saved up some money and I'll
have a little time off from the restaurant this summer. I'm assuming you won't
mention any of this to our parents.

Rahul
She replied immediately, without rereading the letter or bothering to ask
Roger if it was all right for Rahul to stay with them. She tore a sheet of paper out
of the notebook they kept by the phone, for messages, and wrote:
Dear Rahul,
Yes, it's me. I've had a baby, a boy named Neel. He's ten months old, and I
want you to meet him.
She stopped, then signed the letter. She had nothing more to say.
She had not seen Rahul since her wedding night, a fact that was incredible
to her. "Hi, Didi," he said when she opened the door, still using the traditional
term of respect their parents had taught him. She felt no awkwardness, the sight
of him after over a year and a half standing under the portico of the house,
completing a part of her that had been missing, like the clothes she could wear
again now that the weight of her pregnancy was gone.
"Here he is," she said to Rahul, adjusting Neel in her arms. Neel stuck out a
hand, his fingers gripping a digestive biscuit. He babbled softly, taking in the
new person in front of him.
"That's right," Rahul said, stroking Neel's cheek with the back of his index
finger. "It's your screwup uncle finally here to see you." He shook his head in
disbelief, acquainting himself with the details of Neel's face, the nose and eyes
and mouth and wisps of hair that Sudha felt she'd known all her life. It was
Rahul who'd changed. He'd put on weight, enough so that his once refined
features appeared common, his neck and waistline thick. He had acquired the
stoop of an older, uncertain man. His hair was combed back from his head,
receding above the temples, the sideburns long. His jeans had lost their stiffness,
frayed at the hems. The pin-striped blazer looked like it had come from a thrift
store and was a little short in the sleeves.
"I can't believe you were born and I didn't know it. You're absolutely
perfect," he said to Neel. He looked at Sudha, then Neel, then back at Sudha.
"He's got your face, totally."
"You think? I see Roger's."
Rahul shook his head. "No way, Didi. This boy is a Mukher-jee through
and through."
She gave him a tour of the house: the kitchen and a small toilet in the
basement, the parlor above, two bedrooms and a bathroom above that, Roger's

study under the eaves. In spite of all the stories the house was diminutive, and
they were constantly going up and down the staircase, which these days Neel
was also attempting to climb. The steps were too much for Sudha's father, who
had recently developed bursitis in his knee, and when her parents last visited
London they'd stayed with friends in the suburbs. But Roger had agreed to let
Rahul sleep on the daybed normally covered with papers in the study.
"Feel free to take a nap," she told Rahul, but he declined, coaxing Neel into
his arms and not letting go as Sudha peeled potatoes and prepared to roast a
chicken. He took in the low-ceilinged space, with its black-and-white
checkerboard floor, a perpetually cluttered dining table, Spode plates and copper
molds hung on yellow walls. Roger had painted the walls himself, the final layer
applied with a sponge. Rahul stopped in front of some shelves where the
cookbooks were, along with photographs in frames. Most of the photos were of
Neel: in the hours after his birth, in the arms of Sudha's parents, sitting in his
stroller outside of the house. There were no pictures of Rahul. "When was this
taken?" he asked.
"Which?"
"It looks like an annaprasan."
"Oh that," she said, pricking a fork into a lemon, thinking back to the day
Neel was fed his first meal a few months before, her parents flying to London for
the occasion. "It was just a tiny thing at home," she told him, as if that would
explain away Rahul's absence. It was the maternal uncle who traditionally fed
the child. In Neel's case it had been Sudha's father.
He crossed the floor to where she stood at the butcher block and removed
his wallet from his back pocket. With one hand he shook it so that it displayed a
school portait of a smiling young girl with freckles and two long brown
ponytails. "This is Crystal," he said proudly, explaining that he arranged to be
home every day when Crystal got home from school, making her a snack and
then cooking her dinner before Elena returned and he went off to his shift at the
restaurant. He didn't pull out a picture of Elena but Sudha remembered her
clearly from that one time she'd come to lunch. Sudha didn't ask Rahul if he and
Elena had gotten married, if they were going to have a child of their own. Sudha
had tried to help her brother but it was Elena who had succeeded. "She's a great
kid," he said, before putting away Crystal's picture. "I thought I'd get her a little
tea set, you know, something really English? She'd love that."
He lifted Neel into the air, shaking him playfully, rubbing his face against
Neel's belly, Neel cackling hysterically.
"Careful," Sudha warned.
Rahul obliged, stopping the game and hugging Neel tightly, then beginning

to tickle him so that the cackles started up again. "Relax, Didi. I'm a parent too,
now."
Sudha and Roger had white wine with dinner, but Rahul had asked only for
club soda mixed with some orange juice. They ate outside, at a small table on the
garden patio, overlooking the rosebushes that thrived in spite of Sudha and
Roger's neglect. She had wondered about the wine, whether or not to drink it in
front of Rahul. There were a few bottles of Scotch and vodka in their kitchen
cabinets left over from a house-warming party she and Roger had thrown, and
she stuffed them into the back of her closet and into the sweater chest at the foot
of their bed, telling herself that Roger would never notice. Neel sat in Rahul's
lap, eating small dollops of mashed potato from Roger's extended finger.
"First time in London, is it?" Roger asked Rahul.
"Apart from sitting in Heathrow dozens of times on the way to Calcutta,"
Rahul said, and Sudha was reminded of all those trips they'd taken together in
childhood to see their relatives, trips that would never take place again. They had
slept beside one another on the same bed, often bathed together, taken
everything in with one pair of eyes.
Rahul mentioned things he wanted to see in the course of the week-the
British Museum, Freud's house, the V &A-asking if it was possible to go to
Stratford-upon-Avon for the day. He seemed suddenly desperate to interact with
the world, after all those years of sitting up in his room. Roger told him when the
museums were open, what was currently on exhibit, and it struck Sudha how
little her husband and her brother were acquainted, that they remained all but
strangers. "Mainly I want to spend time with Neel," Rahul said. "I can take him
out to a park or a zoo, whatever."
Sudha told Rahul to enjoy himself, that Neel spent the days with a nanny,
but that in the evening his nephew would be all his.
"So, when's the next one?" Rahul asked, draping Neel over his legs, jiggling
them up and down. "Next what?" Roger asked. "The next kid."
"Have you been talking to Ma?" Sudha said, beginning to laugh before
abruptly stopping herself.
"What do you want, buddy?" Rahul asked, looking down at Neel's upturned
face. "A little brother like me, or a sister?"
Now that the subject of their parents had come up she decided to give Rahul
their news, that their father was retiring at the end of the year and that their
parents were shopping for a flat in Calcutta. "That's where they are now," she
said.
"They're not in Wayland?"

"No." It was a fact that had made it easier for Sudha to honor Rahul's
request and not tell her parents about his visit. "Are they moving back for good?"
"Maybe." She told him about their father's knee trouble, that he was going
to have surgery to have fluid drained. One day, she knew, it would be something
more serious, and when it came, as long as Rahul stayed away, she would have
to be an only child all over again.
After dinner Roger put away the leftovers while Sudha went upstairs to run
Neel's bath. Rahul came with her, sitting on the toilet and blowing some bubbles
he'd brought for Neel as she crouched on the floor and soaped and rinsed him.
Neel was ecstatic about the bubbles, waiting wide-eyed for each to emerge from
the little plastic wand, reaching out and popping them and calling out for more.
"Okay, little guy, time for bed," she said after a few minutes, lifting the
rubber plug and letting the water drain out out of the claw-foot tub. She reached
for Neel's towel, throwing it over her shoulder and lifting him out. She wrapped
him up, scrubbing his head. "Say goodnight to Mamu," she said.
"What does he call them?" Rahul asked.
"Who?"
"Our parents."
She hesitated, though the answer was not something she had to search for.
"Dadu and Dadi."
"Just like we did," he said, his voice softening. "I bet they treat you like a
king," he said to Neel.
"You could say that. We still haven't unwrapped some of his Christmas
presents."
"What about next Christmas? Do you guys have plans?"
"They're supposed to come to London," Sudha began, watching for a
reaction. "Of course, you're welcome," she continued, knowing the idea was
ludicrous. "All of you, Elena and Crystal. You guys could stay in a hotel."
She stopped then, realizing that she was holding her breath, waiting for him
to walk out of her life all over again. Instead he said, "I'll think about it," leaving
her even more breathless, for she realized that without a formal truce the battle
had ended, that he wanted to come back.
Rahul was already awake when she came downstairs the next morning,
sitting at the table with Roger, a T-shirt sticking to his thickened body, sweaty
hair plastered to his face. He was wearing shorts, the hair on his dark legs curlier
than she remembered. Roger was drinking his tea, showing Rahul a
Tube map, telling him which trains went where, pointing out parks in which
he could run.

"Where did you go?" she asked Rahul. She prepared a pot of coffee, then
warmed the milk for Neel's Weetabix, knowing he would be up soon.
"No idea," he said. "I just go for an hour. Running's my new addiction." It
was the first time since he arrived that he'd alluded in any way to his drinking.
"That and coffee."
When it was ready she poured him a cup, watched him add three spoons of
sugar, remembered the time he'd visited her in college and she'd handed him his
first beer. "What will you do today?"
Rahul shrugged. "Maybe a museum. I just want to walk around."
"Be ready in twenty minutes and I'll drop you at the tube," Roger offered.
While Sudha was at work she wondered what her brother was doing,
wondered if one of the hundreds of pubs on the streets of London would tempt
him. Part of her worried that something would set him off and that he would
disappear again. But when she got back to the house that evening she found
Rahul crawling up the staircase after Neel, pretending to be a hungry lion. That
night they went out for curry and again he did not drink, covering the paper
spread on the table with elaborate drawings. Again he sat with Sudha in the
bathroom as she bathed Neel, and the following morning he went for his run. For
the rest of the week he worked through his list of activities, always returning
with a little gift for Neel. It felt strange to be at work for so much of the time that
Rahul was visiting, but Sudha thought it was better, safer, that their time together
was limited to mornings and evenings, times when Roger and Neel were around.
Saturday morning Rahul made omelettes, expertly chopping mushrooms
and onions the way the chefs did on television, and then at Rahul's suggestion
they went to the London Zoo. Rahul had offered to take Neel himself, and
though throughout the week both Sudha and Roger had taken advantage of
Rahul's presence, leaving him in charge for five or ten minutes if they needed to
go to the corner for eggs or bread, there was no question of that. And yet, once
they were at the zoo, both Roger and Sudha felt obsolete. Rahul carried Neel on
his shoulders the whole time, the stroller Sudha pushed containing nothing but
her purse. Neel was equally smitten, bursting into tears when Rahul had to use
the restroom. Rahul had insisted on paying for everything-buying them their
tickets, their sandwiches and sodas, the ice cream for Neel, the lime-green
balloon that drifted all afternoon above their heads.
"I was thinking of going to a movie later," Rahul said when they returned to
the house, still carrying Neel. "But I think I'd rather stay home with this guy."
"Don't be silly," Sudha said. "You've dealt with him all day. You deserve a
break."
Rahul shook his head. "I'm leaving tomorrow, and we've got a lot of

catching up to do." And then he said, "You two are the ones who need a break.
When was the last time you saw a movie together?"
The idea presented itself, a perfect plan that felt all wrong. She looked over
at Roger, and Rahul saw her looking. "What, you guys don't trust me?"
"Of course," Roger said. He turned to Sudha. "Shall we,
Su?"
She reminded herself that they had a cell phone; the movie theater was a
ten-minute drive from the house. If they went to an early show, they'd be back in
time for Neel's bath. "I'll call to see what's playing," she said.
"We'll be right here," Rahul promised her, looking up from the sitting room
floor where he and Neel were stacking blocks, and she forced herself to believe
him. They had not left him a key, there was nowhere he could go. She had left
food for Neel, milk in a sippy cup, overcooked macaroni that was impossible to
choke on. She had reminded Rahul to be careful with Neel on the stairs. During
the movie she kept the volume of her cell phone turned on, not trusting it to
vibrate in the pocket of her jeans. After the first hour she got up and called from
the lobby. "Everything okay?"
"Everything's great," Rahul told her. "He seemed hungry so I'm giving him
something to eat." In the background she could hear Neel banging something, a
cup or a spoon, against the tray of his high chair.
"Great. Thanks. We'll be back soon," she said.
"No need to rush," Rahul said. And so on their way back, at Roger's
suggestion, they stopped at a market, for cheese and jams and a few other things
they needed. They bought three nice steaks for dinner, Roger saying he would
make a tart.
Rahul and Neel were not in the sitting room where she expected to find
them, not playing among the toys scattered across the carpet. A children's show
was on television but no one was watching it. Downstairs in the kitchen the high
chair had not been wiped, and gummy bits of pasta were submerged in a puddle
of water on the surface of the tray. The balloon from the zoo had been tied to the
side, reaching almost to the ceiling. All the upper cupboards were open, but
nothing seemed to have been removed from them. Quickly Sudha shut them, a
cold sweat forming on her lips.
"They haven't left, the push chair's still here," Roger said.
As she raced up the steps she heard the sound of water splashing and chided
herself for panicking. "It's okay," she called out. "He's giving Neel a bath."
She found Neel in the tub, filling his sippy cup with water and pouring it
out. He was sitting without the plastic ring they normally put him in so that he
wouldn't tip over. He was trembling but otherwise happy, intent on his task, the

water up to the middle of his chest, the mere sight of him sitting there,
unattended, causing Sudha to emit a series of spontaneous cries and a volt of fear
to seize her haunches. The water was no longer warm. One slip and he would
have been facedown, his fine dark hair spread like a sunburst, the strands waving
as the rest of him was still.
"Where's your uncle?" Roger demanded, even though Neel did not yet have
the words to reply. He yanked Neel out of the tub, making him burst into tears.
They found Rahul in Roger's study, asleep, a glass tucked beneath the
daybed. In their bedroom, the sweater chest was open, the necks of the bottles
poking out, nestled in woolly arms. They went back to Roger's study and were
unable to rouse Rahul, Sudha shaking his shoulder as she held Neel. Roger
leaned over Rahul's duffel, stuffing it with clothes.
"What are you doing?" she asked.
"What does it look like, Sudha?"
"He'll do that when he gets up."
Roger stood up, his face not at all kind. "I'm making it easier for him. I
don't want your brother to set foot in our home or come near our child ever
again."
Because they could not scream at Rahul they began to scream at each other,
the strange calm that had followed their discovery in the bathtub now shattered.
"You're the one who told him we trusted him," she said. "You agreed to go
out."
"Don't blame this on me," Roger said. "I barely know him. Don't you dare
blame a bit of this on me."
"I'm not," she said, beginning to cry. "I'm sorry. I should have told you."
"Told me what?"
She was sobbing now, too hard for any words to come out, Neel beginning
to cry again in reaction. Roger went up to her, holding her by the shoulders, his
arms outstretched. "Told me what?"
And somehow, in spite of how hard she was crying, she told him, about the
very first time Rahul had come to visit her at Penn, and how he hadn't even liked
beer, and then about all the cans they'd hidden over the years and how eventually
it was no longer a game for him but a way of life, a way of life that had removed
him from her family and ruined him.
Roger looked around the study with its book-lined walls, its cabinets full of
files, postcards of noble portraits pinned over the desk. A disgusted look
appeared on his face. And then he looked at Sudha, his disgust for her just as
plain. "You lied to me. I've never lied to you, Sudha. I would never have kept
something like this from you."

She nodded. She was still crying, tightly holding Neel. Roger took their son
from her arms and left her there with Rahul, who was flat on his back, one leg
hanging over the edge of the daybed, his slackened face to the wall.
All night she did not sleep, Roger stiff as a board on his side. They'd gone
to bed hungry, the three steaks tossed into the freezer. Rahul had never woken
up. She knew Roger was right, knew that if it had been his sibling she would
have said and done the same. She thought of her parents, who had believed their
children were destined to succeed, had fumbled when one failed. After
everything Rahul had put them through they never renounced him, never
banished him. They were incapable of shutting him out. But Roger was capable,
and Sudha realized, as the wakeful night passed, that she was capable, too.
She drifted off around daybreak, then woke up an hour later, hearing the
shower running. It ran for a long time. She became nervous and considered
knocking, but then she heard the door open, and a few minutes later, footsteps
padding down the stairs.
"I meant to clean up the high chair," Rahul said when she joined him in the
kitchen. He was dressed in one of Roger's bathrobes, squinting, as if the
subterreanean space were flooded with light. His voice was gruff, the effects of
the liquor clear in the delicate yet awkward way he was moving about. He had
filled the kettle with water, turned on the gas, measured coffee into the glass pot.
"Sorry about that."
"I thought you were better."
He glanced at her, only for a second. He looked like an idiot to her, dull and
slow.
"What the hell happened, Rahul?"
He didn't reply.
"Is it me?" she asked. For she had wondered this, during the long hours she
had lain awake: wondered if seeing her had reminded him of the past, of those
nights they had defied their parents together, pouring warm beer into cups of ice
and forging a link all their own.
The water began to boil, the kettle emitting a thin whistle. She switched off
the gas, poured the water into the coffeepot. "You have to go to the airport," she
said.
"My flight isn't until evening."
"Now, Rahul. You have to get dressed and go now. You left Neel in the
bathtub." Her voice quavered and at the same time it was beginning to rise, the
sickening image flooding her all over again.
"I did?"

"Yes, Rahul," she said, fresh tears streaming down her face. "You passed
out and you left our baby alone in a tub. You could have killed him, do you
understand?"
He turned away, his back to her. He pressed his head to a cupboard,
twisting it slightly to either side, swearing to himself under his breath. Then, still
without facing her, he said, "But he's okay, right, Didi? I peeked into his room
this morning and he was asleep in his crib just fine."
"You have to go now." Her words were coming out in almost a whisper.
She was aware that she sounded like a broken record. Fury had raged through
her all night; that storm cloud had unleashed its rain, and now she was simply
tired.
"I've stayed away from it for months," he said. "I don't know what
happened. I just had the tiniest bit-"
"Stop," she said, and he did. "I don't want to hear your explanation. Do you
understand me? I don't want to hear it."
He didn't try to speak again. He went upstairs to dress and get his bag and
then stood in the sitting room as she called a minicab for Heathrow. She held out
fifty pounds to cover the fare and he took it from her. Then he left, going out to
the street before the cab arrived. When it pulled up to the house she went to the
window, held back the lace curtain, and watched him slip into the backseat. Then
the cab pulled away, leaving her to stare out at the gray morning light. She
wasn't aware of when she'd stopped crying. She felt wide awake suddenly. She
heard Neel upstairs, stirring in his crib. In another minute he would cry out,
wanting her, expecting breakfast; he was young enough so that Sudha was still
only goodness to him, nothing else. She returned to the kitchen, opened a
cupboard, took out a packet of Weetabix, heated milk in a pan. Something
brushed against her ankles, and she saw that the balloon tied to the back of
Neel's high chair was no longer suspended on its ribbon. It had sagged to the
floor, a shrunken thing incapable of bursting. She clipped the ribbon with
scissors and stuffed the whole thing into the garbage, surprised at how easily it
fit, thinking of the husband who no longer trusted her, of the son whose cry now
interrupted her, of the fledgling family that had cracked open that morning, as
typical and as terrifying as any other.

N obody's Business
Every so often a man called for Sang, wanting to marry her. Sang usually
didn't know these men. Sometimes she had never even heard of them. But they'd
heard that she was pretty and smart and thirty and Bengali and still single, and so
these men, most of whom also happened to be Bengali, would procure her
number from someone who knew someone who knew her parents, who,
according to Sang, desperately wanted her to be married. According to Sang,
these men always confused details when they spoke to her, saying they'd heard
that she studied physics, when really it was philosophy, or that she'd graduated
from Columbia, when really it was NYU, calling her Sangeeta, when really she
went by Sang. They were impressed that she was getting her doctorate at
Harvard, when really she'd dropped out of Harvard after a semester and was
working part time at a bookstore on the square.
Sang's housemates, Paul and Heather, could always tell when it was a
prospective groom on the phone. "Oh. Hi," Sang would say, sitting at the
imitation-walnut kitchen table, rolling her eyes, coin-colored eyes that were
sometimes green. She would slouch in her chair, looking bothered but resigned,
as if a subway she were riding had halted between stations. To Paul's mild
disappointment, Sang was never rude to these men. She listened as they
explained the complicated, far-fetched connection between them, connections
Paul vaguely envied in spite of the fact that he shared a house with Sang, and a
kitchen, and a subscription to the Globe. The suitors called from as far away as
Los Angeles, as close by as Watertown. Once, she told Paul and Heather, she
had actually agreed to meet one of these men, and he had driven her north up I93, pointing from the highway to the corporation he worked for. Then he'd taken
her to a Dunkin' Donuts, where, over crullers and coffee, he'd proposed.
Sometimes Sang would take notes during these conversations, on the
message pad kept next to the phone. She'd write down the man's name, or
"Carnegie Mellon," or "likes mystery novels" before her pen drifted into
scribbles and stars and tick-tack-toe games. To be polite, she asked a few
questions, too, about whether the man enjoyed his work as an economist, or a
dentist, or a metallurgical engineer. Her excuse to these men, her rebuttal to their
offers to wine and dine her, was always the same white lie: she was busy at the
moment with classes, its being Harvard and all. Sometimes, if Paul happened to
be sitting at the table, she would write him a note in the middle of the
conversation: "He sounds like he's twelve" or "Total dweeb" or "This guy threw

up once in my parents' swimming pool," waving the pad for Paul's benefit as she
cradled the phone to her ear.
It was only after Sang hung up that she complained. How dare these men
call? she'd say. How dare they hunt her down? It was a violation of her privacy,
an insult to her adulthood. It was pathetic. If only Paul and Heather could hear
them, going on about themselves. At this point, Heather would sometimes say,
"God, Sang, I can't believe you're complaining. Dozens of men, successful men,
possibly even handsome, want to marry you, sight unseen. And you expect us to
feel sorry for you?"
Heather, a law student at Boston College, had been bitterly single for five
years. She told Sang the proposals were romantic, but Sang shook her head. "It's
not love." In Sang's opinion it was practically an arranged marriage. These men
weren't really interested in her. They were interested in a mythical creature
created by an intricate chain of gossip, a web of wishful Indian-community
thinking in which she was an aging, overlooked poster child for years of bharat
natyam classes, perfect SATs. Had they any idea who she actually was and how
she made a living, in spite of her test scores, which was by running a cash
register and arranging paperback books in pyramid configurations, they would
want nothing to do with her? "And besides," she always reminded Paul and
Heather, "I have a boyfriend."
"You're like Penelope," Paul ventured one evening. He had lately been
rereading Lattimore's Homer, in preparation for his orals in English literature the
following spring.
"Penelope?" She was standing at the microwave, heating some rice. Paul
watched as she removed the plate and mixed the steaming rice with a spoonful of
the dark red-hot lime pickle that lived next to his peanut butter in the door of the
refrigerator.
"From the Odyssey?" Paul said gently, a question to match her question. He
was tall without being lank, with solid fingers and calves, and fine straw-colored
hair. The most noticeable aspect of his appearance was a pair of expensive
designer glasses, their maroon frames perfectly round, which an attractive
salesgirl in a frame shop on Beacon Street had talked him into buying. Paul had
not liked the glasses, even as he was being fitted for them, and had not grown to
like them since.
"Right, the Odyssey," Sang said, sitting down at the table. "Penelope. Only
I can't knit."
"Weave," he said, correcting her. "It was a shroud Penelope kept weaving
and unweaving, to ward off her suitors."
Sang lifted a forkful of the rice to her lips, blowing on it so that it would

cool. "Then, who's the woman who knits?" she asked. She looked at Paul. "You
would know."
Paul paused, eager to impress her, but his mind had drawn a blank. He
knew it was someone in Dickens, had the paperbacks up in his room. "Be right
back," he said. Then he stopped, relieved. "A Tale of Two Cities," he told her.
"Madame De-farge."
Paul had answered the phone the first time Sang called, at nine o'clock one
Saturday morning in July, in reference to the housemate ad he and Heather had
placed in the Phoenix. The call had roused him from sleep, and he wondered,
standing there, groggy in his bathrobe, what sort of name Sang was, half
expecting a Japanese woman. It wasn't until she wrote out a check for her
security deposit at the end of her visit that he saw that her official name was
Sangeeta Biswas. This was the name he would see on her mail, on the labels of
the thick, pungent Vogue magazines she received each month, and in the
window of the electric bill she agreed to take on. Heather had been in the shower
when Sang arrived and pressed the doorbell that chimed two solemn tones, so
Paul greeted her alone. She had worn her long hair loose, something Paul was to
learn she rarely did, and as he walked behind her he had liked the way it clung
protectively to her body, over the rise of her shoulder blades. She had admired
the spectacular central staircase, as most everyone did, letting her hand linger
over the bannister. The staircase turned six times at right angles after every six
steps and was constructed of dark gleaming wood with the lustre of cognac. It
was the only thing of enduring beauty in the house, a false promise of what was
above: ugly brown cabinets in the kitchen, moldy bathrooms with missing tiles,
omnipresent oatmeal carpeting to protect the ears of the landlords, who lived
below.
She had remarked on what a lot of space it was, pacing the landing before
joining Paul in the vacant room. There was a built-in hutch in the corner, with
Doric pilasters and glass-paned doors, which Sang opened and closed. Paul told
her that the room had originally been the dining room, the cabinet intended to
store china. There was a bathroom across the landing; Paul and Heather shared
the larger one, upstairs. "I feel like I'm standing inside an empty refrigerator,"
she'd said, referring to the fact that the walls, once blue, had been painted over
with a single coat of white; the effect, under the glare of the ceiling light, was
stark and cold. She ran a hand along one wall and carefully removed a stray
piece of tape. Once, there had been an arched doorway connecting the room to
the kitchen, since filled in, but Sang noted that the arch was still visible, like a
scar in the plaster.

While she was there, the phone rang, another person replying to the ad, but
by then she had handed over her deposit. She had met Heather, and the three of
them chatted in the living room with its peeling bay window and its soft filthy
couch and its yellow papasan chair. They told her about their system for splitting
up the chores, and about the landlords, both doctors at Brigham and Women's.
They told her there was only one phone jack in the house, in the kitchen. The
phone was attached to a cord so long that they could all drag it to their rooms,
though at times the price to pay for dragging the cord too far was a persistent
crackle.
"We thought about having another line put in, but it's pretty expensive,"
Heather said.
"It's not a big deal," Sang said.
And Paul, who seldom spoke on the phone to anyone, said nothing at all.
She had practically nothing to contribute to the house, no pots or
appliances, nothing for the kitchen apart from an ailing hanging plant that shed
yellow heart-shaped leaves. A friend helped her move in one Sunday, a male
friend who was not, Paul gathered, her boyfriend (for she had mentioned one on
her first visit, telling them that he was in Cairo for the summer visiting his
parents, that he was Egyptian, and that he taught Middle Eastern history at
Harvard). The friend's name was Charles. He wore high-top sneakers and a
bright orange bowling shirt, his hair tied back in a stubby ponytail. He was
telling Sang about a date he'd had the night before, as they unloaded a futon, two
big battered suitcases, a series of shopping bags, and a few boxes from the back
of a pickup truck. Paul had offered to help, calling out from the deck where he
was trying to read the Canterbury Tales, but Sang said no, it was nothing. Their
talk distracted him and yet he remained, watching Sang through the railing.
Charles was teasingly forbidding her to buy too many things, so that moving out
would be just as easy. Sang had been laughing at him, but now she stopped, her
expression pensive. She looked up at the house, a balled-up comforter in her
arms. "I don't know, Charles. I don't know how long I'll be here."
"He still doesn't want to live together until you're married?"
She shook her head.
"What does he say?"
"That he doesn't want to spoil things."
Charles shifted the weight of the box he was carrying. "But he
acknowledges the fact that you're getting married."
She turned back to the truck. "He says things like 'When we have kids, we'll
buy a big house in Lexington.' "
"You've been together three years," Charles said. "So he's a little old-

fashioned. That's one of the things you like about him, right?"
The next few nights, Sang slept on the couch in the living room, her things
stored temporarily in the corner, in order to paint her room. Both Paul and
Heather were surprised by this; neither of them had made an effort to do much to
their rooms when moving in. For the walls, she had chosen a soothing sage
green; for the trim, the palest lavender, a color that the paint company called
"mole." It wasn't what she imagined a mole to look like at all, she told Paul,
stirring the can vigorously on the kitchen counter. "What would you have named
it?" she asked him suddenly. He could think of nothing. It was only upstairs,
sitting alone at his big plywood desk, piled with thick books full of tissue-thin
pages, that he thought of the ice cream his mother always ordered at Newport
Creamery when his family went on Sunday nights for hamburgers. His mother
had died years ago, his father soon after. They'd adopted Paul late in life, when
they were in their fifties, so people had often mistaken them for his
grandparents. That evening in the kitchen, when Sang walked in, Paul said,
"Black raspberry."
"What?" "The paint."
She had a small, slightly worried-looking smile on her face, a smile one
might give a confused child. "That's funny."
"The name?"
"No. It's just a little funny the way you picked up a conversation we had,
like, six hours ago, and expected me to remember what you were talking about."
As soon as Paul opened the door of his room the next morning, he detected
the fresh yet cloying smell of paint, heard the swish of the roller as it moved up
and down a wall. After Heather had left the house, Sang started to play music:
one Billie Holiday CD after another. They were having a spell of sticky,
sweltering days, and Paul was working in the relative cool of the living room, a
few paces across the landing from Sang.
"Oh, my God," she exclaimed, noticing him on her way to the bathroom.
"This music must be driving you crazy." She wore cutoff jeans, a black tank top
with straps like those of a brassiere. Her feet were bare, her calves and thighs
flecked with paint.
He lied, telling her he often studied to music. Because he noticed it was the
kitchen she went to most often, to rinse her brushes or eat some yogurt out of a
big tub, the second day he moved himself there, where he made a pot of tea, and,
much to her amusement, set the alarm on his wristwatch to know when to take
out the leaves. In the afternoon, her sister called, from London, with a voice
identical to Sang's. For a moment, Paul actually believed it was Sang herself,
mysteriously calling him from her room. "Can't talk, I'm painting my room sage

and mole," she reported cheerfully to her sister, and when she replaced the
receiver of the dark brown phone there were a few of her mole-colored
fingerprints on the surface.
He liked studying in her fleeting company. She was impressed with how far
he'd got on his PhD-she told him that after she dropped out of Harvard a year
ago, her mother locked herself up in her bedroom for a week and her father
refused to speak to her. She'd had it with academia, hated how competitive it
was, how monkish it forced one to become. That was what her boyfriend did,
always blocking off chunks of his day and working at home with the phone
unplugged, writing papers for the next conference. "You'll be good at it," she
assured Paul. "You're devoted, I can tell." When she asked him what his exam
entailed, he told her it would last three hours, that there would be three
questioners, and that it would cover three centuries of English and European
literature.
"And they can ask you anything?" she wanted to know.
"Within reason."
"Wow."
He didn't tell her the truth-that he'd already taken the exam the year before
and failed. His committee and a handful of students were the only ones who
knew, and it was to avoid them that Paul preferred to stay at home now. He had
failed not because he wasn't prepared but because his mind had betrayed him
that bright May morning, inexplicably cramped like a stubborn muscle that
curled his foot during sleep. For five harrowing minutes, as the professors stared
at him with their legal pads full of questions, as trains came and went along
Commonwealth Avenue, he had not been able to reply to the first question,
about comic villainy in Richard III. He had read the play so many times he could
picture each scene, not as it might be performed on a stage but, rather, as the
pale printed columns in his Pelican Shakespeare. He felt himself go crimson; it
was the nightmare he had been having for months before the exam. His
interrogators were patient, tried another question, which he stammered miserably
through, pausing in the middle of a thought and unable to continue, until, finally,
one of the professors, white hair like a snowy wreath around his otherwise naked
head, put out a hand, as might a policeman stopping traffic, and said, "The
candidate's simply not ready." Paul had walked home, the tie he'd bought for the
occasion stuffed into his pocket, and for a week he had not left the house. When
he returned to campus, he was ten pounds thinner, and the department secretary
asked him if he'd fallen in love.
Sang had been living with them for a week when a suitor called. By then,

the painting was finished, the dreary room transformed. She was removing
masking tape from the edges of the windowpanes when Paul told her someone
named Asim Bhatta-charya was calling from Geneva. "Tell him I'm not in," she
said, without hesitating. He wrote down the name, spelled out carefully by the
caller, who had said before hanging up, "Just tell her it's Pinkoo."
More men called. One asked Paul, dejectedly, if he was Sang's boyfriend.
The mere possibility, articulated by a stranger, jolted him. Such a thing had
happened once before in the house, the first year Paul lived there-two
housemates had fallen in love, had moved out in order to marry each other.
"No," he told the caller. "I'm just her housemate." Nevertheless, for the rest of
the day he felt burdened by the question, worried that he'd transgressed
somehow simply by answering the phone. A few days later, he told Sang. She
laughed. "He's probably horrified now, knowing that I live with a man," she said.
"Next time," she advised him, "say yes."
A week afterward, the three of them were in the kitchen, Heather filling a
thermos with echinacea tea because she had come down with a cold and had to
spend all day in classes, Sang hunched over the newspaper and coffee. The night
before, she had locked herself up in her bathroom, and now there were some
reddish highlights in her hair. When the phone rang and Paul picked up, he
assumed it was another suitor on the line, for, like many of Sang's suitors, the
caller had a slight foreign accent, though this one was more refined than
awkward. The only difference was that instead of asking for Sangeeta he asked
to speak to Sang. When Paul asked who was calling, he said, in a slightly
impatient way, "I am her boyfriend." The words landed in Paul's chest like the
dull yet painful taps of a doctor's instrument. He saw that Sang was looking up at
him expectantly, her chair already partly pushed back from the table.
"For me?"
He nodded, and Sang took the phone into her room. "Boyfriend," Paul
reported to Heather. "What's his name?"
Paul shrugged. "Didn't say."
"Well, she must be happy as a clam," Heather remarked with some asperity,
screwing the lid onto her thermos.
Paul felt sorry for Heather, with her red, chapped nose and her thickwaisted body, but more than that he felt protective of Sang. "What do you
mean?" he said.
"Because her lover's back, and now she can tell all those other guys to fuck
off."
The boyfriend was standing on the sidewalk with Sang, looking up at the

house, as Paul returned on his bike from a day of photocopying at the library. A
bottle-green BMW was parked at the curb. The couple stood with an assumed
intimacy, their dark heads tilting toward each other.
"Keep away from the window when you change your clothes," Paul heard
him say. "I can see through the curtain. Couldn't you get a room at the back?"
Paul stepped off his bike at a slight distance from them, adjusted the straps of his
backpack. He was uncomfortably aware that he was shabbily dressed-in shorts,
and Birkenstocks, and an old Dartmouth T-shirt, his pale legs covered with
matted blond hair. The boyfriend wore perfectly fitted faded jeans, a white shirt,
a navy-blue blazer, and brown leather shoes. His sharp features commanded
admiration without being imposing. His hair, in contrast, was on the long side,
framing his face in a lavish, unexpected style. He looked several years older than
Sang, Paul decided, but in certain ways he strongly resembled her, for they
shared the same height, the same gilded complexion, the same sprinkle of moles
above and below their lips. As Paul walked toward them, Sang's boyfriend was
still inspecting the house, searching the yellow-and-ochre Victorian facade as if
for defects, until he looked away suddenly, distracted by the bark of a dog.
"Your roommates have a dog?" the boyfriend asked. He took an odd,
dancelike step to the left, moving partly behind Sang.
"No, silly," Sang said teasingly, running her hand down the back of his
head. "No dogs, no smokers. Those were the only listings I called, because of
you." The barking stopped, and the ensuing silence seemed to punctuate her
words. There was a necklace around her neck, lapis beads she now fingered in a
way that made Paul think they were a gift. "Paul, this is Farouk. Farouk's afraid
of dogs." She kissed Farouk on the cheek.
"Freddy," Farouk said, nodding rather than extending a hand, his words
directed more to Sang than to Paul. She shook her head.
"For the millionth time, I'm not calling you Freddy."
Farouk glanced at her without humor. "Why not? You expect people to call
you Sang."
She was unbothered. "That's different. That's actually a part of my name."
"Well, I'm Paul, and that's pretty much all you can call me," Paul said. No
one laughed.
Suddenly, she was never at home. When she was, she stayed in her room,
often on the phone, the door shut. By dinner, she tended to be gone. The items
on her shelf of the refrigerator, the big tubs of yogurt and the crackers and the
tabouli, sat untouched. The yogurt eventually sported a mantle of green fuzz,
setting off shrieks of disgust when Sang finally opened the lid. It was only

natural, Paul told himself, for the two of them to want to be alone together. He
was surprised to run into her one day in the small gourmet grocery in the
neighborhood, her basket piled high with food she never brought back to the
house, purple net bags of shallots, goat cheese in oil, meat wrapped in butcher
paper. Because it was raining, Paul, who had his car with him, offered her a ride.
She told him no thank you, and headed off to the T stop, a Harvard baseball cap
on her head, hugging the grocery bag to her chest. He had no idea where Farouk
lived; he pictured a beautiful house on Brattle Street, French doors and pretty
molding.
It was always something of a shock to find Farouk in the house. He visited
infrequently and seemed to appear and disappear without a trace. Unless Paul
looked out the window and saw the BMW, always precisely parked under the
shade of a birch tree, it was impossible to tell if he was there. He never said hello
or good-bye; instead, he behaved as if Sang were the sole occupant of the house.
They never sat in the living room, or in the kitchen. Only once, when Paul
returned from a bike ride, did he see them overhead, eating lunch on the deck.
They were sitting next to each other, cross-legged, and Sang was extending a
fork toward Farouk's mouth, her other hand cupped beneath it. By the time Paul
entered the house, they had retreated into her room.
When she wasn't with Farouk, she did things for him. She read through
proofs of an article he'd written, checking it for typos. She scheduled his doctor's
appointments. Once, she spent all morning with the Yellow Pages, pricing tiles;
Farouk was thinking of redoing his kitchen.
By the end of September, Paul was aware of a routine: Mondays, which
Sang had off from the bookstore, Farouk came for lunch. The two of them would
eat in her room; sometimes he heard the sounds of their talking as they ate, or
their spoons tapping against soup bowls, or the Nocturnes of Chopin. They were
silent lovers-mercifully so, compared with other couples he'd overheard in the
house through the years-but their presence soon prompted him to go to the
library on Mondays, for he was affected nevertheless, embarrassed by the time
her door had been partly open and he'd seen Farouk zipping his jeans.
Three years had passed since Theresa, the one girlfriend he'd ever had. He'd
dated no one since. Because of Theresa, he'd chosen a graduate school in Boston.
For a few months, he had lived with her in her apartment on St. Botolph Street.
For Thanksgiving, he'd gone with her to her parents' house in Deerfield. It was
there that it had ended. "I'm sorry, Paul, I can't help it, I just don't like the way
you kiss me," she told him once they'd gone to bed. He remembered himself
sitting naked on one side of the mattress, in a room he was suddenly aware he
was never again to see. He had not argued; in the wake of his shame, he became

strangely efficient and agreeable, with her, with everyone.
Late one night, Paul was in bed reading when he heard a car pull up to the
house. The clock on his desk said twenty past two. He shut off his lamp and got
up to look through the window. It was November. A full moon illuminated the
wide, desolate street, lined with trash bags and recycling bins. There was a taxi
in front of the house, the engine still running. Sang emerged from it alone. For
close to a minute, she stood there on the sidewalk. He waited by the window
until she climbed up to the porch, then listened as she climbed the staircase and
shut the door to her room. Farouk had picked her up that afternoon; Paul had
seen her stepping into his car. He thought perhaps they'd fought, though the next
day he detected no signs of discord. He overheard her speaking to Farouk on the
phone in good spirits, deciding on a video to rent. But that night, around the
same time, the same thing happened. The third night, he stayed awake on
purpose, making sure she got in.
The following morning, a Sunday, Paul, Heather, and Sang had pancakes
together in the kitchen. Sang was playing Louis
Armstrong on the CD player in her room while Paul fried the pancakes in
two cast-iron skillets.
"Kevin's sleeping over tonight," Heather said. She'd met him recently. He
was a physicist at MIT. "I hope that's okay."
"Sure thing," Paul said. He liked Kevin. He had been coming over often for
dinner and brought beers and helped with the dishes afterward, talking to Paul as
much as he talked to Heather.
"I'm sorry I keep missing him. He seems really nice," Sang said.
"We'll see," Heather said. "Next week is our one-month anniversary."
Sang smiled, as if this modest commemoration were in fact something of
much greater significance. "Congratulations."
Heather crossed her fingers. "I guess the next stage is when you assume
you're going to spend weekends together."
Paul glanced at Sang, who said nothing. She got up, returning five minutes
later from the cellar with a basket full of laundry.
"Nice Jockeys," Heather said, noticing several pairs folded on top of the
pile.
"They're Farouk's," Sang said.
"He doesn't have a washing machine?" Heather wanted to know.
"He does," Sang said, oblivious of Heather's disapproving expression. "But
it's coin-operated."

The arguments started around Thanksgiving. Paul would hear Sang crying
into the phone in her room, the gray plastic cord stretched across the linoleum
and then across the landing, disappearing under her door. One of the fights had
something to do with a party Sang had been invited to, which Farouk didn't want
to attend. Another was about Farouk's birthday. Sang had spent the day before
making a cake. The house smelled of oranges and almonds and Paul heard the
electric beater going late at night. But the next afternoon, he saw the cake in the
trash can.
Once, returning from school, he discovered that Farouk was there, the
BMW parked outside. It was a painfully cold December day; early that morning,
the season's first flakes had fallen. Walking past Sang's room, Paul heard her
raised voice. She was accusing: Why didn't he ever want to meet her friends?
Why didn't he invite her to his cousin's house for Thanksgiving? Why didn't he
like to spend the night together? Why, at the very least, didn't he drive her
home?
"I pay for the cabs," Farouk said quietly. "What difference does it make?"
"I hate it, Farouk. It's abnormal."
"You know I don't sleep well when you're there."
"How are we ever going to get married?" she demanded. "Are we supposed
to live in separate houses forever?"
"Sang, please," Farouk said. "Try to be calm. Your roommates will hear."
"Will you stop about my roommates," Sang shouted.
"You're hysterical," Farouk said.
She began to cry.
"I've warned you, Sang," Farouk said. He sounded desperate. "I will not
spend my life with a woman who makes scenes."
"Fuck you."
Something, a plate or a glass, struck a wall and broke. Then the room went
quiet. After much deliberation, Paul knocked softly. No one replied. A few hours
later, Paul nearly bumped into Sang as she was emerging from her bathroom,
wrapped in a large dark pink towel. Her wet hair was uncombed and tangled, a
knot bulging like a small nest on one side of her head.
For weeks, he had longed to catch a glimpse of her this way, and still he felt
wholly unprepared for the vision of her bare legs and arms, her damp face and
shoulders. "Hey," he said, sidling quickly past.
"Paul," she called out after a moment, as if his presence had registered only
then. He turned to look at her; though it was barely past four, the sun was
already setting in the living-room window, casting a golden patch of light to one
side of her in the hallway.

"What's up?" he said.
She crossed her arms in front of her, a hand concealing each shoulder. A
spot on her forehead was coated with what appeared to be toothpaste. "I'm sorry
about earlier."
"That's okay."
"It's not. You have an exam to study for."
Her eyes were shining brightly, and she had a funny frozen smile on her
face, her lips slightly parted. He began to smile back when he saw she was about
to cry. He nodded. "It doesn't matter."
For a week, Farouk didn't call, though when the phone rang she flew to
answer it. She was home every night for dinner. She had long conversations with
her sister in London. "Tell me if you think this is normal," Paul overheard her
say as he walked into the kitchen. "We were driving one time and he told me I
smelled bad. Sweaty. He told me to wash under my arms. He kept saying it
wasn't a criticism, that people in love should be able to say things like that to
each other." One day, Charles took Sang out and in the evening she returned,
with shopping bags from the outlets in Kittery. Another night, she accepted an
invitation to see a movie at the Coolidge with Paul and Heather and Kevin, but
once they'd reached the box office she told them she had a headache and walked
back to the house. "I bet you they've split up," Heather said, once they'd settled
into their seats.
But the following week Farouk called when Sang was at work. Though
Farouk hadn't bothered to identify himself, Paul called the bookstore, leaving her
the message.
The relationship resumed its course, but Paul noticed that Farouk no longer
set foot in the house. He wouldn't even ring the bell. He would pause at the curb,
the engine of his car still running, beeping three times to signal that he was
waiting for her, and then she would disappear.
Over winter break, she went away, to London. Her sister had had a baby
boy recently. Sang showed Paul the things she bought for the baby: playsuits full
of snaps, a stuffed octopus, a miniature French sailor's shirt, a mobile of stars
and planets that glowed in the dark. "I'm going to be called Sang Mashi," she
told him excitedly, explaining that Mashi was the Bengali word for "Aunt." The
word sounded strange on her lips. She spoke Bengali infrequently-never to her
sister, never to her suitors, only a word here and there to her parents, in
Michigan, to whom she spoke on weekends.
"How do you say 'bon voyage'?" Paul asked.

She told him she wasn't sure.
Without her there, it was easier for Paul to study, his mind spacious and
clear. His exam was less than six months away. A date and time had been
scheduled, the first Tuesday in May, at ten o'clock, marked with an "X" on the
calendar over his desk. Since summer, he had worked his way, yet again,
through the list of poems and critical essays and plays, typing summaries of
them into his computer. He had printed out these summaries, three-hole-punched
them, put them in a series of binders. He wrote further summaries of the
summaries on index cards that he reviewed before bed, filed in shoe boxes. For
Christmas, he was invited to an aunt's house in Buffalo, as usual. This year, with
his exam as an excuse, he declined the invitation, mailing off gifts. Heather was
away, too; she and Kevin had gone skiing in Vermont.
To mark the new year, Paul set up a new routine, spreading himself all over
the house. In the mornings, he reviewed poetry at the kitchen table. After lunch,
criticism in the living room. A Shakespeare play before bed. He began to leave
his things, his binders and his shoe boxes and his books, on the kitchen table, on
certain steps of the staircase, on the coffee table in the living room. He was
slouched in the papasan chair one snowy afternoon, reading his notes on
Aristotle's Poetics, when the doorbell rang.
It was a UPS man with a package for Sang, something from J. Crew. Paul
signed for it and took it upstairs. He leaned it against the door of her room,
which caused the door to open slightly. He closed it firmly, and for a moment he
stood there, his hand still on the knob. Even though she was in London, he
knocked before entering. The futon was neatly made, a red batik bedspread
covering the top. The green walls were bare but for two framed Indian
miniatures of palace scenes, men smoking hookahs and reclining on cushions,
bare-bellied women dancing in a ring. There was none of the disarray he for
some reason pictured every time he walked by her room; only outside, through
the windows, was there the silent chaos of the storm. The snow fell in disorderly
swirls, yet it covered the brown porch railing below, neatly, as if it were a
painted trim. A single panel of a white seersucker curtain was loosely cinched
with a peach silk scarf that Sang sometimes knotted at her throat, causing the
fabric of the curtain to gather in the shape of a slim hourglass. Paul untied the
scarf, letting the curtain cover the windowpane. Without touching his face to the
scarf, he smelled the perfume that lingered in its weave. He went to the futon
and sat down, his legs extending along the oatmeal carpet. He took off his shoes
and socks. On a wine crate next to the futon was a glass of water that had
gathered bubbles, a small pot of Vaseline. He undid his belt buckle, but suddenly
the desire left him, absent from his body just as she was absent from the room.

He buckled his belt again, and then slowly he lifted the bedspread. The sheets
were flannel, blue and white, a pattern of fleur-de-lis.
He had drifted off to sleep when he heard the phone ring. He stumbled
barefoot out of Sang's room, into the kitchen, the linoleum chilly.
"Hello?"
No one replied on the other end, and he was about to hang up when he
heard a dog barking.
"Hello?" he repeated. It occurred to him it might be Sang, a poor connection
from London. "Sang, is that you?"
The caller hung up.
That evening, after dinner, the phone rang again. When he picked it up, he
heard the same dog he'd heard earlier.
"Balthazar, shush!" a woman said, as soon as Paul said hello. Her voice was
hesitant. Was Sang in? she wanted to know.
"She's not here. May I take a message?"
She left her name, Deirdre Frain, and a telephone number. Paul wrote it
down on the message pad, under Partha Mazoomdar, a suitor who'd called from
Cleveland in the morning.
The next day, Deirdre called again. Again Paul told her Sang wasn't there,
adding that she wouldn't be back until the weekend.
"Where is she?" Deirdre asked.
"She's out of the country."
"In Cairo?"
This took him by surprise. "No, London." "In London," she repeated. She
sounded relieved. "London. Okay. Thanks."
The fourth call was very late at night, when Paul was already in bed. He
went downstairs, feeling for the phone in the dark.
"It's Deirdre." She sounded slightly out of breath, as if it were she, not he,
who'd just rushed to the phone.
He flicked on the light switch, rubbing his eyes behind his glasses. "Um, as
I said, Sang's not back yet."
"I don't want to talk to Sang." She was slurring her words, exaggerating the
pronunciation of Sang's name in a slightly cruel way.
Paul heard music, a trumpet crooning softly. "You don't?" "No," she said.
"Actually, I have a question."
"A question?"
"Yes." There was a pause, the clink of an ice cube falling into a glass. Her
tone had become flirtatious. "So, what's your name?"
He took off his glasses, allowing the room to go blurry. He couldn't recall

the last time a woman had spoken to him that way. "Paul."
"Paul," she repeated. "Can I ask you another question,
Paul?" "What?"
"It's about Sang."
He stiffened. Again, she had said the name without kindness. "What about
Sang?"
Deirdre paused. "She's your housemate, right?"
"That's right."
"Well, I was wondering, then, if you'd know if-are they cousins?"
"Who?"
"Sang and Freddy."
He put his glasses on again, drawing things into focus. He was unnerved by
this woman's curiosity. It wasn't her business, he wanted to tell her. But before
he could do that, Deirdre began quietly crying.
He looked at the clock on the stove; it was close to three in the morning. It
was his own fault. He shouldn't have answered the phone so late. He wished he
hadn't told the woman his name.
"Deirdre," he said after a while, tired of listening to her. "Are you still
there?"
She stopped crying. Her breathing was uneven, penetrating his ear.
"I don't know who you are," Paul said. "I don't understand why you're
calling me."
"I love him."
He hung up, his heart hammering. He had the urge to take a shower. He
wanted to erase her name from the legal pad. He stared at the receiver, remnants
of Sang's mole-colored fingerprints still visible here and there. For the first time
since the winter break had begun, he felt lonely in the house. The call had to be a
fluke. Some other Sang the woman was referring to. Maybe it was a scheme on
behalf of one of her Indian suitors, to cast suspicion, to woo her away from
Farouk. Before Sang left for London, the fights had subsided, and things
between Sang and Farouk, as far as Paul could tell, were still the same. In the
living room, she'd been wrapping a brown leather satchel, a pair of men's driving
gloves. The night before she left, she made a dinner reservation for the two of
them at Biba. Farouk had driven her to the airport.
The ringing of the phone woke Paul the next morning. He remained in bed,
listening to it, looking at the ashen branches of the tree outside his window. He
counted twelve rings before they stopped. The phone rang half an hour later, and
he ignored it again. The third time, he was in the kitchen. When it stopped, he

unplugged the cord from the jack.
Though he studied in silence for the remainder of the day, he felt fitful.
Sitting in the kitchen that evening with a bricklike volume of Spenser, he was
unable to concentrate on the lines, irritated by the footnotes, by how much there
was left to learn. He wondered how many times Deirdre had tried to call him
since he'd unplugged the phone. Had she given up? The calling seemed
obsessive to him. He wondered whether she was the type to do something. To
take a bottle of pills.
After dinner, he plugged the phone back into the jack. There were no
further calls. And yet his mind continued to wander. Something told him that
she'd try again. He'd made the mistake of telling her when Sang would be back.
Perhaps Deirdre was waiting to speak to her directly. Perhaps Deirdre would tell
Sang the same thing she'd told him, about loving Farouk. Before going to bed, he
poured himself a glass of Dewar's, a gift sent by his aunt in Buffalo. Then he
dialed the number Deirdre had given him. She picked up right away, with a
lilting hello. "Deirdre, it's Paul."
"Paul," she said, slowly.
"You called me last night. I'm Sang's housemate."
"Of course. Paul. You hung up on me, Paul." She appeared to be drunk
again, but in a sunnier mood.
"Listen, I'm sorry about that. I just wanted to make sure you were okay."
Deirdre sighed. "That's sweet of you, Paul."
"And to ask you to please stop calling me," he said after a considerable
pause.
"Why?" There was panic in her voice.
"Because I don't know you," he said.
"Would you like to know me, Paul?" she said. "I'm a very likable person."
"I have to go," he said firmly, hoping not to provoke her. "But maybe
there's someone else you could talk to? A friend?"
"Freddy's my friend."
The mention of Farouk, the use of the nickname, unsettled Paul as it had the
night before. Yesterday, he'd surmised that Deirdre might be a student of
Farouk's at Harvard, practically a teenager, infatuated with an older man. He
imagined her sitting at the back of a lecture hall, visiting him in his office,
getting the wrong idea. Now a simple, reasonable question, which was at the
same time a poisoned question, formed in Paul's mind.
"So, how exactly do you know Farouk?" Paul asked lightly, as if they were
chatting at a party.
He didn't think she'd tell him, thought she might even hang up on him as he

had on her, but they slipped easily into a conversation. It was Deirdre who did
most of the talking. She told Paul that she was from Vancouver originally, and
that she'd moved to Boston in her twenties, to study interior design. She'd met
Farouk one Sunday afternoon, a year and a half ago, when she was walking out
of a cafe in the South End. He had followed her halfway down the block, tapped
her on the shoulder, looked her up and down with unconcealed desire. "You can't
imagine," Deirdre said, remembering it. "You can't imagine how something like
that feels." Nevertheless, he'd been gentlemanly. For their first date, they had
gone to Walden Pond. Afterward, they bought corn and tomatoes, and grilled
salmon in her backyard. Farouk loved her home, an old farmhouse on five acres.
He asked her to draw up the plans for redoing his kitchen. On Labor Day, they
had hiked Mount Sunapee together. She said other things Paul listened to, unsure
of how much he should believe. For either they were true, and Farouk and
Deirdre were having a full-blown affair, or Deirdre was simply inventing it all,
the way lonely, drunk people sometimes invent things. At one point, he
wandered into the hallway and opened Sang's door, making sure the curtain was
tied as he'd remembered it.
"What about you?" Deirdre asked suddenly.
"What about me?"
"Well, here I am going on and you haven't said a thing. What are you like,
Paul? Are you happy?"
He had sacrificed an hour to this woman. The edge of his ear ached from
pressing the phone to it for so long. "This isn't about me." He swallowed,
shutting the door to Sang's room. "It's about Sang."
"They're cousins, right?" Deirdre said. He could barely hear her. "Aren't
they?"
The desperation with which she asked him brought with it a crushing
certainty. He knew that all she had told him was true, the knowledge of
something having gone terribly wrong leveling him the way his exam had. The
way Theresa's words had.
"Sang and Farouk are not cousins," he said. He felt a strange, inward power
as he spoke, aware that the information could devastate her.
She was silent.
"They're boyfriend and girlfriend, Deirdre," he said. "A serious couple."
"Oh, yeah?" Her tone was challenging. "How serious?"
He thought for a moment. "They see each other four or five nights a week."
"They do?" To Paul's satisfaction, Deirdre sounded wounded by this
information.
"Yes," he said, adding, "they've been together for over three years."

"Three?" The word trailed off weakly, in a way that made Paul wonder if
she might cry again. But when she spoke next her voice was clear. "Well, we're a
serious couple, too. I picked him up from the airport yesterday when he came
back from Cairo. I saw him tonight. He was here for dinner, here in my house.
He made love to me on my staircase, Paul. An hour ago, I could still feel him
dripping down my thighs."
Sang returned from London with presents for the house, KitKats in red
wrappers, tea from Harrods, marmalade, chocolate-coated biscuits. A snapshot
of her nephew went up on the refrigerator, his small smiling face pressed against
Sang's. Paul, from his room, saw that it was Farouk who dropped her off at the
house. Eventually, Paul had gone downstairs, down the magnificent staircase,
which he was now unable to descend without a fleeting image of Farouk naked
on top of a woman who was not Sang. In the kitchen he opened his cupboard and
pulled down the Dewar's.
"Wow. Things have really changed around here," Sang said, smiling, her
eyebrows raised in amusement, watching him pour the drink.
"What do you mean?"
"You're drinking Scotch. If I'd known, I would have bought you some
single malt in duty-free, instead of the KitKats."
The thought of her buying him a gift depressed him. They were friendly,
but they were not friends. He offered her a glass of the Scotch, which she
accepted. They sat together at the table. She clinked her glass against his.
She began sorting through the mail Paul had collected for her. Her hair was
a few inches shorter; she smelled intensely of a spicy perfume.
"I don't know any Deirdres," she said, reading her messages on the legal
pad. "Did she say why she was calling?"
He'd drained his glass and was already pacified by the drink. He shook his
head.
"I wonder what I should do."
"About what?"
"Well, should I call her back?"
He stood up and opened the freezer to get ice cubes for a second drink.
When he returned to the table, she was crossing out the name with a pencil.
"Forget it. She's probably a telemarketer or something."
Avoiding Sang was easy. The university library, which Paul normally found
so charmless, with its cement floors and gray metal shelves and carrels full of
anonymous ballpoint philosophy, was where he began to spend his days. At
home, he discovered that it was just as easy to take a sandwich up to his room.

Winter gave way to a wet, reluctant spring, full of wind and slanted rains that
lashed the window by Paul's bed. Whenever the phone rang, he didn't answer. In
the first few days after Sang's return, he was convinced, each time, that it would
be Deirdre, demanding to talk to Sang. But Deirdre never called. He waited for
her voice, the things she had told him, to fade from his memory. But the
conversations had lodged themselves stubbornly in his mind, alongside all the
plays and poems and essays. He saw two people swimming in Walden Pond,
their heads above the surface of the water. But then there was Sang, day after
day, disappearing to eat dinner at Farouk's. There she was, sitting at the kitchen
table, booking Farouk's tickets to Cairo for the summer, his credit card number
written on a sheet of paper. After two months, Deirdre still hadn't called, and
Paul finally stopped fearing that she would.
Paul took the week of his spring break off from studying. "Stop cramming.
That's probably what happened the first time. Go to the Caribbean," his adviser
suggested. Instead, Paul stayed at home, but declared himself officially on
vacation. He went to movies at the Brattle, spent two days making a cassoulet.
He drove to Wellfleet one day, forcing himself not to take a book. He decided to
ride out to Concord on his bike, to see Emerson's house; on Saturday morning,
he discovered that the chain needed to be fixed, and he brought the bike up to the
deck. When he looked up, Sang was standing there, the phone in her hands, the
cord stretched as far as it could go. "Something weird just happened, "she said.
"What?"
"It was that Deirdre woman. The one you took the message from when I
was away."
Paul bent down, pretending to root around for something in his toolbox.
"She was asking for Farouk," Sang continued. "She says she's a friend of his,
visiting from out of town."
"Oh. So that must have been why she was calling," he said, relieved to hear
that this was all Deirdre had said.
"He's never mentioned a Deirdre."
"Oh."
Sang sat down in a beach chair, the phone in her lap, her body leaning into
it. She straightened, staring at the phone, pressing numbers at random without
picking up the receiver. "Farouk doesn't have any friends," she said. "Ever since
I've known him, he's never introduced me to a single friend. I'm his only friend,
really." She looked intently at Paul, and for a second he feared she was about to
draw some sort of parallel, point out that Paul didn't have friends, either. Instead,
she said, "How did she get my number, anyway?"
She'd looked it up in Farouk's address book; Deirdre had confessed this to

Paul. Farouk had made it easy for her, writing it under "S" for Sang, the name of
the cousin he had mentioned in a way that made her suspicious. Paul shook his
head, standing up, squeezing the hand brakes on the bicycle. "Don't know. I
guess I'd ask Farouk."
"Right. Ask Farouk." She stood up and went back into the house.
That evening, when Paul returned from Concord, he found Sang at the
kitchen table. She said nothing as he went to the refrigerator to pull out the
remains of the cassoulet.
"Farouk isn't in," she said, as if responding to a question on Paul's part. "He
hasn't been in all day."
He lifted the lid of the baking dish and sprinkled a few drops of water on
top of the cassoulet. "You want some of this?"
"No, thanks." She was frowning.
Paul put the cassoulet in the oven and poured a Scotch. The muscles in his
arms and his thighs ached pleasantly. He wanted to take a shower before eating.
"So, when exactly did this Deirdre person call?" Sang said, stopping him as
he walked out of the kitchen.
He turned to face her, pivoting on his heels. "I don't remember. It was when
you were away."
"And did she say anything to you?"
"What do you mean?"
"What did she say to you, exactly?"
"Nothing. I didn't talk to her," he said, his pulse racing; he was thankful that
he was already coated with sweat. "She just wanted you to call her back."
"Well, I can't call her back. She didn't even leave her number. It was weird.
Did she sound like a weird sort of person to you?"
He remembered Deirdre's tears. "I love him," she'd told Paul, a perfect
stranger. He looked at Sang, manipulating his face into an uncomprehending
expression. "I'm not sure what you mean."
She sighed impatiently. "Can you hand me that?" she said, pointing to the
message pad.
Paul watched as Sang began flipping through the pages that had been turned
over, running her finger down each line.
"What are you looking for?" he said after a moment.
"Her number."
"Why?"
"I want to call her back."
"Why?"
She looked up at him, exasperated. "Because I want to, Paul. Is that a

problem with you?"
He went upstairs to take his shower. It wasn't his business, he told himself
as the hot water washed over him, and, later, as he dried himself, then combed
back his hair, enveloped in steam. When he came downstairs again, he found her
on her hands and knees, going through the recycling bin, newspapers and
magazines piled around her.
"Damn it," she said.
"Now what are you looking for?"
"The number. I remember ripping out that page for some reason. I think I
threw it away." She began to put the newspapers and magazines back into the
bin. "Damn it," she said again. She stood up, kicking the bin lightly with her
foot. "I don't even remember her last name. Do you?"
He inhaled, as if to seal the information inside himself, but then he shook
his head, relieved at the opportunity, at last, to be honest with her. He, too, had
forgotten Deirdre's last name. It was a name of one syllable, but apart from that
detail it had vanished from his brain.
"Hey, Paul," Sang said after a moment. "I'm sorry if I sounded harsh back
then."
He walked across the kitchen, opened the oven. "Don't worry about it."
Her stomach growled, loudly enough for Paul to hear. "God, I just realized I
haven't eaten a thing today. I think I'll have some of that cassoulet, after all.
Should I make a salad?" This would be their first dinner together, alone, without
Heather. He used to yearn for such an occasion. He used to feel clumsy and
tongue-tied when Sang was in the room. Now he felt dread.
"I guess she was a little weird," he said slowly, gazing at the back of Sang's
head, bent forward over the sink where she was ripping lettuce. She turned
around.
"How? How did she seem weird to you?"
He was so nervous that for a terrible instant he worried that he might laugh
out loud. Sang was regarding him steadily. The faucet was still running. She
reached back to turn it off, and now the room was silent.
"She was crying," he said.
"Crying?"
"Um-yeah." "Crying how?"
"Just-crying. Like she was upset about something."
Sang opened her mouth, as if to speak, but for a while it simply hung open.
"So let me get this straight. This woman Deirdre called and asked for me."
Paul nodded. "Right."
"And you said I wasn't there."

"Right."
"And then she asked you to have me call her back."
"Right."
"And then she started crying?"
"Yeah."
"And then what happened?" "That was it. Then she hung up."
For a moment, Sang seemed satisfied with the information, nodding slowly.
Then she shook her head abruptly, as if to flick it away. "Why didn't you tell me
this?"
He regretted having offered her the cassoulet. He regretted ever having
picked up the phone that day. He regretted that Sang and not another person had
moved into the room, into his house, into his life. "I did," he said calmly,
drawing a line between them in his mind. "I told you she called."
"But you didn't tell me this."
"No."
She opened her eyes wide, incredulous. "Didn't it occur to you I might want
to know?"
He curled his lips together, looking away.
"Well?" she demanded, shouting at him now. "Didn't it?"
When he still did not reply, she marched up to him, her hands clenched in
fists, and he braced himself for a blow, twisting his face to one side. But she
didn't strike him. Instead she gripped the sides of her own head, as if to steady
herself. "My God, Paul." Her voice was so shrill it was nearly inaudible. "What
the hell is wrong with you?"
Now it was she who began to avoid him. For a few nights, she was not at
home. Paul saw her getting into Charles's truck with a weekend bag. Because
Heather had by then all but officially moved in with Kevin, once again Paul
found himself alone in the house. A week passed before he saw Sang again.
Thinking himself alone, he hadn't bothered to shut his door. She came up to his
room, wearing a pretty dress he'd never seen, a white cotton short-sleeved dress,
fitted at the waist. The neck was square, showing off her collarbones.
"Hey," she said.
"Hey." He had not missed her at all.
"Look. I just wanted to tell you that it's all a huge confusion. Deirdre really
is an old friend of Farouk's, from way back. From college."
"You don't have to explain it to me," Paul said.
"She lives in Canada." Sang continued. "In Vancouver."
"I see."

"They talk, like, once a year. Farouk mentioned my name to her years ago,
when we first got together, when he lived in another apartment, and she
remembered it. She was trying to get in touch with him because she's getting
married, and she wanted to send Farouk an invitation. She didn't have Farouk's
new address or his number, and he's not listed. That's why she tried here."
She seemed strangely excited by her convoluted explanation. Some color
had come to her cheeks. "There's only one thing, Paul."
He looked up. "What's that?"
"Farouk called Deirdre to ask about what you said."
"What I said?"
"About the crying." Sang shrugged her shoulders, dropped them carelessly.
"He told me she has no idea what you were talking about." Her voice sounded
compressed, the words running together quickly.
"Are you saying I made it up?"
She was silent.
For her sake, he'd told her about the crying. That night in the kitchen,
watching her make the salad, he'd felt the walls collapsing around her. He'd
wanted to warn her somehow. Now he wanted to push her from the door frame
where she stood.
"Why would I make up a story like that?" He could feel a nerve on one side
of his head throbbing.
Instead of arguing with him, she gave a sympathetic glance, letting her head
rest against the door frame. "I don't know, Paul." It occurred to him that this was
the first time she'd visited him in his room. For a moment, she appeared to be
searching for a free place to sit. She straightened her head.
"Did you really think it would make me leave him?"
"I didn't think it would make you do anything," Paul said. He was clenching
his teeth now. His body felt heavy from her accusation, numb. "I didn't make it
up."
"I mean, it's one thing for you to like me, Paul," she continued. "It's one
thing for you to have a crush. But to make up a story like that-" She stopped, her
mouth now straining into something that was not a smile. "It's pathetic, really.
Pathetic!" And she walked out of the room.
When they crossed paths again, she didn't apologize for the outburst. She
didn't appear angry, only indifferent. He noticed that a copy of the Phoenix,
which she'd left on top of the microwave, was folded to the real estate section,
and that a few of the listings were circled. She came and went from Farouk's.
She looked up at Paul briefly when she happened to see him, with a mechanical
little smile, and then she looked away, as if he were invisible.

The next time Sang worked at the bookstore, Paul stayed up in his room
until he heard her leave the house. Once she was gone, he went to the kitchen,
emptying out the recycling bin, which had not been taken out all winter. He
flipped though each magazine, unfolded every newspaper, searching for the
sheet of paper with Deirdre's number. It would be like Sang, he thought, to look
for it and not find it. But Paul couldn't find it, either. He pulled out the White
Pages and opened it at random, searching for a Deirdre, not caring how
ridiculous he was being. Then he remembered it. Her last name. It swam
effortlessly back to his memory, accompanied by the sound of Deirdre's voice as
she introduced herself to him that night on the telephone months ago. He turned
to the "F's," saw it there, a D. Frain, an address in Belmont. He dragged the nail
of his index finger beneath the listing, leaving a faint dent in the paper.
He called the next day. He left a message on her machine, asking her to call
him back. He felt giddy, having done it. In a way, it was his fear that Deirdre
would not call him back, knowing that she, too, was now keeping her distance,
that emboldened him to keep calling, to keep leaving messages. "Deirdre, this is
Paul. Please call me," he said each time.
And then one day she picked up the phone.
"I need to talk to you," he said. She recognized his voice. "I know. Listen,
Paul-" He cut her off. "It's not right," he said. He was sitting in a booth in the
lobby of the library, watching as students flashed their ID cards to the security
guard. He fished in his pocket for extra quarters.
"I listened to you. I was kind to you. I didn't have to talk to you."
"I know. I'm sorry. It was wrong of me." She no longer sounded drunk or
flirtatious or desperate or upset in any way. She was perfectly ordinary, polite
but removed.
"I didn't even tell her the other stuff you told me." He saw that a student
was standing outside the booth, waiting for him to finish. Paul lowered his voice.
He felt mildly hysterical. "Remember all that stuff?"
"Look, please, I said I'm sorry. Can you hold on a second?" Paul heard a
doorbell ring. After a minute, she came back to the phone. "I have to go now. I'll
call you back."
"When?" Paul demanded, afraid that she was lying to him, that it was a ploy
to be rid of him. In January, when Paul had wanted to get off the phone with
Deirdre, she had pleaded with him to stay on the line.
"Later. Tonight," she said.
"I want to know when."
She told him she'd call at ten.
The idea came to him immediately after getting off the phone, the receiver

still in his hand. He left the library, went to the nearest RadioShack. "I need a
phone," he told the salesman. "And an adapter with two jacks."
It was a night Sang worked at the bookstore; as usual, she was home by
nine. She said nothing to Paul when she came into the kitchen to get her mail.
"I called Deirdre," Paul said.
"Why don't you stop involving yourself this way?" Sang said evenly,
leafing through a catalogue.
"She's calling me at ten o'clock," Paul said. "If you want, you can listen in
without her knowing. I got another phone and hooked it up to our line."
She dropped the catalogue, noticing the second phone. "Jesus, Paul," she
hissed. "I can't fucking believe you."
She went into her room; at five to ten she came out and sat next to Paul.
He'd set the phones together on the table. At exactly one minute past ten, both
phones rang. Paul picked up one. "Hello?"
"It's me," Deirdre said.
He nodded, motioning to Sang, and slowly, carefully, Sang picked up the
other phone and put it to her ear without allowing it to touch her. She held it
unnaturally, the bottom of the receiver turned away from her mouth, pointed
toward her shoulder.
"Like I said, Paul, I'm sorry for calling you. I shouldn't have," Deirdre said.
She seemed relaxed, willing to talk, in no apparent rush. Paul relaxed a
little, too. "But you did."
"Yes."
"And you cried about Farouk."
"Yes."
"And then you made me into a liar." She was silent.
"You denied the whole thing." "It was Freddy's idea."
"And you went along with it," Paul said. He was looking at Sang. She was
pressing her top teeth into her lower lip in a way that looked painful.
"What was I supposed to do, Paul?" Deirdre said. "He was furious when he
found out I'd called you. He refused to see me. He unplugged his phone. He
wouldn't answer the door."
Sang put a palm against the table's edge, as if to push it away, but she ended
up pushing herself back in her chair, scraping the linoleum. Paul put a finger to
his lips, but then he realized that, to Deirdre, it was he who'd made the sound.
She kept talking.
"Listen, Paul, I'm sorry you're in the middle of all this. I really am sorry I
called. It was just that Freddy kept telling me Sang was his cousin, and when I

asked him to introduce me to her he refused. I didn't care at first. I figured I
wasn't the only woman in his life. But then I fell in love with him." She wanted
to believe him, she explained. She was a thirty-five-year-old woman, already
married and divorced. She didn't have time for this.
"But I've ended it," she said, matter-of-factly. "You know, there was a point
when I actually believed he couldn't live without me. That's what he does to
women. He depends on them. He asks them to do a hundred things, makes them
believe his life won't function without them. That was him this afternoon when
you called, still wanting to see me, still wanting to keep me on the side. He
doesn't have any friends, you see. Only lovers. I think he needs them, the way
other people need a family or friends." She sounded reasonable and reflective
now, as if she were describing an affair she'd had years before. Sang's eyes were
closed and she was shaking her head slowly from side to side. The dog was
barking.
"That's my dog," Deirdre said. "He's always hated Freddy. He's the size of a
football, but every time Freddy comes over he makes me put a guardrail across
the stairs."
Sang inhaled sharply. She put the receiver down quietly on the table, then
she picked it up again.
"I should go," Paul said.
"Me, too," Deirdre agreed. "I think you need to tell her now."
He was startled, afraid Deirdre had discovered his trick, that she knew that
Sang was listening in. "Tell her what?"
"Tell her about me and Farouk. She deserves to know. It sounds like you're
a good friend of hers."
Deirdre hung up, and for a long time Paul and Sang sat there, listening to
the silence. He had cleared himself with Sang, and yet he felt no relief, no
vindication. Eventually, Sang hung up her phone and stood up, slowly, but made
no further movements. She looked sealed off from things, holding herself as if
she still needed to be perfectly stealthy, as if the slightest sound or gesture would
betray her presence.
"I'm sorry," Paul said finally.
She nodded and went to her room, shutting the door. After a while he
followed her, stood outside. "Sang? Do you need anything?"
He remained there, waiting for her to reply. He heard her moving around
the room. When the door opened, he saw that she had changed, into a black top
with long tight-fitting sleeves. Her pink raincoat was draped over her arm, her
purse hanging over her shoulder. "I need a ride."
In the car, she directed him, saying what to do and where to turn only at the

last possible minute. They drove through Allston and down Storrow Drive.
"There," she said, pointing. It was an ugly high-rise, bereft of charm and yet
clearly exclusive, on the Cambridge side of the river. She got out of the car and
started walking.
Paul followed her. "What are you doing?"
She speeded up. "I need to talk to him." She spoke in a monotone.
"I don't know, Sang."
She walked even faster, her shoes clicking on the pavement.
The lobby was filled with beige sofas and potted trees. There was an
African doorman sitting at the desk who smiled at them, recognizing Sang. He
was listening to a radio tuned to the news in French.
"Evening, Miss."
"Hello, Raymond."
"Getting cold again, Miss. Maybe rain later."
"Maybe."
She kept her finger pressed on the elevator button until it came, while she
fixed her hair in the mirror opposite. On the tenth floor, they stopped, then
walked to the end of the hallway. The doors were dark brown, thickly varnished.
She tapped the door knocker, which was like a small brass picture frame hinged
to the surface. Inside, there was the sound of a television. Then there was
silence.
"It's me," she said.
She tapped it again. Five consecutive taps. Ten. She pressed the top of her
head against the door. "I heard her, Farouk. I heard Deirdre. She called Paul, and
I heard her." Sang's voice was quavering.
"Please open the door." She tried the knob, a strong metal knob, which
would not budge.
There were footsteps, a chain being undone. Farouk opened the door, a
day's stubble on his face. He wore a flecked fisherman's sweater, corduroy pants,
black espadrilles on bare feet. He looked nothing like a philanderer, just bookish
and slight. "I did not invite you here," he said acidly when he saw Paul.
In spite of all he knew, Paul was stung by the words, unable to speak in his
own defense.
"Please leave," Farouk said. "Please, for once, try to respect our privacy."
"She asked me," Paul said.
Farouk lurched forward, arms extended rigidly in front of him, pushing
Paul away as if he were a large piece of furniture.
Paul took a step back, then resisted, grabbing Farouk's wrists. The two men
fell to the floor of the hallway, Paul's glasses flying onto the carpet. It was easy

for Paul to pin Farouk to the ground, to dig his fingers into his shoulders. Paul
squeezed them tightly, through the thick wool of the sweater, feeling the give of
the tendons, aware that Farouk was no longer resisting. For a moment, Paul lay
on top of him fully, subduing him like a lover. He looked up, searching for Sang,
but she was nowhere. He looked back at the man beneath him, a man he barely
knew, a man he hated. "All she wants is for you to admit it," Paul said. "I think
you owe her that."
Farouk spat at Paul's face, a cold spray that made Paul recoil. Farouk
pushed him off, went into his apartment, and slammed the door. Other doors
along the hallway began to open. Paul could hear Farouk fastening the chain. He
found his glasses and stood up, pressed his ear to the varnished wood. He heard
crying, then a series of objects falling. At one point he could hear Farouk saying,
"Stop it, please, please, it's not as bad as you think." And then Sang saying,
"How many times? How many times did you do it? Did you do it here on the
bed?"
A minute later, the elevator opened and a man walked toward Farouk's
apartment. He was a lean man with gray hair and a big bunch of keys in his
hand. "I'm the super in this building. Who are you?" he asked Paul.
"I live with the woman inside," he said, pointing at Farouk's door.
"You her husband?" "No."
The super knocked on the door, saying neighbors had complained. He
continued to knock, rapping the wood with his knuckles until the door opened.
Inside was a hallway illuminated by track lights. Paul glimpsed a bright
white kitchen without windows, a stack of cookbooks on the counter. To the
right was a dining room, painted the same sage-green as Sang's room. Paul
followed the super into the living room. There was an off-white sofa, a coffee
table, a sliding glass door that led to a balcony. In the distance was a view of the
Citgo sign, draining and filling with color. There was a bookcase along one wall
which had fallen to the floor, its books in a heap. The receiver of a telephone on
a side table hung from a cord, beeping faintly, repeatedly. In spite of these
things, the room had a barren quality, as if someone were in the process of
moving out of it.
Sang was kneeling on an Oriental carpet, picking up the pieces of what
appeared to have been a clear glass vase. She was shivering. Her hair was
undone, hanging toward the floor, partly shielding her face. There was water
everywhere, and the ruins of a bouquet of flowers, irises and tiger lilies and
daffodils. She worked carefully with the glass, creating a pile of shards on the
coffee table. There were petals in her hair and stuck to her face and neck, and
plastered to the skin exposed above her black scoop-necked top, as if she had

smeared them on herself like a cream. There were welts emerging above her
neckline, fresh and bright.
The men stood there, looking at her, none of them saying anything. A
policeman arrived, his black boots and his gun and his radio filling up the room,
static from his radio replacing the silence. Someone in the building had called
the station to complain, he said. He asked Sang, who was still on the floor, if
Farouk had struck her. Sang shook her head.
"Do you live here?" he asked.
"I painted the walls," Sang said, as if that would explain everything. Paul
remembered her painting her own room, barefoot, listening to Billie Holiday.
The policeman leaned over, inspecting the broken glass and flower debris
on the carpet, noticing the welts on her skin.
"What happened?"
"I bought them," she said, tears streaming quickly down her cheeks. Her
voice was thick, ashamed. "I did this to myself."
After that, everything proceeded in an orderly way, with people moving in
separate directions, not reacting to anyone else. The policeman filled out a form,
then lent an arm and took Sang to the bathroom. The super left, saying
something to Farouk about a fine. Farouk went to the kitchen, returning with a
roll of paper towels and a garbage bag, and knelt by the carpet, cleaning up the
mess Sang had made. The policeman looked at Paul, as if assessing him for the
first time. He asked if Paul was an involved party.
"I'm her housemate," Paul replied. "I just gave her a ride."
The next morning, Paul was awakened by the noise of a car door closing.
He went to the window and saw the trunk of a taxi being pressed down by the
driver's hand. Sang had left a note on the kitchen table: she was going to London
to visit her sister. "Paul, thanks for yesterday," it said. Along with this was a
signed check for her portion of the rent.
For a few days, nothing happened. He collected her mail. The bookstore
called to ask where she was. Paul told them she had the flu. Two weeks later, the
bookstore called again. This time it was to fire her. The third week, Farouk
began to call, asking to speak to her. He didn't identify himself, didn't press Paul
when he said, night after night, "Sang's not in." He was polite to Paul, in a way
he had never been before, saying, thank you, that he'd try later. Paul relished
these calls. He liked depriving Farouk of the knowledge of where Sang was. But
then, one day when he called, Heather, holed up in the house that week to study
for an exam, happened to answer and said, "She's left the country," putting an
end to Farouk's calls.

At the end of the month, the rent was due. Paul and Heather didn't have
enough to cover it. Instead of contacting Sang's parents, he looked up her sister's
phone number in London on an old telephone bill. A woman answered, who
sounded just like her.
"Sang?"
The phone switched hands, and a man came on the line.
"Who is this?"
"This is her housemate in America, in Brookline. Paul. I'm trying to reach
Sang."
There was a long pause. After some minutes had passed, he wondered if he
ought to hang up and try again. But then the man picked up the phone. He didn't
apologize for the delay. "She's indisposed at the moment. I'm sure she'll
appreciate your call."
Charles came that weekend to pack up Sang's things. He tossed her clothes
into garbage bags, stripped the futon of its sheets, and asked Paul to help him put
it out on the sidewalk. Wrapping the framed Indian miniatures in newspaper at
the kitchen table, he told Paul he'd talked to Sang on the phone, said that she'd be
living in London with her sister through the summer. "You know, I kept telling
her to leave him. Can you believe, I never even met the guy?"
Charles loaded up the back of his truck, until all that was left of Sang in the
house was the sage and mole paint on the walls of her room, and the hanging
plant over the dish drainer. "I guess that's everything," Charles said.
The truck disappeared, but Paul stood a while longer, looking at the houses
lining the street. Though Charles was her friend, she had not told him. She had
not told Charles that Paul had known for months about Deirdre. That night at
Farouk's apartment, after washing up in the bathroom, Sang had got down on all
fours and crawled into Farouk's coat closet, weeping uncontrollably, at one point
hitting herself with a shoe.
She'd refused to emerge from the closet until the policeman lifted her by the
armpits and dragged her forcefully from the apartment, telling Paul to see her
home. Tiny pieces of flower petals and leaves were still stuck in her hair. She
had taken Paul's hand in the elevator, and all the way back to the house. In the
car, she had cried continuously with her head between her knees, not letting go
of Paul's hand, gripping it even as he shifted gears. He had put the seatbelt on
her; her body had been stiff, unyielding. She seemed to know, without looking
up, when they turned in to their road. By then, she had stopped crying. Her nose
was running. She wiped it with the back of her hand. A light rain had begun to
fall, and within seconds the windows and the windshield seemed covered with
scratches, similar to the ones she'd inflicted on herself, the drops beading up in

small diagonal lines.
The day Paul passed his exams, two of his professors took him to the Four
Seasons bar for a drink. He had many drinks that afternoon, ice-cold Martinis on
an unseasonably warm spring day. He drank them quickly on an empty stomach
and little sleep the night before, and suddenly he was drunk. He had answered
every question, passed with honors the three-hour ordeal. "Let's pretend it never
happened," his committee told him, alluding to his previous embarrassment.
After they left him, shaking hands a final time, patting him on the back for good
measure, he went to the men's room, splashed water on his face. He pressed a
plush white towel to his temples, sprayed himself with some cologne from a
leather-encased bottle by the sink. Returning to the lobby, the reception desk, the
massive bouquets of flowers, the well-dressed guests, the brass carts piled with
expensive luggage-all of them had spun round him like a carrousel, then floated
one by one in an arc across his vision. For a while, he stood watching these
images appearing and fading like fireworks, not wanting them to end. He wanted
money all of a sudden, enough of it to march up to the desk and request a room,
a big white bed, silence.
Outside, he turned a corner, crossed a street. He walked toward
Commonwealth Avenue, so different at this end from the way it was by the
university. Here it was an elegant, tree-lined boulevard, flanked by spectacular
homes, and benches on which to sit and admire the architecture. The cross
streets progressed alphabetically-Berkeley, Clarendon, Dartmouth. He walked
slowly, still drunk, looking now and then for a taxi to take him home. At Exeter
Street, he noticed a couple on a bench. It was Farouk and a woman, willowy but
haggard. Her bony nose was a little too large for her face. Her slim legs were
crossed. Her eyes, a limpid turquoise blue, were topped with mascara-coated
lashes and she blinked rapidly, as if irritated by a grain of sand.
There was an empty bench across from them. Paul walked to it and sat
down. Loosening his tie, he looked directly at Farouk. For this man, Deirdre had
called a perfect stranger, made a fool of herself. For this man, Sang would rush
from the house, had refused all her suitors. Because the suitors didn't know her,
they hadn't had a chance. "It's not love," she used to say. They still called for her
now and again, their voices eager, their intentions plain. "Do you know her
number in London?" some asked, but Paul had thrown it away. His head tilting
this way and that way, he studied Farouk carefully. Paul had lain on top of this
man. He had felt those legs, that chest, beneath his own, had smelled his skin
and hair and breath. It was a knowledge he shared with Sang and Deirdre, a
knowledge each had believed to be her own. Farouk and the woman exchanged

glances. Let them, Paul thought, smiling, a quiet snicker escaping him. There
was nothing Farouk could do to stop him; not with this new woman at his side.
He slouched down, his head against the wood of the bench now, allowing the
afternoon sun to warm his body, his face. He was tempted to stretch out. He
closed his eyes.
He felt a poke in the side of his arm. It was Farouk, standing in front of
him.
"You should be grateful I didn't sue," Farouk said. He spoke precisely yet
without rancor, as if he were making casual conversation.
Paul rubbed his eyes behind his glasses, displacing them.
"What?"
"You've damaged my shoulder. I had to get an MRI. I may need surgery."
The woman, now standing a few feet behind Farouk, said something Paul
was unable to hear.
"He should know," Farouk said to the woman, his voice rising unpleasantly.
Then he shrugged, and they walked off together. There was something curious
about the way they were walking, together and yet with a space between them. It
was only then that Paul noticed a small yellow dog at the end of a very long
leash, stretched taut in the woman's hand, pulling her along the path.

P ART TWO. HEMA AND KAUSHIK

O nce in a Lifetime
I had seen you before, too many times to count, but a farewell that my
family threw for yours, at our house in Inman Square, is when I begin to recall
your presence in my life. Your parents had decided to leave Cambridge, not for
Atlanta or Arizona, as some other Bengalis had, but to move all the way back to
India, abandoning the struggle that my parents and their friends had embarked
upon. It was 1974. I was six years old. You were nine. What I remember most
clearly are the hours before the party, which my mother spent preparing for
everyone to arrive: the furniture was polished, the paper plates and napkins set
out on the table, the rooms filled with the smell of lamb curry and pullao and the
L'Air du Temps my mother used for special occasions, spraying it first on
herself, then on me, a firm squirt that temporarily darkened whatever I was
wearing. I was dressed that evening in an outfit that my grandmother had sent
from Calcutta: white pajamas with tapered legs and a waist wide enough to gird
two of me side by side, a turquoise kurta, and a black velvet vest embroidered
with plastic pearls. The three pieces had been arrayed on my parents' bed while I
was in the bath, and I stood shivering, my fingertips puckered and white, as my
mother threaded a length of thick drawstring
through the giant waist of the pajamas with a safety pin, gathering up the
stiff material bit by bit and then knotting the drawstring tightly at my stomach.
The inseam of the pajamas was stamped with purple letters within a circle, the
seal of the textile company. I remember fretting about this fact, wanting to wear
something else, but my mother assured me that the seal would come out in the
wash, adding that, because of the length of the kurta, no one would notice it
anyway.
My mother had more pressing concerns. In addition to the quality and
quantity of the food, she was worried about the weather: snow was predicted for
later that evening, and this was a time when my parents and their friends didn't
own cars. Most of the guests, including you, lived less than a fifteen-minute
walk away, either in the neighborhoods behind Harvard and MIT or just across
the Mass Avenue Bridge. But some were farther, coming by bus or the T from
Malden or Medford or Waltham. "I suppose Dr. Choudhuri can drive people
home," she said of your father as she untangled my hair. Your parents were
slightly older-seasoned immigrants, as mine were not. They had left India in
1962, before the laws welcoming foreign students changed. While my father and

the other men were still taking exams, your father already had a PhD, and he
drove a car, a silver Saab with bucket seats, to his job at an engineering firm in
Andover. I had been driven home in that car many nights, after parties had gone
late and I had fallen asleep in some strange bed or other.
Our mothers met when mine was pregnant. She didn't know it yet; she was
feeling dizzy and sat down on a bench in a small park. Your mother was perched
on a swing, gently swaying back and forth as you soared above her, when she
noticed a young Bengali woman in a sari, wearing vermilion in her hair. "Are
you feeling all right?" your mother asked in the polite form. She told you to get
off the swing, and then she and you escorted my mother home. It was during that
walk that your mother suggested that perhaps mine was expecting. They became
instant friends, spending their days together while our fathers were at work.
They talked about the lives they had left behind in Calcutta: your mother's
beautiful home in Jodhpur Park, with hibiscus and rosebushes blooming on the
rooftop, and my mother's modest flat in Maniktala, above a grimy Punjabi
restaurant, where seven people existed in three small rooms. In Calcutta they
would probably have had little occasion to meet. Your mother went to a convent
school and was the daughter of one of Calcutta's most prominent lawyers, a pipesmoking Anglophile and a member of the Saturday Club. My mother's father
was a clerk in the General Post Office, and she had neither eaten at a table nor
sat on a commode before coming to America. Those differences were irrelevant
in Cambridge, where they were both equally alone. Here they shopped together
for groceries and complained about their husbands and cooked at either our stove
or yours, dividing up the dishes for our respective families when they were done.
They knitted together, switching projects when one of them got bored. When I
was born, your parents were the only friends to visit the hospital. I was fed in
your old high chair, pushed along the streets in your old pram.
During the party it started snowing, as predicted, stragglers arriving with
wet, white-caked coats that we had to hang from the shower curtain rod. For
years, my mother talked about how, when the party ended, your father made
countless trips to drive people home, taking one couple as far as Braintree,
claiming that it was no trouble, that this was his last opportunity to drive the car.
In the days before you left, your parents came by again, to bring over pots and
pans, small appliances, blankets and sheets, half-used bags of flour and sugar,
bottles of shampoo. We continued to refer to these things as your mother's. "Get
me Parul's frying pan," my mother would say. Or, "I think we need to turn the
setting down on Parul's toaster."
Your mother also brought over shopping bags filled with clothes she
thought I might be able to use, that once belonged to you. My mother put the

bags away and took them with us when we moved, a few years later, from Inman
Square to a house in Sharon, incorporating the clothes into my wardrobe as I
grew into them. Mainly they were winter items, things you would no longer need
in India. There were thick Tshirts and turtlenecks in navy and brown. I found
these clothes ugly and tried to avoid them, but my mother refused to replace
them. And so I was forced to wear your sweaters, your rubber boots on rainy
days. One winter I had to wear your coat, which I hated so much that it caused
me to hate you as a result. It was blue-black with an orange lining and a scratchy
grayish-brown trim around the hood. I never got used to having to hook the
zipper on the right side, to looking so different from the other girls in my class
with their puffy pink and purple jackets. When I asked my parents if I could
have a new coat they said no. A coat was a coat, they said. I wanted desperately
to get rid of it. I wanted it to be lost. I wished that one of the boys in my class,
many of whom owned identical coats, would accidentally pick it up in the
narrow alcove where we rushed to put on our things at the end of the day. But
my mother had gone so far as to iron a label inside the coat with my name on it,
an idea she'd got from her subscription to Good Housekeeping.
Once I left it on the school bus. It was a mild late winter day, the windows
on the bus open, everybody's outerwear shed on the seats. I was taking a
different bus than usual, one that dropped me off in the neighborhood of my
piano teacher, Mrs. Hennessey. When the bus neared my stop I stood up, and
when I reached the front the driver reminded me to be careful crossing the street.
She pulled back the lever that opened the door, letting fragrant air onto the bus. I
was about to step off, coat-less, but then someone cried out, "Hey, Hema, you
forgot this!" I was startled that anyone on that bus knew my name; I had
forgotten about the name tag.
By the following year I had outgrown the coat, and to my great relief it was
donated to charity. The other items your parents bequeathed to us, the toaster
and the crockery and the Teflon pots and pans, were gradually replaced as well,
until there was no longer any physical trace of you in the house. For years our
families had no contact. The friendship did not merit the same energy my parents
devoted to their relatives, buying stacks of aerograms at the post office and
sending them off faithfully every week, asking me to write the same three
sentences to each set of grandparents at the bottom. My parents spoke of you
rarely, and I imagine they assumed that our paths were unlikely to cross again.
You'd moved to Bombay, a city far from Calcutta, which my parents and I never
visited. And so we did not see you, or hear from you, until the first day of 1981,
when your father called us very early in the morning to wish us a happy New

Year and say that your family was returning to Massachusetts, where he had a
new job. He asked if, until he found a house, you could all stay with us.
For days afterward, my parents talked of nothing else. They wondered what
had gone wrong: Had your father's position at Larsen & Toubro, too good to turn
down at the time, fallen through? Was your mother no longer able to abide the
mess and heat of India? Had they decided that the schools weren't good enough
for you there? Back then international calls were kept short. Of course, your
family was welcome, my parents said, and marked the date of your arrival on the
calendar in our kitchen. Whatever the reason you were coming, I gathered from
my parents' talk that it was regarded as a wavering, a weakness. "They should
have known it's impossible to go back," they said to their friends, condemning
your parents for having failed at both ends. We had stuck it out as immigrants
while you had fled; had we been the ones to go back to India, my parents seemed
to suggest, we would have stuck it out there as well.
Until your return I'd thought of you as a boy of eight or nine, frozen in time,
the size of the clothes I'd inherited. But you were twice that now, sixteen, and
my parents thought it best that you occupy my room and that I sleep on a folding
cot set up in their bedroom. Your parents would stay in the guestroom, down the
hall. My parents often hosted friends who came from New Jersey or New
Hampshire for the weekend, to eat elaborate dinners and talk late into the
evening about Indian politics. But by Sunday afternoon those guests were always
gone. I was accustomed to having children sleep on the floor by my bed, in
sleeping bags. Being an only child, I enjoyed this occasional company. But I had
never been asked to relinquish my room entirely. I asked my mother why they
weren't giving you the folding cot instead of me.
"Where would we put it?" she asked. "We only have three bedrooms."
"Downstairs," I suggested. "In the living room."
"That wouldn't look right," my mother said. "Kaushik must practically be a
man by now. He needs his privacy."
"What about the basement?" I said, thinking of the small study my father
had built there, lined with metal bookcases.
"That's no way to treat guests, Hema. Especially not these. Dr. Choudhuri
and Parul Di were such a blessing when we first had you. They drove us home
from the hospital, they brought over food for weeks. Now it's our turn to be
helpful."
"What sort of doctor is he?" I asked. Though I had always been in good
health, I had an irrational fear of doctors then, and the thought of one living in
the house made me nervous, as if his mere presence might make one of us sick.
"He's not a medical doctor. It refers to his PhD." "Baba has his PhD and no

one calls him a doctor," I pointed out.
"When we met, Dr. Choudhuri was the only one. It was our way of paying
respect."
I asked how long you would be staying with us-a week? Two? My mother
couldn't say; it all depended on how long it took your family to get settled and
find a place. The prospect of having to give up my room infuriated me. My
feelings were complicated by the fact that, until rather recently, to my great
shame, I'd regularly slept with my parents on the cot in their room, and not in the
room where I kept my clothes and things. My mother considered the idea of a
child sleeping alone a cruel American practice and therefore did not encourage
it, even when we had the space. She told me that she had slept in the same bed as
her parents until the day she was married and that this was perfectly normal. But
I knew that it was not normal, not what my friends at school did, and that they
would ridicule me if they knew. The summer before I started middle school, I
insisted on sleeping alone. In the beginning my mother kept checking on me
during the night, as if I were still an infant who might suddenly stop breathing,
asking if I was scared and reminding me that she was just on the other side of the
wall. In fact, I was scared that first night; the perfect silence in my room terrified
me. But I refused to admit this, for what I feared more was failing at something I
should have learned to do at the age of three or four. In the end it was easy; I fell
asleep out of sheer anxiety that I would not, and in the morning I woke up alone,
squinting in the eastern light my parents' room did not receive.
The house was prepared for your arrival. New throw pillows were
purchased for the living-room sofa, bright orange against the brown tweed
upholstery. The plants and the curios were rearranged, my school portrait framed
and hung above the fireplace. The Christmas cards were taken down from
around the front door, where my mother and I had taped them one by one as they
came in the mail. My parents, remembering your father's habit of dressing well,
bought robes to wear in the mornings, my mother's made of velour, my father's
styled like a smoking jacket. One day I came home from school and found that
the pink-and-white coverlet on my bed had been replaced by a tan blanket. There
were new towels in the bathroom for you and your parents, plusher than the ones
we used and a prettier shade of blue. My closet had been weeded, bare hangers
left on the rod. I was told to clear out a couple of drawers, and I removed enough
things so that I would not have to enter the room while you were in it. I took my
pajamas, some outfits to wear to school, and the sneakers I needed for gym. I
took the library book I was reading, along with the others stacked on my bedside
table. I wanted you to see as few of my things as possible, so I cleared away my

jewelry box full of cheap tangled chains and my bottles of Avon perfume. I
removed the locked diary from my desk drawer, though I'd written only two
entries since receiving it for Christmas. I removed the seventh-grade yearbook in
which my photograph appeared, the endpapers filled with silly messages from
my classmates. It was like deciding which of my possessions I wanted to take on
a long trip to India, only this time I was going nowhere. Still, I put my things
into a suitcase covered with peeling tags and stickers that had traveled various
times back and forth across the world and dragged it into my parents' room.
I studied pictures of your parents; we had a few pasted into an album, taken
the night of the farewell party. There was my father, his stiff jet-black hair
already a surprise to me by then. He was dressed in a sweater vest, his shirt cuffs
rolled back, pointing urgently at something beyond the frame. Your father was in
the suit and tie he always wore, his handsome, bespectacled face leaning toward
someone in conversation, his greenish eyes unlike anyone else's. The middle part
in your mother's hair accentuated the narrow length of her face; the end of her
raw-silk sari was wrapped around her shoulders like a shawl. My mother stood
beside her, a head shorter and more disheveled, stray hairs hanging by her ears.
They both appeared flushed, the color high in their cheeks, as if from drinking
wine, even though all they ever drank in those days was tap water or tea, the
bond between them clear. There was no evidence of you, the person I was most
curious about. Who knows where you had lurked in that crowd? I imagine you
sat at the desk in the corner of my parents' bedroom, reading a book you'd
brought with you, waiting for the party to end.
My father went one evening to the airport to greet you. It was a school night
for me. The dining table had been set since the afternoon. This was my mother's
way when she gave parties, though she had never prepared such an elaborate
meal in the middle of the week. An hour before you were expected, she turned
on the oven. She had heated up a panful of oil and begun to fry thick slices of
eggplant to serve with the dal, filling the room with a haze of smoke, when my
father called to say that though your plane had landed, one of your suitcases had
not arrived. I was hungry by then, but it felt wrong to ask my mother to open the
oven door and pull out all the dishes for my sake. My mother turned off the oil
and I sat with her on the sofa watching a movie on television, something about
the Second World War, in which a group of tired men were walking across a
dark field. Cinema of a certain period was the one thing my mother loved
wholeheartedly about the West. She herself never wore a skirt-she considered it
indecent-but she could recall, scene by scene, Audrey Hepburn's outfits in any
given movie.
I fell asleep at her side, and the next thing I knew I was sprawled on the

sofa alone, the television turned off, voices filling another part of the house. I
stood up, my face hot, my limbs cramped and heavy. You were all in the dining
room, eating. Pans of food lined the table, and in addition to the water pitcher
there was a bottle of Johnnie Walker that only your parents were drinking,
planted between their plates. There was your mother, her slippery dark hair cut
to her shoulders, wearing slacks and a tunic, a silk scarf knotted at her neck,
looking only vaguely like the woman I'd seen in the pictures. With her bright
lipstick and frosted eyelids, she looked less exhausted than my mother did. She
had remained thin, her collarbones glamorously protruding, unburdened by the
weight of middle age that now padded my mother's features. Your father looked
more or less the same, still handsome, still wearing a jacket and tie, a different
style of glasses his concession to the new decade. You were pale like your
father, long bangs combed over to one side of your face, your eyes distracted yet
missing nothing. I had not expected you to be handsome. I had not expected to
find you appealing in the least.
"My goodness, Hema, already a lady. You don't remember us, do you?"
your mother said. She spoke to me in English, in a pleasant, unhurried way, with
a voice that sounded amused. "Come, poor thing, we've kept you waiting. Your
mother told us you went hungry because of us."
I sat down, embarrassed that you had seen me asleep on the sofa. Though
you had all just flown halfway across the world, it was I who felt weary, despite
my nap. My mother served me a plate of food, but her attention was on you and
the fact that you were refusing seconds.
"We had dinner before we landed," you replied, a faint accent present in
your English, but not the strong accent our parents shared. Your voice had
deepened, no longer a child's.
"It's remarkable, the amount of food you get in first class," your mother
said. "Champagne, chocolates, even caviar. But I saved room. I remembered
your cooking, Shibani," she added.
"First class!" my mother exclaimed, with an intake of breath. "How did you
end up there?"
"It was my fortieth birthday gift," your mother explained. She looked over
at your father, smiling. "Once in a lifetime, right?"
"Who knows?" he said, clearly proud of the extravagance. "It could become
a terrible habit."
Our parents spoke of the old Cambridge crowd, mine telling yours about
people's moves and accomplishments, the bachelors who had married, the
children who had been born. They spoke about Reagan winning the election, all
the ways that Carter had failed. Your parents spoke of Rome, where you'd had a

two-day layover to tour the city. Your mother described the fountains, and the
ceiling of the Sistine Chapel you had stood three hours in line to see. "So many
lovely churches," she said. "Each is like a museum. It made me want to be a
Catholic, only to be able to pray in them."
"Do not die before seeing the Pantheon," your father said, and my parents
nodded, not knowing what the Pantheon was. I knew-I was, in fact, in the middle
of learning about ancient Rome in my Latin class, writing a long report about its
art and architecture, all of it based on encyclopedia entries and other books in the
school library. Your parents spoke of Bombay and the home you had left behind,
a flat on the tenth floor, with a balcony overlooking palm trees and the Arabian
Sea. "A pity you didn't visit us there," your mother said. Later, in the privacy of
their bedroom, my mother pointed out to my father that we had never been
invited.
After dinner I was told to show you the house and where you would sleep.
Normally I loved to do this for guests, taking a proprietary pleasure in explaining
that this was the broom closet, that the downstairs half-bath. But now I lingered
over nothing, for I sensed your boredom. I was also nervous at being sent off
with you, disturbed by the immediate schoolgirl attraction I felt. I was used to
admiring boys by then, boys in my class who were and would remain unaware of
my existence. But never someone as old as you, never someone belonging to the
world of my parents. It was you who led me, climbing quickly up the stairs,
opening doors, poking your head into rooms, unimpressed by it all.
"This is my room. Your room," I said, correcting myself.
After dreading it all this time, now I was secretly thrilled that you would be
sleeping here. You would absorb my presence, I thought. Without my having to
do a thing, you would come to know me and like me. You walked across the
room to the window, opened it, and leaned out into the darkness, letting cold air
into the room.
"Ever go out on the roof?" you asked. You did not wait for me to answer,
and the next thing I knew you'd lifted the screen and were gone. I rushed over to
the window, and when I leaned outside I couldn't see you. I imagined you
slipping on the shingles, falling into the shrubbery, my being blamed for the
accident, for standing by stupidly as you did such a brazen thing. "Are you
okay?" I called out. The logical thing would have been to say your name, but I
felt inhibited and did not. Eventually you came back around, seating yourself on
the incline over the garage, gazing down at the lawn.
"What's behind the house?"
"Woods. But you can't go there."
"Who said?"

"Everyone. My parents and all the teachers in school." "Why not?"
"A boy got lost in them last year. He's still missing." His name was Kevin
McGrath, and he'd been two grades behind me. For a week we'd heard nothing
but helicopters, dogs barking, searching for some sign of him.
You did not react to this information. Instead, you asked, "Why do people
have yellow ribbons tied to their mailboxes?"
"They're for the hostages in Iran."
"I bet most Americans had never even heard of Iran before this," you said,
causing me to feel responsible both for my neighbors' patriotism and for their
ignorance.
"What's that thing to the right?"
"A swing set."
The word must have amused you. You faced me and smiled, though not
kindly, as if I'd invented the term.
"I missed the cold," you said. "This cold." The remark reminded me that
none of this was new to you. "And the snow. When will it snow again?"
"I don't know. There wasn't much snow for Christmas this year."
You climbed back into the room, disappointed, I feared, by my lack of
information. You glanced at yourself in my white-framed mirror, your head
nearly cut off at the top. "Where's the bathroom?" you asked, already halfway
out the door.
That night, lying on the cot in my parents' room, wide awake though it was
well past midnight, I heard my mother and father talking in the dark. I worried
that perhaps you would hear them, too. The bed where you slept was just on the
other side of the wall, and if I had been able to stick my hand through it, I could
have touched you. My parents were at once critical of and intimidated by yours,
perplexed by the ways in which they had changed. Bombay had made them more
American than Cambridge had, my mother said, something she hadn't
anticipated and didn't understand. There were remarks concerning your mother's
short hair, her slacks, the Johnnie Walker she and your father continued to drink
after the meal was finished, taking it with them from the dining room to the
living room. It was mainly my mother who talked, my father listening and
murmuring now and then in tired consent. My parents, who had never set foot in
a liquor store, wondered whether they should buy another bottle-at the rate your
parents were going, that bottle would be drained by tomorrow, my mother said.
She remarked that your mother had become "stylish," a pejorative term in her
vocabulary, implying a self-indulgence that she shunned. "Twelve people could
have flown for the price of one first-class ticket," she said. My mother's
birthdays came and went without acknowledgment by my father. I was the one

who made a card and had him sign it with me on the first of every June.
Suddenly my mother sat up, sniffing the air. "I smell smoke," she said. My father
asked if she had remembered to turn off the oven. My mother said she was
certain she had, but she asked him to get up and check.
"It's a cigarette you smell," he said when he came back to bed. "Someone
has been smoking in the bathroom."
"I didn't know Dr. Choudhuri smoked," my mother said. "Should we have
put out an ashtray?"
In the morning you all slept in, victims of jet lag, reminding us that despite
your presence, your bags crowding the hallways, your toothbrushes cluttering
the side of the sink, you belonged elsewhere. When I returned from school in the
afternoon you were still sleeping, and at dinner-breakfast for you-you all
declined the curry we were eating, craving toast and tea. It was like that for the
first few days: you were awake when we slept, sleeping when we were awake;
we were leading antipodal lives under the same roof. As a result, apart from the
fact that I wasn't sleeping in my own room, there was little change. I drank my
orange juice and ate my bowl of cereal and went off to the bus stop as usual. I
spoke to no one of your arrival; I almost never revealed details of my home life
to my American friends. As a child, I had always dreaded my birthdays, when a
dozen girls would appear in the house, glimpsing the way we lived. I don't know
how I would have referred to you. "A family friend," I suppose.
Then one day I came home from school and found your parents awake,
their ankles crossed on top of the coffee table, filling up the sofa where I
normally sat to watch The Brady Bunch and Gilligan's Island. They were
chatting with my mother, who was in the recliner with a bowl in her lap, peeling
potatoes. Your mother was dressed in a nylon sari of my mother's, purple with
red dots in various sizes. Distressing news of your mother's missing suitcase had
come: it had been located in Rome but had been placed on a flight to
Johannesburg. I remember thinking that the sari looked better on your mother
than on mine; the intense purple shade was more flattering against her skin. I
was told that you were outside in the yard. I did not go out to look for you.
Instead I practiced the piano. It was nearly dark by the time you came in,
accepting the tea that I was still too young to drink. Your parents drank tea as
well, but by six o'clock the bottle of Johnnie Walker was on the coffee table, as it
would be every night that you stayed with us. You had gone out in only a
pullover, your father's costly camera slung around your neck. Your face showed
the effects of the cold, your eyes blazing, the borders of your ears crimson, your
skin glowing from within.

"There's a stream back there," you said, "in those woods."
My mother became nervous then, warning you not to go there, as she had so
often warned me, as I had warned you the night you came, but your parents did
not share her concern. What had you photographed? they asked instead.
"Nothing," you replied, and I took it personally that nothing had inspired
you. The suburbs were new to you and to your parents. Whatever memories you
possessed of America were of Cambridge, a place that I could only dimly recall.
You took your tea and disappeared to my room as if it were yours,
emerging only when summoned for dinner. You ate quickly, not speaking, then
returned upstairs. It was your parents who paid me court, who asked me
questions and complimented me on my manners, on my piano playing, on all the
things I did to help my mother around the house. "Look, Kaushik, how Hema
makes her lunch," your mother would say as I prepared a ham or turkey
sandwich after dinner and put it in a paper bag to take to school the next day. I
was still very much a child, while you, just three years older, had already eluded
your parents' grasp. You did not argue with them and yet you did not seem to
talk to them very much, either. While you were outside I'd heard them tell my
mother how unhappy you were to be back. "He was furious that we left, and now
he's furious that we're here again," your father said. "Even in Bombay we
managed to raise a typical American teenager."
I did my homework at the dining table, unable to use the desk in my room. I
worked on my ancient Rome report, something that had interested me until your
arrival. Now it seemed silly, given that you'd been there. I longed to work on it
in privacy, but your father talked to me at length about the structural aspects of
the Colosseum. His civil engineer's explanations went over my head, were
irrelevant to my needs, but to be polite I listened. I worried that he would want to
see whether I had incorporated the things he said, but he never bothered me
about that. He hunted through his bags and showed me postcards he'd purchased,
and though it had nothing to do with my report, he gave me a two-lire coin.
When the worst of your jet lag had subsided we went to the mall in my
parents' station wagon. Your mother needed bras, one item that she could not
borrow from my voluptuous mother. At the mall our fathers sat together in a
sunken area of benches and potted plants, waiting, and you were given some
money and allowed to wander off while I accompanied our mothers to the
lingerie department in Jordan Marsh. Your mother led us there, with the credit
card your father had handed to her before they parted. Normally we went to
Sears. On her way to the bras she bought black leather gloves and a pair of boots
that zipped to the knee, never looking at the price before taking something off

the shelf. In the lingerie department it was me the saleswoman approached. "We
have lovely training models, just in," she said to your mother, believing that I
was her daughter.
"Oh, no, she's far too young," my mother said.
"But look, how sweet," your mother said, fingering the style the
saleswoman presented on a hanger, lacy white with a rosebud at its center. I had
yet to get my period and, unlike many of the girls at school, still wore flowerprinted undershirts. I was ushered into the fitting room, your mother watching
approvingly as I took off my coat and sweater and tried on the bra. She adjusted
the straps and attached the hook at the back. She tried things on as well, topless
beside me without shame, though it embarrassed me to see her large, plumcolored nipples, the surprising droop of her breasts, the dark patches of underarm
hair that gave off a faintly acrid but not altogether unpleasant smell. "Perfect,"
your mother said, running her finger below the elastic, along my skin, adding, "I
hope you know that you're going to be very beautiful one day." Despite my
mother's protests, your mother bought me my first three bras, insisting that they
were a gift. On the way out, at the makeup counter, she bought a lipstick, a bottle
of perfume, and an assortment of expensive creams that promised to firm her
throat and brighten her eyes; she was uninterested in the Avon products my
mother used. The reward for her purchases at the makeup counter was a large
red tote bag. This she gave to me, thinking that it would be useful for my books,
and the next day I took it to school.
After a week your father began his new job, at an engineering firm forty
miles away. At first my father got up early and dropped him off before returning
to Northeastern to teach his economics classes. Then your father bought an Audi
with a stick shift. You stayed home with our mothers-your parents wanted to
wait until they'd bought their home to see which school you would go to. I was
stunned, and envious-half a year without school! To my added chagrin, you were
not expected to do anything around the house, never to return your plate or glass
to the sink, never to make my bed, which I would see from time to time through
the partly open door to my room in a state of total disarray, the blanket on the
floor, your clothes heaped on my white desk. You ate enormous amounts of
fruit, whole bunches of grapes, apples to their cores, a practice that fascinated
me. I did not eat fresh fruit then; the textures and intensity of flavors made me
gag. You complained about the taste, or lack of taste, but nevertheless decimated
whatever my parents brought home from Star Market. I would find you, when I
came home in the afternoons, always at the same end of the sofa, the toes of your
thin bare feet hooked around the edge of the coffee table, reading books by Isaac
Asimov that you'd picked off my father's shelves in the basement. I hated Doctor

Who, the one show you liked on television.
I did not know what to make of you. Because you'd lived in India, I
associated you more with my parents than with me. And yet you were unlike my
cousins in Calcutta, who seemed so innocent and obedient when I visited them,
asking questions about my life in America as if it were the moon, astonished by
every detail. You were not curious about me in the least. One day a friend at
school invited me to see The Empire Strikes Back on a Saturday afternoon. My
mother said that I could go, but only if you were invited as well. I protested,
telling her that my friend did not know you. Despite my crush, I didn't want to
have to explain to my friend who you were and why you were living in our
house.
"You know him," my mother said.
"But he doesn't even like me," I complained.
"Of course he likes you," my mother said, blind to the full implication of
what I'd said. "He's adjusting, Hema. It's something you've never had to go
through."
The conversation ended there. As it turned out, you were uninterested in the
movie, not having seen Star Wars in the first place.
One day I found you sitting at my piano, randomly striking the keys with
your index finger. You stood up when you saw me and retreated to the couch.
"Do you hate it here?" I asked.
"I liked living in India," you said. I did not betray my opinion, that I found
trips to India dull, that I didn't like the geckos that clung to the walls in the
evenings, poking in and out of the fluorescent light fixtures, or the giant
cockroaches that sometimes watched me as I bathed. I didn't like the comments
my relatives made freely in my presence-that I had not inherited my mother's
graceful hands, that my skin had darkened since I was a child.
"Bombay is nothing like Calcutta," you added, as if reading my mind.
"Is it close to the Taj Mahal?"
"No." You looked at me carefully, as if fully registering my presence for the
first time. "Haven't you ever looked at a map?"
On our trip to the mall you'd bought a record, something by the Rolling
Stones. The jacket was white, with what seemed to be a cake on it. You had no
interest in the few records I owned-Abba, Shaun Cassidy, a disco compilation I'd
ordered from a TV commercial with my allowance money. Nor were you willing
to play your album on the plastic record player in my room. You opened up the
cabinet where my father kept his turntable and receiver. My father was
extremely particular about his stereo components. They were off-limits to me,

and even to my mother. The stereo had been the single extravagant purchase of
his life. He cleaned everything himself, wiping the parts with a special cloth on
Saturday mornings, before listening to his collection of Indian vocalists. "You
can't touch that," I said.
You turned around. The lid of the player was already lifted, the record
revolving. You held the arm of the needle, resting its weight on your finger. "I
know how to play a record," you said, no longer making an effort to conceal
your irritation. And then you let the needle drop.
How bored you must have been in my room full of a girl's things. It must
have driven you crazy, being stuck with our mothers all day long as they cooked
and watched soap operas. Really, it was my mother who did the cooking now.
Though your mother kept her company, occasionally peeling or slicing
something, she was no longer interested in cooking, as she had been in the
Cambridge days. She'd been spoiled by Zareen, the fabulous Parsi cook you had
in Bombay, she said. From time to time she would promise to make us an
English trifle, the one thing she said she always insisted on making herself, but
this didn't materialize. She continued to borrow saris from my mother and went
to the mall to buy herself more sweaters and trousers. Her missing suitcase never
arrived, and she accepted this fact calmly, saying that it gave her an excuse to
buy new things, but your father battled on her behalf, making a series of irate
phone calls to the airline before finally letting the matter go.
You were in the house as little as possible, walking in the cold weather
through the woods and along streets where you were the only pedestrian. I
spotted you once, while I was on the school bus coming home, shocked at how
far you'd gone. "You're going to get sick, Kaushik, always wandering outside
like that," my mother said. She continued to speak to you in Bengali, despite
your consistently English replies. It was your mother who came down with a
cold, using this as an excuse to stay in bed for days. She refused the food my
mother made for the rest of us, requesting only canned chicken broth. You
walked to the minimart a mile from our house, bringing back the broth and
issues of Vogue and Harper's Bazaar. "Go ask Parul Mashi if she wants tea," my
mother said one afternoon, and I headed upstairs to the guestroom. On my way I
needed to use the bathroom. There was your mother, wrapped up in a robe,
perched morosely on the edge of the bathtub, legs crossed, smoking a cigarette.
"Oh, Hema!" she cried out, nearly falling into the tub, so startled that she
crushed the cigarette against the porcelain and not into the tiny stainless-steel
ashtray she held cupped in her palm, and which she must have brought with her
from Bombay.

"I'm sorry," I said, turning to leave.
"No, no, please, I was just going," she said. I watched as she flushed away
the cigarette, rinsed her mouth at the sink, and applied fresh lipstick, blotting it
with a Kleenex, which then fluttered into the garbage pail. Apart from her bindi,
my mother did not wear makeup, and I observed your mother's ritual with care,
all the more impressed that she would go to such lengths when she was unwell
and spending most of her day in bed. She looked into the mirror intently, without
evasion. The brief application of lipstick seemed to restore the composure that
my sudden appearance had caused her to lose. She caught me looking at her
reflection and smiled. "One cigarette a day can't kill me, can it?" she said
brightly. She opened the window, pulled some perfume out of her cosmetics bag,
and sprayed the air. "Our little secret, Hema?" she said, less a question than a
command, and left, shutting the door behind her.
In the evenings we sometimes went house-hunting with you. We took the
station wagon; the beautiful car your father had bought could not comfortably
accommodate us all. My father drove, hesitantly, to unknown neighborhoods
where the lawns were all a little bigger than ours, the houses spaced a little
farther apart. Your parents searched first in Lexington and Concord, where the
schools were best. Some of the homes we saw were empty, others full of the
current occupants and their possessions. None, according to the conversations I
overheard at night as I tried to fall asleep, were the sort my parents could afford.
They stepped to the side as your parents discussed asking prices with the real
estate agents. But it wasn't money that stood in the way. The houses themselves
were the problem, the light scant, the ceilings low, the rooms awkward, your
parents always concluded, as we drove back to our house. Unlike my parents,
yours had opinions about design, preferring something contemporary, excited
when we happened to pass a white boxlike structure obscured by a thicket of tall
trees. They sought an in-ground pool, or space to build one; your mother missed
swimming at her club in Bombay. "Water views, that's what we should look for,"
your mother said, while reading the classified section of the Globe one
afternoon, and this limited the search even further. We drove out to Swampscott
and Duxbury to see properties overlooking the ocean, and to houses in the woods
with views of private lakes. Your parents made an offer on a house in Beverly,
but after a second visit they withdrew the bid, your mother saying that the layout
was ungenerous.
My parents felt slighted by your parents' extravagant visions, ashamed of
the modest home we owned. "How uncomfortable you must be here," they said,
but your parents never complained, as mine did, nightly, before falling asleep. "I

didn't expect it to take this long," my mother said, noting that almost a month
had gone by. While you were with us there was no room for anyone else. "The
Dasguptas wanted to visit next weekend and I had to say no," my mother said.
Again and again I heard how much your parents had changed, how we'd
unwittingly opened our home to strangers. There were complaints about how
your mother did not help clean up after dinner, how she went to bed whenever it
suited her and slept close to lunchtime. My mother said that your father was too
indulgent, too solicitous of your mother, always asking if she needed a fresh
drink, bringing down a cardigan if she was cold.
"She's the reason they're still here," my mother said. "She won't settle for
anything less than a palace."
"It's no easy task," my father said diplomatically, "starting a new job, a new
way of life all over again. My guess is she didn't want to leave, and he's trying to
make up for that."
"You would never put up with that sort of behavior in me."
"Let it go," my father said, turning away from her and tucking the covers
under his chin. "It's not forever. They'll leave soon enough and then all our lives
will go back to normal."
Somewhere, in that cramped house, a line was drawn between our two
families. On one side was the life we'd always led, my parents taking me to Star
Market every Thursday night, treating me to McDonald's afterward. Every
Sunday I studied for my weekly spelling test, my father quizzing me after 60
Minutes was over. Your family began to do things independently as well.
Sometimes your father would come home from work early and take your mother
out, either to look at properties or to shop at the mall, where slowly and
methodically she began to buy all the things she would need to set up her own
household: sheets, blankets, plates and glasses, small appliances. They would
come home with bags and bags, amassing them in our basement, sometimes
showing my mother the things they'd bought, sometimes not bothering. On
Fridays your parents often took us out to dinner, to one of the overpriced
mediocre restaurants in town. They enjoyed the change of pace, having
mysteriously acquired a taste for things like steak and baked potatoes, while my
parents had not. The outings were intended to give my mother a break from
cooking, but she complained about these, too.
I was the only one who didn't mind your staying with us. In my quiet,
complicated way I continued to like you, was happy simply to observe you day
after day. And I liked your parents, your mother especially; the attention I got

from her almost made up for what I didn't get from you. One day your father
developed the photographs from your stay in Rome. I enjoyed seeing the prints,
holding them carefully by the edges. The pictures were almost all of you and
your mother, posing in piazzas or sitting on the edge of fountains. There were
two shots of Trajan's Column, nearly identical. "Take one for your report," your
father said, handing me one. "That should impress your teacher." "But I wasn't
there."
"No matter. Say your uncle went to Rome and took a snap for you."
You were in the picture, standing to one side. You were looking down, your
face obscured by a visor. You could have been anyone, one of the many passing
tourists in the frame, but it bothered me that you were there, your presence
threatening to expose the secret attraction I felt and still hoped would be
acknowledged somehow. You had successfully wiped away all the other crushes
I harbored at school, so that I thought only of being at home, and of where in the
course of the afternoon and evening our paths might intersect, whether or not
you would bother to glance at me at the dinner table. Long hours were devoted,
lying on the cot in my parents' room, to imagining you kissing me. I was too
young, too inexperienced, to contemplate anything beyond that. I accepted the
picture and pasted it into my report, but not before cutting the part with you
away. That bit I kept, hidden among the blank pages of my diary, locked up for
years.
Your wish for snow had not been granted since you'd arrived. There were
brief flurries now and again, but nothing stuck to the ground. Then one day snow
began to fall, barely visible at first, gathering force as the afternoon passed, an
inch or so coating the streets by the time I rode the bus home from school. It was
not a dangerous storm, but significant enough to break up the monotony of
winter. My mother, in a cheerful mood that evening, decided to cook a big pot of
khichuri, which she typically made when it rained, and for a change your mother
insisted on helping, standing in the kitchen deep-frying pieces of potato and
cauliflower, melting sticks of butter in a saucepan for ghee. She also decided that
she wanted, finally, to make the long-promised trifle, and when my mother told
her that there weren't enough eggs your father went to get them, along with the
other ingredients she needed. "It won't be ready until midnight," she said as she
beat together hot milk and eggs over the stove, allowing me to take over for her
when she tired of the task. "It needs at least four hours to set."
"Then we can have it for breakfast," you said, breaking off a piece of the
pound cake she'd sliced, stuffing it into your mouth. You seldom set foot in the
kitchen, but that evening you hovered there, excited by the promise of trifle,

which I gathered you loved and which I had never tasted.
After dinner we crowded into the living room, watching the news as the
snow continued to fall, excited to learn that my school would be closed and my
father's classes canceled the next day. "You take the day off, too," your mother
said to your father, and to everyone's surprise he agreed.
"It reminds me of the winter we left Cambridge," your father said. He and
your mother were sipping their Johnnie Walker, and that night, though my
mother still refused, my father agreed to join them for a small taste. "That party
you had for us," your father continued, turning to my parents. "Remember?"
"Seven years ago," my mother said. "It was another life, back then." They
spoke of how young you and I had been, how much younger they had all been.
"Such a lovely evening," your mother recalled, her voice betraying a
sadness that all of them seemed to share. "How different things were."
In the morning icicles hung from our windows and a foot of snow blanketed
the ground. The trifle, which we had been too tired to wait for the night before,
emerged for breakfast along with toast and tea. It was not what I'd expected, the
hot mixture I'd helped beat on the stove now cold and slippery, but you devoured
bowl after bowl; your mother finally put it away, fearing that you would get a
stomachache. After breakfast our fathers took turns with the shovel, clearing the
driveway. When the wind had settled I was allowed to go outside. Usually, I
made snowmen alone, scrawny and lopsided, my parents complaining, when I
asked for a carrot, that it was a waste of food. But this time you joined me,
touching the snow with your bare hands, studying it, looking happy for the first
time since you arrived. You packed a bit of it into a ball and tossed it in my
direction. I ducked out of the way, and then threw one at you, hitting you in the
leg, aware of the camera hanging around your neck.
"I surrender," you said, raising your arms. "This is beautiful," you added,
looking around at our lawn, which the snow had transformed. I felt flattered,
though I had nothing to do with the weather. You began walking toward the
woods and I hesitated. There was something you wanted to show me there, you
said. Covered in snow on that bright blue-skied day, the bare branches of the
trees concealing so little, it seemed safe. I did not think of the boy, lost there and
never found. From time to time you stopped, focusing your camera on
something, never asking me to pose. We walked a long way, until I no longer
heard the sounds of snow being shoveled, no longer saw our house. I didn't
realize at first what you were doing, getting on your knees and pushing away the
snow. Underneath was a rock of some sort. And then I saw that it was a
tombstone. You uncovered a row of them, flat on the ground. I began to help
you, unburying the buried, using my mittened hands at first, then my whole arm.

They belonged to people named Simonds, a family of six. "They're all here
together," you said. "Mother, father, four children."
"I never knew this was here."
"I doubt anyone does. It was buried under leaves when I first found it. The
last one, Emma, died in 1923."
I nodded, disturbed by the similarity of the name to mine, wondering if this
had occurred to you.
"It makes me wish we weren't Hindu, so that my mother could be buried
somewhere. But she's made us promise we'll scatter her ashes into the Atlantic."
I looked at you, confused, and so you continued, explaining that there was
cancer in her breast, spreading through the rest of her body. That was why you
had left India. It was not so much for treatment as it was to be left alone. In India
people knew she was dying, and had you remained there, inevitably, friends and
family would have gathered at her side in your beautiful seaside apartment,
trying to shield her from something she could not escape. Your mother, not
wanting to be suffocated by the attention, not wanting her parents to witness her
decline, had asked your father to bring you all back to America. "She's been
seeing a new doctor at Mass General. That's where my father often takes her
when they say they're going to see houses. She's going to have surgery in the
spring, but it's only to buy her a little more time. She doesn't want anyone here to
know. Not until the end."
The information fell between us, as shocking as if you'd struck me in the
face, and I began to cry. At first the tears fell silently, sliding over my nearly
frozen face, but then I started sobbing, becoming ugly in front of you, my nose
running in the cold, my eyes turning red. I stood there, my hands wedged up
under my cheekbones to catch the tears, mortified that you were witnessing such
a pathetic display. Though you had never taken a picture of me in your life, I
was afraid that you would lift the camera and capture me that way. Of course,
you did nothing, you said nothing; you had said enough. You remained where
you were, looking down at the tombstone of Emma Simonds, and eventually,
when I calmed down, you began to walk back to our yard. I followed you along
the path you had discovered, and then we parted, neither of us a comfort to the
other, you shoveling the driveway, I going inside for a hot shower, my red puffy
face assumed by our mothers to be a consequence of the cold. Perhaps you
believed that I was crying for you, or for your mother, but I was not. I was too
young, that day, to feel sorrow or sympathy. I felt only the enormous fear of
having a dying woman in our home. I remembered standing beside your mother,
both of us topless in the fitting room where I tried on my first bra, disturbed that
I had been in such close proximity to her disease. I was furious that you had told

me, and that you had not told me, feeling at once burdened and betrayed, hating
you all over again.
Two weeks later, you were gone. Your parents bought a house on the North
Shore, which had been designed by a well-known Massachusetts architect. It had
a perfectly flat roof and whole walls of glass. The upstairs rooms were arranged
off an interior balcony, the ceiling in the living room soaring to twenty feet.
There were no water views but there was a pool for your mother to swim in, just
as she had wanted. Your first night there, my mother brought food over so that
your mother would not have to cook, not realizing what a favor this was. We
admired the house and the property, the echoing, empty rooms that would soon
be filled with sickness and grief. There was a bedroom with a skylight;
underneath it, your mother told us, she planned to position her bed. It was all to
give her two years of pleasure. When my parents finally learned the news and
went to the hospital where your mother was dying, I revealed nothing about what
you'd told me. In that sense I remained loyal. Our parents were only
acquaintances by then, having gone their separate ways after the weeks of forced
intimacy. Your mother had promised to have us over in the summer to swim in
the pool, but as her health declined, more quickly than the doctors had predicted,
your parents shut down, still silent about her illness, seldom entertaining. For a
time my mother and father continued to complain, feeling snubbed. "After all we
did for them," they said before drifting off to sleep. But I was back in my own
room by then, on the other side of the wall, in the bed where you had slept, no
longer hearing them.

Y ear's End
I did not attend my father's wedding. I did not even know there had been a
wedding until my father called early one Sunday during my final year at
Swarthmore. I was roused from sleep by a fist pounding on my door, followed
by the voice of one of my hallmates saying my last name. I knew before
answering that it was my father; there was no one else who would have called
me before nine. My father had always been an early riser, believing that the
hours between five and seven were the most profitable part of the day. He would
use that time to read the newspaper and then go for a walk, along Marine Drive
when we lived in Bombay and on the quiet roads of our town on the North
Shore, and as much as he used to encourage my mother and me to join him I
knew he preferred being alone. Things were different now, of course; those
solitary hours he'd once savored had become a prison for him, a commonplace. I
knew that he no longer bothered to go for walks and that since my mother's
death he hardly slept at all. I had not spoken to my father in several weeks. He
had been in Calcutta, visiting my grandparents, all four of whom were still alive,
and when I picked up the phone, left for me hanging upside down by its cord, I
expected him to say only that he had returned safely to Massachusetts, not that I
now had a stepmother and two stepsisters.
"I must tell you something that will upset you," he began, and I wondered if
perhaps one of my grandparents had fallen ill, if my mother's parents, in
particular, could no longer endure the loss of their only daughter at the age of
forty-two. It had been the hardest thing, in those first months after she was gone:
having to go to Calcutta with my father and enter the home where my mother
had been a girl, having to see the man and woman who had raised her, who had
known her and loved her long before my father and I did. My grandparents had
already lived in a state of mild mourning since 1962, when my parents were
married. Occasionally my mother would return to them, first from Boston and
then Bombay, like Persephone in the myth, temporarily filling up and
brightening the rooms, scattering her creams and powders on the dressing table,
sipping tea from cups she'd known since she was a girl, sleeping in the room
where she'd been small. After we called my grandparents from Massachusetts to
tell them my mother was dead, they had held on to the hope that it was only a
matter of time, and that she would board a plane and walk through the door once
again. Even after my father and I entered the house, my grandmother asked if my
mother was still in the taxi that had already driven away, this in spite of the fact

that a photograph of my mother, larger than life and draped with a tuberose
garland, hung on their living-room wall. "She's not with us, Didun," I said, and it
was only then both my grandparents broke down, grieving freshly for my mother
as neither my father nor I had done. Being with her through her illness day after
day had denied us that privilege.
But my grandparents were fine, my father reported now. They missed me
and sent their love, he said, and then he told me about Chitra. She had lost her
spouse two years ago, not to cancer but encephalitis. Chitra was a schoolteacher
and, at thirty-five, nearly twenty years younger than my father. Her daughters
were seven and ten. He offered these details as if responding diligently to
questions I was not asking. "I don't ask you to care for her, even to like her," my
father said. "You are a grown man, you have no need for her in your life as I do.
I only ask, eventually, that you understand my decision." It was clear to me that
he had prepared himself for my outrage-harsh words, accusations, the slamming
down of the phone. But no turbulent emotion passed through me as he spoke,
only a diluted version of the nauseating sensation that had taken hold the day in
Bombay that I learned my mother was dying, a sensation that had dropped
anchor in me and never fully left.
"Is she there with you?" I asked. "Would you like me to say something?" I
said this more as a challenge than out of politeness, not entirely believing him.
Since my mother's death, I frequently doubted things my father said in the course
of our telephone conversations: that he had eaten dinner on any given night, for
example, at the Italian restaurant he usually took me to when I went home, and
not simply polished off another can of almonds and a few Johnnie Walkers in
front of the television.
"They arrive in two weeks. You will see them when you come home for
Christmas," my father said, adding, "Her English is not so good."
"Worse than my Bengali?"
"Possibly. She will pick it up, of course."
I didn't say what came to my lips, that my mother had learned English as a
girl, that she'd had no need to pick it up in America.
"The girls are better at it," my father continued. "They've gone to Englishmedium schools. I've enrolled them in their grades to start in January."
He had known Chitra just a few weeks, had met her only twice before their
marriage. It was a registry wedding followed by a small dinner at a hotel. "The
whole thing was arranged by relatives," he explained, in a way that suggested
that he was not to blame. This remark upset me more than anything my father
had said so far. My father was not a malleable man, and I knew that no one
would have dared to find him a new wife unless he had requested it.

"I was tired, Kaushik," he said. "Tired of coming home to an empty house
every night."
I didn't know which was worse-the idea of my father's remarrying for love,
or of his actively seeking out a stranger for companionship. My parents had had
an arranged marriage, but there was a touch of romance about it, too, my father
seeing my mother for the first time at a wedding and being so attracted that he
had asked, the following week, for her hand. They had always been affectionate
with one another, but it wasn't until her illness that he seemed fully, recklessly,
to fall in love with her, so that I was witness to a courtship that ought to have
faded before I was born. He doted on her then, arriving home at our Bombay flat
with flowers, lingering in bed with her in the mornings, going in late to work,
wanting to be alone with her to the point where I, a teenager, felt in the way.
"I thought," he continued, "since your bedroom is a good size, of putting the
girls together there. Would you mind terribly staying in the guestroom when you
visit, Kaushik? Most of your things are with you now anyway. It is just a matter
of where to sleep. But please tell me if you mind." He seemed more concerned
about my reaction to a new room than the fact that I had just acquired a new
family.
"It's fine."
"You are being honest?" "I said I don't mind."
I returned to my dorm room. There was a girl in my bed that morning; she
had remained asleep as I pulled on my clothes and stumbled barefoot into the
hallway to answer the phone. Now she was lying on her stomach, a pen in her
hand, finishing a crossword I'd abandoned. Her name was Jessica, and I'd met
her in my Spanish class.
"Who was that?" she asked, turning to look at me. Strong sunlight angled in
from the window behind her, darkening her to the point that her features were
obscured.
"My father," I said, squeezing back into the bed beside her. For a while she
continued pondering the puzzle as I lay curled at her side, the unfamiliar smell of
her still thrilling. She knew nothing about my family, about my father's recent
visit to Calcutta or about my mother's death the summer before I started college.
In the course of our few weekends together I had told Jessica none of those
things. That morning, after crying briefly against her body, I did.
After my exams I drove to Massachusetts, dropping off Jessica on the way
at her parents' farmhouse in Connecticut. When I decided to attend Swarthmore
my father gave me the Audi he'd bought after we moved back from Bombay. He
said that it would make it easier for me to come home from Pennsylvania during

weekends and holidays, but I knew it was really an excuse to get rid of yet
another thing my mother had touched, known, or otherwise occupied. The day
we came back from the hospital for the last time, he took every single
photograph of her, in frames and in albums, and put them in a shoebox. "Choose
a few, I know pictures are important to you," he told me, and then he sealed the
box with tape and put it in a closet somewhere. He had wasted no time giving
away her clothes, her handbags, her boxes of cosmetics and colognes. That is
probably the last time I remember you from that period, you and your mother
coming to the house one day and spending an afternoon going through my
mother's drawers as many others already had, fingering her things, lifting her
sweaters and shawls to their chests to see if they would flatter them, testing to
see if Chanel No. Five would react as favorably with their skin. The items you
and your mother and the other Bengali women had no need for were sent to
charities in India, as there was nowhere in New England to donate all those saris
with their matching blouses and petticoats. This was according to my mother's
instructions. "I don't want all that beautiful material turned into curtains," she'd
told us from her hospital bed. Her ashes were tossed from a boat off the
Gloucester coast that a coworker of my father's, Jim Skillings, had arranged for,
but her gold went back to Calcutta, distributed to poor women who had worked
for my extended family as ayahs or cooks or maids.
It didn't matter to me that her things were gone. After Bombay she had little
occasion to wear jewels and saris, saying no to most of the parties she and my
father were invited to. Coming home from school toward the end, I would find
her sitting wrapped in a blanket, looking out at the pool she no longer had
strength to swim in. Sometimes I would take her outside for fresh air, walking
carefully through the birches and pines behind the house and sitting with her on
a low stone wall. Occasionally, feeling ambitious, she would ask me to drive her
to the sea. "Be sure to keep my ruby choker and the pearl and emerald set for the
person you will marry," she said during one of these walks. "I'm not planning on
getting married any time soon," I told her, and she said that she wished she could
say the same for dying. Ultimately, I disobeyed her. After she was gone I was
unable to open up and examine the contents of all those flat red boxes she'd kept
hidden in a suitcase on her closet shelf, never mind set something aside for the
sake of my future happiness.
Late in the afternoon I climbed the road that led to our driveway. Our house
was the only source of light for miles, amid isolated patches of hardened snow. It
was not an easy, typically inviting place. Stone steps had been built into the
uneven ground, flanked by overgrown rhododendrons leading to the entrance. I

saw from the other car in the driveway that my father was home, and he stood
behind the storm door, waiting for me to come in with my things.
"We were expecting you earlier," he said. "You said you would be here by
lunchtime."
I knew then that it was true, that there was another person inside the house,
a person who made it possible for my father, without hesitating, to say "We"
instead of "I." I said nothing about my detour to Jessica's home and the two
hours I'd spent there. Instead I said the traffic had been bad. I wondered if my
father had left work early for my sake, or if perhaps he had not gone into the
office that day. I could not tell from his appearance. He had given up wearing
suits and was dressed as he might be for the weekend, in dark blue pants and an
cream-colored sweater. There was more gray in his hair than I remembered, and
though he was still vigorously handsome, old age was creeping into his face, the
skin sagging at the sides of his nose, his pale greenish eyes-a trait that made my
mother insist that there was Irish blood on his side of the family-less curious
than they had once been. I tried to imagine him, just weeks before, in a silk
kurta, a groom's topor on his head. I wondered who had taken photographs of the
wedding, whether my father would show them to me.
I was unused, stepping into the house, to the heavy smell of cooking that
was in the air. Otherwise things appeared unchanged, the black-and-white
photographs I'd taken of the surrounding woods, which my mother had insisted
on framing, still lining one wall of the entryway. The house had always
maintained an impersonal quality, full of built-in cupboards concealing the
traces of our everyday lives. Now that I no longer lived there I was astonished by
how enormous it was, the soaring double-height ceiling of the living room and
the great wall of glass looking out onto the trees, more befitting of an institution
than a private home. There was a window-seat running along the length of the
glass wall, enough space for twenty people to sit side by side, as they had during
my mother's funeral.
As soon as I removed my coat, my father hung it in a cupboard, then led me
to the dining table. My mother had insisted on furnishing the house with pieces
true to its Modernist architecture: a black leather sectional configured in aU, a
chrome floor lamp arcing overhead, a glass-topped kidney-shaped cocktail table,
and a dining table made of white fiberglass surrounded by matching chairs. She
had never allowed a cloth to cover the table, but one was there now, something
with an Indian print that could just as easily have been a bedspread and didn't
fully reach either end. In the center, instead of the generous cluster of fresh fruit
or flowers my mother would have arranged, there was a stainless-steel plate
holding an ordinary salt shaker and two jars of pickles, hot mango and sweet

lime, their lids missing, their labels stained, spoons stuck into their oils. A single
place had been set for me at one end, with translucent luchis piled on a plate, and
several smaller bowls containing dal and vegetables arrayed in a semicircle.
"Sit down," my father said. "You must be hungry." He was nervous, as I
was. There was no drink in his hand, no bottle of Johnnie Walker set out, as it
usually was by this time, on the cocktail table.
I remained standing, uninterested in the food, staring down at the table. I
was no longer accustomed to Indian food. At school I ate in the cafeteria, and
during my time at home after my mother's death my father and I either went out
or picked up pizzas, so that the impressive gas stove that my mother was so
excited about when we moved in, with the inset grill where she said she would
make kebabs, was used only to boil water for tea. I looked above the table at one
corner of the ceiling and saw that it was discolored by a leak.
"When did that happen?" I asked.
"A while back."
"Aren't you going to fix it?" My father, sensitive to how buildings were put
together, had always been particular about that sort of thing.
"It's a big project," he said. "There's a reason roofs should be sloped in this
part of the world."
I heard no voices or footsteps, no sound of cooking or water running in the
kitchen. It was as if Chitra and her daughters were discreetly hidden in one of the
many cupboards of the house, swallowed up as so many other things were.
"Where are they?" I asked finally.
She appeared then, walking through the swinging doors that led to the
kitchen. She was closer to my age than my father's. I had known this beforehand,
but seeing her was a shock. Her hair was long and dark and she had a broad nose
on an otherwise pleasant face, though it was too round for me to find beautiful.
She was taller than I expected her to be, a little taller than my mother. She wore
vermilion in her hair, a traditional practice my mother had shunned, the powdery
red stain the strongest element of her appearance.
"I would like for you to call me Mamoni," she said in Bengali. Her voice
was of a lower pitch than my mother's, with a faint huskiness that was oddly
calming. "Do you have any objection to that?" She asked this kindly, smiling,
wary of my reaction, and I shook my head, not smiling back.
"Please," she said, this time in English, motioning to the chair.
I turned to my father and asked, "Aren't we all eating?"
"We already have." Chitra said, switching back to Bengali. "You have
driven from so far. More is coming."
She returned abruptly to the kitchen and I sat down. My mouth watered, in

spite of my reluctance to eat, and I was suddenly grateful for the vast amount of
food in front of me. The last thing I'd eaten was a slice of fruitcake baked by
Jessica's mother, whom I'd met in the course of dropping Jessica off. It was a
delicious cake and Jessica's mother cut off some extra pieces for me, wrapping
them in foil for the road, but I had forgotten them on the coffee table in their
living room, distracted after Jessica kissed me on the four-poster bed of her
childhood room.
"Start, Kaushik," my father said, sitting down in a chair beside me. "It's
getting cold."
The arrangement of the bowls, small glass bowls in which we normally had
ice cream, felt too formal to me. This was the old-fashioned, ceremonious way I
remembered my grandfathers eating in Calcutta, being treated each day like
kings after their morning baths. I wondered what was the best way to go about it,
whether to take a spoonful of each dish as I went or to dump everything onto the
plate at once. In the meantime I ate the luchis, still warm and impressively
puffed, on their own. I was reminded of Sunday mornings in Bombay, eating
luchis prepared by our Parsi cook, Zareen. I could hear my mother complaining
cheerfully in the kitchen, telling Zareen to try another batch, that she was frying
them before the oil was hot enough.
When Chitra returned she was followed by her daughters, two girls who at
first glance, apart from a few inches in height, were indistinguishable. They were
overdressed in our comfortably heated house, in thick sweaters and socks,
incongruous Indian things that would soon be rejected, I knew, in favor of
clothes from the mall. The sweaters were made of the same sickeningly bright
shade of pink wool. The girls did not resemble Chitra very strongly. They were
darker and sweeter-looking, with heart-shaped faces and two black ponytails on
either side of their heads, adorned with red ribbons.
"Would you like some of this?" I asked, pointing to the luchis still on my
plate, and to my surprise they stepped forward and both put out a hand, cupping
their giggling mouths with the other. I saw that one of the girls, the shorter one,
was missing a front tooth.
"Let Dada eat in peace," Chitra said. She had treaded cautiously in terms of
what I was to call her, but now referred to me without hesitation as the girls'
older brother.
"You can call me Kaushik," I said to the girls, and this made them put their
hands back over their mouths and giggle more forcefully.
"What about KD?" my father suggested.
We all turned to him, puzzled, this man for whom we were now gathered
together.

"Short for Kaushik Dada," he explained. I wondered if this was something
that had just popped into his head or if he'd considered it carefully beforehand.
He had always possessed an inventive streak when it came to words, writing
Bengali poems on weekends and reading them aloud to my mother. From her
comments I gathered that the poems were witty. It had been one of our family
secrets, the fact that my civil engineer father was also a poet. Though I never
asked about it, I'd assumed he'd stopped writing after my mother's death, as he'd
stopped doing so many things.
"That's clever," Chitra said, speaking directly to my father for the first time
since my arrival. She spoke approvingly, with the tone of someone who is used
to acknowledging small achievements, and it was then that I remembered that
she had been a schoolteacher in her former life. "Yes, KD is better."
I found the nickname inane, but my father seemed proud of it, and it was
preferable to Chitra's alternative. "And what do I call you?" I asked my
stepsisters.
"I am Rupa," said the taller one, her voice husky, like her mother's.
"And I am Piu," said the one missing the tooth.
"We are very glad to be in your room," Rupa added. She spoke stiffly, a bit
distantly, as if reciting something she'd been forced to memorize. "We are very
much appreciating."
They spoke to me in English, their accents and their intonation sounding as
severe as mine must have sounded to your fully American ear when we arrived
as refugees in your family's home. I knew the accents would soon diminish and
then disappear, as would their unstylish sweaters, their silly hairstyles.
"Rupa and Piu are eager to see the Aquarium and the Science Museum," my
father said. "Perhaps you can take them one day, Kaushik."
I didn't reply to this. "Very tasty," I said instead in Bengali, referring to the
food, something my mother had taught me to say after eating in the homes of
other people. I got up to bring my plate to the kitchen.
"You have not eaten," Chitra said, intercepting me. She attempted to take
the plate from my hand, but I held on to it and went to the kitchen to pour myself
some of the Johnnie Walker my father stored in the cupboard over the
dishwasher.
"What do you need? I'll get it for you," Chitra said, following me. I was
suddenly sickened by her, by the sight of her standing in our kitchen. I had no
memories of my mother cooking there, but the space still retained her presence
more than any other part of the house. The jade and spider plants she had
watered were still thriving on the windowsill, the orange-and-white sunburst
clock she'd so loved the design of, with its quivering second hand, still marking

the time on the wall.
Though she had rarely done the dishes, though it was in fact I who had
mostly done the dishes in those days, I imagined her hands on the taps of the
sink, her slim form pressed against the counter. Ignoring Chitra, I opened one
cupboard for a glass and another for the Scotch, but all I found there now were
boxes of cereal and packets of chanachur brought back from Calcutta.
My father came into the kitchen as well. "Where's the Scotch?" I asked him.
He glanced at Chitra, and after some small silent communication between
them she walked out. "I put it away," he said once we were alone.
"Why?"
"I've stopped taking it. I sleep better at night, I find." "Since when?"
"For some time now. Also, I didn't want to alarm Chitra."
"Alarm her?"
"She's a bit old-fashioned." He pulled out the stepstool that lived in a space
beside the refrigerator and unfolded it. He climbed to the top and opened up a
cupboard above our refrigerator that was difficult, even with the stepstool, to
reach, and took out a half-empty bottle.
I wanted to ask my father what on earth had possessed him to marry an oldfashioned girl half his age. Instead I said, taking the bottle from his hand, "I hope
it's all right if I alarm her."
"Just be quiet about it, especially around the girls."
My parents had never been quiet about their fondness for Johnnie Walker,
around me, around anyone. After my mother's death, just after I turned eighteen,
it was I who filled her shoes, nursing one watered-down glass and then another
in the evenings in order to keep my father company before we could both justify
going to bed. I almost never drank the stuff at college, preferring beer, but
whenever I came home I craved the taste, unable to avoid the thought of my
mother when I happened to see an ad for it on a billboard or in a magazine.
"I thought tomorrow, while I'm at work, you could go pick up a tree," my
father said. "There's a place not too far down 128. Perhaps the girls would want
to join you. They're terribly excited about it."
I looked at him, confused. Until now it had not fully registered that my
father would be at work during the days, that I would be alone with Chitra and
her daughters.
"You mean a Christmas tree?" For the past three years, since my mother's
death, we had not celebrated the holiday at our house. Instead we had fallen into
a pattern of accepting invitations at the homes of friends, appearing in the
mornings fully dressed while the other family would still be in their pajamas. I
would receive a single box containing a sweater or a button-down shirt and

watch the family's children open dozens of gifts. In Bombay my mother had
always thrown a party on Christmas Day, stringing lights throughout our flat and
putting presents under a potted hibiscus. It was a time of year she spoke fondly
about Cambridge, about your family and the others we had left behind, saying
the holiday wasn't the same without the cold weather, the decorated shops, the
cards that came in the mail.
"I suppose we'll have to get some presents," my father added. "We still have
a few days. It needn't be extravagant."
I knew Chitra and her girls were probably huddled together in the dining
area listening to every word my father and I exchanged, but that didn't stop me
from saying, "Those girls are barely half my age. Do you expect me to play with
them?"
"I don't expect you to do anything," my father replied evenly. He was
unshaken by my remark, perhaps even relieved that we were now officially in
opposition, that there was no longer a need to pretend. It was as if he had already
played out this scene several times in his mind and was weary of it. "I am only
asking if you mind picking up a tree."
I had yet to pour my drink. I'd been standing with my back to the kitchen
counter, one hand holding a glass, the other the bottle my father had retrieved for
me from its hiding place. I poured it now, taking it as my mother did, with one
ice cube, not adding water. I drank what I poured, then poured another.
"Easy," my father said.
I glanced in his direction. After my mother's death he had acquired an
expression that permanently set his features in a different way. It was less an
expression of sadness than of irritated resignation, the way he used to look if a
glass slipped and broke from my hands when I was little, or if the day happened
to be cloudy when we had planned a picnic. That was the expression that had
come to his face the morning we stepped into my mother's hospital room for the
last time, that subsequently greeted me whenever I came home from college, that
still seemed directed at my mother for letting him down. But the expression was
missing now. "Not easy," I said, shaking my head at my own reflection
suspended against the black backdrop of evening. "It's not easy for me."
My father had already left for work by the time I woke up the next morning.
For a while I remained in bed, not knowing what time it was, confused, initially,
as to why I was in the guestroom and why I could hear the sound of muffled
girlish laughter drifting down through the ceiling. The guestroom was located on
the first floor of the house, in its own wing off a corridor behind the kitchen. I
occupied a double bed, the mattress positioned on a platform low to the ground.

On the opposite wall was a sliding glass door facing the backyard and the pool,
covered by a black tarp. When we first moved into the house my mother had
devoted a disproportionate amount of attention to setting up the guestroom,
shopping for the grasshopper-green quilt on the bed, curtains for the sliding glass
door, an alarm clock for the bedside table, a soap dish for the adjoining
bathroom, asking me to hang a pink and purple Madhubani painting over the
chest of drawers. I didn't know who she was expecting to come and stay with us,
but by then we indulged her in whatever pastime lifted her spirits. I was grateful
for it now, glad not to be upstairs in my old bedroom which shared a wall with
my parents' room. It had been awful enough hearing my mother's raspy breathing
at night, her moans. Now it would be Chitra and my father I would have heard
conversing before bed, their bodies I would have to imagine under a blanket side
by side.
To my knowledge the only person who'd ever occupied our guestroom was
a nurse named Mrs. Gharibian, who had come to tend to my mother after her
needs became too much for my father and me and before my mother decided that
she wanted to die in the hospital and not at home. Mrs. Gharibian was a middleaged woman with short brown hair and a soft Southern accent. She had married
an Armenian and learned to make all sorts of snacks from her motherin-law. She
would bring Tupper-ware containers full of lamb turnovers and stuffed grape
leaves, food that now reminds me of my mother dying, putting them in the
refrigerator for my father and me to eat, also stocking the house with milk and
bread without being asked. Normally she left in the evenings, but for two weeks
she spent the nights with us, administering morphine injections and emptying the
bedpans, making notes in a little cloth book that looked as if it ought to contain
recipes. Something about her quietly optimistic manner made me believe that
Mrs. Gharibian had the power to sustain my mother, not to cure her but to keep
her alive indefinitely. "This is the worst part," she told me once. "You're holding
your breath, thinking it's still ahead, but this really is the worst of it, for you and
for her." At the time her words had not soothed me; I could imagine nothing
worse than the moment my mother no longer drew air in and out of her lungs, no
longer took us in through her weary eyes. I could imagine nothing worse than
not being able to look at her face every day, its beauty grossly distorted but
never abandoning her. But in the days after her death I realized Mrs. Gharibian
had been right, there had been nothing worse than waiting for it to come, that the
void that followed was easier to bear than the solid weight of those days.
I pulled on a sweater, cracked open the sliding door, lit a cigarette. The
season's leaves had not been raked, were scattered everywhere and drifting in the
breeze. The swimming pool had made my summer vacations from college

tolerable, but last summer, which I'd spent house-sitting in Brooklyn with a
friend whose parents had gone to Europe, my father had not bothered to fill it
with water, and last night at dinner he mentioned that the filter needed to be
replaced. Our first summer in the house my mother had used the pool
religiously, forty lengths back and forth before breakfast. By the following
summer, when she was weak from chemotherapy, she would only wade or
dangle her legs on hot days, and at the end of that summer she died.
Inside, I could hear the television-as soon as I emerged from the guestroom
I would have to see them. I put on my jeans, annoyed that I could not simply
walk through the house in boxers. In the bathroom I brushed my teeth and took
the time to shave. I craved coffee but not food. Dinner had been another
embarrassment of riches. Chitra hovered over my father and me and the girls,
eating privately after we were done, the way our maids would in Bombay. I
imagined another crowded plate waiting for me on the dining table, but there
was no breakfast prepared, nothing offered when I approached Chitra and her
daughters in the living room. They were sitting with their feet up on the
sectional, watching an episode of
Family Feud. They were dwarfed by the soaring ceiling, washed out by the
morning sun the room received. The girls were dressed, but Chitra was wearing
a zippered housecoat in a frumpy red-and-yellow calico print. Without makeup
or jewelry she looked even younger. She was drinking a cup of tea, my mother's
biscuit tin open beside her. "Good morning," I said.
"Good morning," Piu and Rupa chimed back, their eyes quickly returning to
the television.
"I'll get your tea," Chitra said, putting her cup on the cocktail table and
preparing to get up. "I didn't make any for you. Your father told me you like to
sleep late when you visit home."
"It's okay," I told her. "Don't get up. I don't need any."
She spoke to me in Bengali, I to her in English, as had been the case the
night before. I thought that my slack Americanized pronunciation would be lost
on her, but she seemed to follow what I said.
Chitra frowned, confused. "No tea in the morning?" The girls also looked
away from the television, waiting for my answer.
"I need coffee. It's what I have at school. I'm used to it now."
"But there is no coffee in the kitchen. Not that I have seen."
"Don't worry about it. I'll grab some at Dunkin' Donuts." Before she had the
chance to ask, I continued, "It's a place that sells donuts. Donuts are a kind of
cake, with a hole in the center."
"The store is far?"

"Just a few minutes."
"But you must take the car?"
I nodded, and she looked disappointed. "Without a car there is nowhere to
go?"
"Not really. Can you drive?" She shook her head.
"It's not hard. I'm sure you could get a license."
"Oh, no," she said, not as if she were incapable, but as if driving were
beneath her. "I would not like to learn."
"I'll be back in a while," I said. I noticed that the girls were looking up at
me and I hesitated. "Would you like to come along?"
"Yes, please," Rupa and Piu said at the same time. They looked at Chitra,
and she nodded in assent.
I went back to the guestroom to get my wallet and keys, and when I
returned the girls were already in their coats, matching red parkas that my father
must have bought for them after they arrived. The thick zippers and bright nylon
shells of the coats transformed their appearance, suddenly lending them a
legitimately American air. They sat together in the back of my car among the
newspapers, empty soda bottles, course books, cassette tapes. "Sorry for the
mess," I said, tossing everything off the seat and onto the floor. They fastened
their seat belts carefully, prying one of the buckles out of its gap, Rupa helping
Piu. Chitra stood in her housecoat looking through the storm door. She was
trusting me to take her children to a place she'd never heard of and would not be
able to find. Still, she waved and forced a small smile. I stepped on the clutch,
about to reverse the car, when Chitra opened the storm door, poking her head
out. "And I will be all right?"
"What do you mean?"
"I will be safe alone, in this house?"
"Of course," I said, stunned that it would be the first time, nearly laughing
at her. "Enjoy it."
"She does not allow us to go outside," Piu said. "Not without her."
"She is afraid because she cannot see neighbors," Rupa added.
"And that we will fall into the swimming pool."
I did not know how to respond to any of this, so I said nothing as I backed
out of the long driveway and drove toward town. The closest Dunkin' Donuts
was less than fifteen minutes away, and when I approached it felt too soon. I
wanted to continue driving, and so I kept going, heading toward the next town,
where there was a beach my mother used to like for an occasional change of
scenery. This required getting on the highway, and I found it satisfying,
accelerating for a short while along the empty, impersonal road. The girls asked

no questions about where we were going, each looking steadily out the back
windows, the journey still brief enough that the lack of conversation did not feel
strange. I entered the next town and took a road from which the gray line of the
ocean was visible. I pointed this out to Rupa and Piu, but they said nothing. "We
can either go into the drive-through or inside," I said once we reached the donut
shop. "You guys have a preference?" "Which way is best?" Rupa asked.
"With the drive-through I get my coffee and drink it as we go back to the
house. The other way, we sit inside."
Rupa voted for the drive-through, Piu to go inside. "Tell you what," I said.
"We'll go in, and on our way home I'll get a refill in the drive-through."
They seemed pleased that neither option would be denied to them and got
out of the car, holding hands as they walked across the parking lot. The Dunkin'
Donuts was part of a shopping plaza with a liquor store, a Bed and Bath, and a
place that sold party supplies. The lot was crammed with the cars of last-minute
Christmas shoppers, but Dunkin' Donuts was empty. Christmas carols played on
the sound system, their trite melodies foreign to Rupa and Piu. I ordered my
coffee and asked the girls what they wanted. They stared at the selections, Piu
straining on tiptoe, Rupa with her mouth slightly open and her tongue planted in
one corner of it. The decent thing to do was to lift Piu up so that she could get a
better view, and when I offered, she raised her hands and came into my arms.
She was heavier than I expected, and I placed her on the counter, where she
continued to stare.
"Which is your favorite, KD?"
"Boston Cream."
"I want that one, then."
"Me, too," Rupa said.
"Make it three," I told the cashier.
We sat in a booth, me on one side of the Formica table, my stepsisters on
the other. They began eating enthusiastically, not pausing until they were
finished, exchanging glances and a sisterly commentary I was not privy to. I ate
my donut as well, surprised by how much smaller their mouths were, how much
longer it took them to finish compared to me. I felt separate from them in every
way but at the same time could not deny the things that bound us together. There
was my father, of course, but he seemed to be the least relevant in a way. Like
them I'd made that journey from India to Massachusetts, too old not to
experience the shock of it, too young to have a say in the matter. They would
recall all of this, perhaps not as clearly as I remember those first months at your
parents' home, but nevertheless they would remember. Like them I had lost a
parent and was now being asked to accept a replacement. I wondered how well

they remembered their father; Piu would only have been five at the time. Even
my memories of my mother had begun to break apart in the three and a half
years since her death, the thousands of days I had spent with her reduced to a
handful of stock scenes. I was lucky, compared to Rupa and Piu, having had my
mother for as long as I did. The knowledge of death seemed present in both
sisters-it was something about the way they carried themselves, something that
had broken too soon and had not mended, marking them in spite of their
lightheartedness.
"Liked that?" I asked.
Both girls nodded, and Piu said, "Another tooth is loose."
She opened her mouth and pressed a tiny chocolate-stained lower tooth
forward with her tongue.
The coffee was too hot to drink, so I removed the lid and set it on the
counter. Piu was looking out the window, at the cars pulling in and out of the lot.
Rupa was eyeing the donuts on display, the dispensers of coffee, the tanks of
bubbling red punch.
"Would you like another?"
She shook her head, avoiding my gaze. She was more reserved than Piu and
seemed, at times, unimpressed by her new surroundings. "I would like to bring
one home for Ma."
"The one with the colors on top," Piu said, kneeling up in the booth and
pointing. "That is prettiest."
Rupa disagreed. "I like the one that is covered in snow."
"Here's a dollar," I said, lifting my hips and reaching for my wallet. "Would
you guys like to buy a couple more?"
"We are not allowed to touch money," Rupa said.
"It's only a dollar. Even if you were to lose it between here and there," I
said, glancing back at the cash register, "it wouldn't be a big deal."
"Big deal?" Piu asked, knitting her dark brows together.
"Not important."
They slid out of the booth and walked toward the counter, each of them
holding a corner of the dollar bill as if it were a miniature banner in a parade. I
had my back to the counter so I turned partway around to watch. I saw Rupa
pointing, once and once more, then both of them sliding the dollar to the cashier.
He folded over the top of the bag and moved it back and forth, unsure which of
the girls to hand it to, eventually leaving it on the counter for Rupa.
"Why didn't you say anything?" I asked when they returned.
Rupa handed me the change, looking defensive. "We have done something
wrong?"

"No. But you could have said the kind of donuts you wanted instead of
pointing, you could have thanked the cashier when he gave them to you. And
you should always start off by saying hello."
Rupa looked down at the table. "Sorry."
"Don't apologize. I'm just saying, you guys don't have to be shy. The more
you use your English in these situations, the better it will be. It's already good."
"Not like yours," Rupa said. "They will laugh at us in school."
"I am afraid to go to school," Piu said, shaking her head and covering her
eyes with her hands.
It was not my intention to reassure them, but it seemed cruel not to. "Look,
I know how you feel. A few kids might laugh in the beginning, but it doesn't
matter. They laughed at me, too. I came here from Bombay when I was sixteen
and had to figure things out all over again. I was born here but it was still hard,
leaving and then coming back again."
"It was before your mother died?" Piu asked. She asked this reverently, a bit
sadly, as if she'd actually known my mother, or perhaps because it reminded her
of her father, I could not tell.
I nodded.
"What was she like?"
"She was-she was my mother," I said, caught offguard by the question. I
felt suddenly vulnerable in front of two little girls I'd known less than a day and
yet who understood me better, in many ways, than friends who had known me
for years. Four years ago my mother would have been the one sitting across from
me, sipping her tea, complaining how tasteless it was, after one of our windy
walks along the beach.
"Do you have a picture of her?" Rupa asked. For a moment her gaze held
mine.
"No," I lied, not wanting to show them the one I carried stuffed behind the
ID cards in my wallet. It had been taken during a party in our flat in Bombay,
long before her illness, from such a distance that it gave little impression of her
face. I had put the photograph, cut down to size, into my wallet after she died,
but since then I had never taken it out to look at it.
"Why is there no picture of her in the house?" Rupa asked.
"My father didn't want any."
"Ma has been looking," Piu said. "She has looked in every room. But she
cannot find one."
Chitra was sitting on the window seat when we got back, watching for my
car. The anxiety in her face was obvious, but she didn't ask what had taken us so

long. Piu and Rupa didn't give her a chance, rushing up as if they hadn't seen her
for days, handing her the donuts and telling her what a fun trip it was, how
generous I'd been, Piu reporting that they'd paid for the donuts themselves. It
was obvious that the girls liked me and that, because of her daughters' approval,
Chitra was willing to like me, too. But I needed to be alone. The open plan of the
house meant it was impossible to watch television or listen to music without
engaging with them. Instead I sat on the bed in the guestroom, looking at the
yard and leafing through the Globe. Then I went for a run, five cold miles on the
winding roads. When I returned, they were eating a heavy Bengali lunch,
hunched over plates of rice and dal and the previous night's leftovers. I turned
down Chitra's invitation to join them and instead, after my shower, dragged the
phone into the guestroom and called Jessica.
"Why don't you just come here?" she suggested. I wished I could, wished I
could simply get into my car and drive to her parents' home. But I wasn't capable
of walking out, not yet. When I went to return the phone to its place in the
hallway, I realized that they were all upstairs, napping, the way my relatives did
in India. For the first time since my arrival I stretched out on the sectional, to
watch television, and without meaning to I fell asleep myself. They were
downstairs when I woke up, within arm's reach but behaving as if I were not
there. It was already getting dark outside, the arcing lamp spreading its light over
the cocktail table. The channel had been changed to a talk show. Chitra was
combing and retying the girls' hair and then proceeded to comb her own. She
worked through it with her fingers, a stunning mass that had been contained,
until now, in a braid, the smooth strands cascading nearly to her waist. The sight
of it repulsed me; I could not help thinking of the hair that had fallen out in
clumps from my mother's head, the awful wig she'd worn even in the hospital,
up until the day she died, that artificial part of her more healthy-looking than
anything else.
Rupa sat behind Chitra, massaging her mother's scalp and plucking out a
few gray hairs while Chitra leaned back and closed her eyes. I gathered that this
was a regular routine, something that took place without the need for instructions
or comment. I sat up and watched, imagining the rest of Chitra's hair turning
gray one day, imagining her growing into an old woman alongside my father the
way my mother was meant to. That thought made me conscious, formally, of my
hatred of her. As if aware of what I was thinking, Chitra opened her eyes and
looked at me, embarrassed, quickly gathering her hair around her hand. She got
up and went to the kitchen, returning a few minutes later with a pot of tea and
cups of Ovaltine on a tray. There were two types of chanachur in cereal bowls,
and on a small plate, a donut cut into four pieces.

"Now will you take tea?" she asked me.
I accepted, lifting from the tray the cup she'd already prepared, with
separately heated milk and too much sugar.
"This is from Haldiram," she said, passing me one of the cer-eral bowls.
"Best in all Calcutta."
"No, thank you."
"This room is cold," she continued. "The wind comes straight through the
glass. Why aren't there curtains?" "It would spoil the view," I said.
"The steps are also slippery." She pointed to the floating staircase leading to
the second floor. "And there is no railing. I am afraid Rupa and Piu will fall."
I turned to look at the thick pieces of wood arranged like empty shelves
ascending the white walls. Even at her weakest, my mother had gone up and
down them without protest.
"Why is there no railing?" Chitra repeated.
"Because we liked it that way," I said, aware that I sounded pedantic.
"Because that's what makes it beautiful."
We had nothing else to say to one another. We sat and watched one
program and then the next as Chitra worked on something with a crochet hook,
and I wondered how I was going to survive the next four weeks in her company.
We were all waiting for my father, waiting for him to return and explain, if only
by his presence, why we were sitting together drinking tea. When he did, he
asked me to give him a hand outside; there was a Christmas tree tied to the roof
of his car. "I would have gone tomorrow," I said, helping him to untie the rope
that held it in place. I was without gloves, a fact that made the task, in the frigid
evening air, both easy and painful. We dragged the tree inside and propped it in
one corner of the living room, next to the high stone fireplace. Chitra and the
girls gathered around.
"But it's just like all the other trees outside," Chitra said, pointing through
the glass wall.
"It's different, actually." I said. "On the property we have pine trees. This is
a spruce."
Somewhere in the basement there was a box, my father said, containing the
stand, the lights, ornaments to hang from the branches. They were from our first
winter in the house, the last
Christmas my mother celebrated, and I was surprised my father hadn't
tossed them out. He asked me to go down and look for the box. Our basement
lacked the sedimented clutter of most, given that we'd lived in the house only a
handful of years and that for most of that time my mother had been dead and I
had been away at college. There had been no period of haphazard accumulation,

only events that had caused things to be taken away. Still, there were a number
of boxes stacked up against the walls, empty ones that once contained the
television and the stereo speakers, others still taped up, full of inessential items
my parents had had shipped from Bombay and never bothered to unpack.
I slit the tape with my car key and lifted the flaps of a few of the boxes. One
contained old engineering books of my father's. Another had a dinner set
wrapped in pages of The Times of India, plates I had eaten off for years but
forgotten until now, with a pattern of small orange diamonds around the rim. I
found my enlarger, tongs, a set of trays, and old bottles of fixer for the darkroom
I'd set up during my last year of high school. There were times my mother came
down and kept me company, sitting quietly in the blackness as I struggled to
load film onto the developing reel. Together we would breathe in the chemical
smells, their corrosiveness, from which my hands were protected by rubber
gloves, nothing compared to what was taking place inside her body. She would
keep time for me with her watch, familiarizing herself with the process enough
to be able to tell me when to pour the series of fluids in and out of the processing
tank, both of us knowing that I'd have to buy a timer, eventually. "It must be
something like this," she said once in that perfectly dark, silent, sealed-up space,
and I understood without her saying so that she was imagining what it might be
like to be dead. "This is how I want to think of it."
The box I was looking for was labeled "x-mas" in my mother's hand, not on
the side so that it was easily identifiable, but in a corner on top. I had no
sentimental attachment to the items inside, and yet I didn't want to see them. The
thought of Chitra going through the box, watching her sift through everything,
upset me just as it had upset me, throughout the day, to watch her handle the
cutlery, the teakettle, at one point to hold the telephone and speak with my father
to learn that he was on his way home. When my father had tried to remove the
signs of my mother from the house I blamed him for being excessive, but now I
blamed him for not having done enough.
"I can't find it," I said, after returning upstairs. My father did not press the
issue, did not insist on going down and looking for it himself. He behaved
differently around Chitra, was more accepting of the minor defeats of life. I
offered to go to a drugstore and buy what we needed, glad to have another
reason to leave the house. When I came back my father and I trimmed the tree
together, Chitra and the girls watching us from the sectional. We placed the tree
in the stand and tightened the screws and draped lights over the branches. There
was nothing personal or idiosyncratic to put on it, just a box of sapphire-blue
balls, so that it looked less like a tree in someone's home and more like one in
the corner of a bank or an office lobby. But Rupa and Piu were delighted,

exclaiming that they'd never seen anything more beautiful. My father went
upstairs and returned with a shopping bag full of gifts. They'd all been wrapped
at whatever store he bought them in, the same green-and-gold paper
professionally taped and tied. He distributed them under the tree, eight boxes
altogether. "Two for each of you," he said to no one in particular. Rupa and Piu
got up and went to look at them then, excited to find their names written on the
tags.
"Can we open them?" Piu asked Chitra, Chitra who did not know the
answer.
"Not until Christmas morning," I said. "Until then you can just look. And
maybe shake them a little."
"So lovely," Chitra said, impressed now that the tree had been trimmed.
"Kaushik, what about a picture?" my father suggested.
I shook my head. I had left my camera, my father's old Yashica, at school.
"But you always have it with you." That look of irritated disappointment,
the one that had appeared the day my mother died and was missing now that he'd
married Chitra, passed briefly across my father's face.
"I forgot it," I said. It was true, I did always have the camera with me. Even
on quiet weekends when I came home and my father and I saw no one I would
bring it, taking it with me on walks. This time I had left it behind, knowing that I
would not want to document anything.
"I don't understand," my father said.
"Neither do I," I replied. "You haven't wanted a picture of anything in
years." "That's not true." "It is."
We were stating facts and at the same time arguing, an argument whose
depths only he and I could fully comprehend. I went to the kitchen to pour
myself a drink, bringing it with me to the dining table when Chitra announced, a
few minutes later, that dinner was ready. No one said anything during the meal.
When we were done eating, Chitra cleared all the plates and took them into the
kitchen, just as she had the night before, allowing my father and me to relax after
dinner in a way that we'd never been able to during the last years of my mother's
life. We no longer had to assume the responsibility of scraping the plates and
loading the dishwasher so that my mother could rest. I sat finishing my drink,
and Rupa and Piu slithered out of their seats and returned to the sectional to
watch more television. My father got up and followed them, settling into his
recliner with the newspaper. He opened it to a large ad for Lechmere that
featured cameras for sale, circling things with a ballpoint pen.
Two days later was Christmas Eve, and my father stayed home from work,
suggesting that we all go, the five of us, into Boston to show Chitra and the girls

the city. I had no excuse and so I joined them, sitting in the backseat of my
father's car, between Rupa and Piu. Though we were only going for a short ride,
the trip felt strangely momentous. For the last two years of my mother's life,
when she was always in and out of the hospital, we had gone nowhere, taken no
trips for pleasure apart from those occasional walks along the beach. The last
thing in my life that was anything close to a vacation was the layover in Rome
with my parents, on our way back from Bombay. All I had learned about New
England was the immediate region that surrounded our house, and the way to
Mass General, making the trip back and forth until it was no longer necessary.
My father drove us first into Cambridge to look at Harvard and MIT, Chitra
asking me why I had chosen a college so far away when I could have attended
those schools instead. I ignored her question, as I ignored so many of the things
she said to me. "He wanted to get out of Massachusetts," my father explained.
I had thought we would get out of the car at various points and walk
around, but Chitra said it was too cold and my father agreed. After circling
around Kendall Square he drove over the Mass Avenue Bridge and turned onto
Commonwealth Avenue, which was decorated with lights and wreaths, and then
drove around the Public Garden and the Common. He pointed out the golden
dome of the State House, and the beautiful homes that lined the steep streets of
Beacon Hill. Behind those homes was Mass General, where my father and I had
gone together so many times. A phone call had woken us in the early hours one
morning, and we had driven down to Boston just as the first light was intruding
with harsh orange streaks in the sky. She looked the same as the night before,
lying in the bed with her eyes closed, only all the machines were shut off,
making the room in which we had spent so many quiet hours all the more silent.
Her skin felt chilled when I touched it, as if she had just returned from a brisk
walk in winter. I looked up now at the windows of the hospital, but my father
turned toward Chitra. "This is where America's Brahmins live," he said, laughing
at his own joke, and in the front seat Chitra smiled in a way that revealed to me
that she was falling in love.
For Christmas my father bought me a sweater and a shirt, but later he gave
me an envelope containing ten hundred-dollar bills. "You will need it for this
and that," he said when I told him it was too much. My father had also arranged
to go to Disney World for five days; this, along with the toys under the tree, was
his present to the girls. "You are welcome to join us," my father said when he
announced this news on Christmas morning, but I said no, making up something
about there being a winter session at Swarthmore. My father did not convince
me to join them. But Rupa and Piu were devastated. "Why don't you want to

come?" they kept asking, all the more bewildered when they discovered that I
had never been to Disney World. I sensed that they needed me to guard them, as
I needed them, from the growing, incontrovertible fact that Chitra and my father
now formed a couple. My presence was proof that my mother had once existed,
just as they represented the physical legacy of their dead father. "Won't you be
lonely staying all by yourself?" Chitra asked me more than once. At the same
time I gathered that she, like my father, was relieved to hear my plans. I had no
plans, of course, other than to be in the house alone.
Once I knew that they were leaving I felt more charitable toward the girls,
and in an effort to make up for not going to Disney World I took them to the
Science Museum one day, and another day to the Aquarium. They behaved
impeccably on these outings, never complaining or demanding, overjoyed when
I bought each of them a cheap rubber lobster. They were with me, having ice
cream at Herrell's in Harvard Square, where I'd gone to buy a record, when Piu's
loose tooth fell out as she crunched on her cone, and I sopped up the blood in her
mouth with napkins and put the sticky tooth in my pocket, telling them about the
tooth fairy as we drove home. Though I was only twenty-one I remember
wondering, just then, what it might be like to have a child. I did not hold it
against them that they had begun calling my father Daddy. They never spoke of
their own father, but one night I woke up to the sound of Piu screaming, locked
inside a nightmare, asking for her Baba again and again.
A few days before New Year's Eve, my father and Chitra were invited to a
holiday party at the home of some of my parents' friends. How strange it was,
seeing Chitra carefully descending the floating staircase, dressed up in a dark
green sari and a garnet necklace, and then my father behind her, then beside her,
always beside her now, his hair neatly combed, wearing a tweed sports jacket I
had not seen since my mother died. I was not expected to attend the party, but
Rupa and Piu were going, had put on matching dresses with red-and-blackcheckered skirts and black velvet headbands in their hair. At the last minute, just
as my father was taking the coats out of a cupboard, Rupa turned to Chitra and
asked, "Can we stay home?"
"Of course not," Chitra said. "It would be rude."
"But KD isn't going."
"Actually, it may be rather dull for them," my father said. "I don't believe
there will be any children close to their ages."
"I haven't made dinner for them," Chitra said. "They haven't eaten."
"I can get a pizza," I offered, looking up from the sectional. I winked at
Rupa and Piu. "We can have our own party."
The girls clapped their hands, Piu smiling to reveal the new gap in her teeth.

Chitra told me to have them in bed by nine, and then she and my father buttoned
their coats and went off to the party. It was the first time they had gone out
alone, and it occurred to me, once they were gone, that I had done a favor to
them as well as to Rupa and Piu. The girls took off their shoes but kept their
tights and party dresses on, and sat with me to watch television. We passed a bag
of potato chips back and forth, and when it was empty I called in for pizzas. I put
on my coat to go to the restaurant. Rupa and Piu stared at me.
"Where are you going?" Piu asked.
"To get our dinner."
"You are leaving us alone?"
"It's ten minutes away. I'll be back before you know it."
They said nothing, but they looked genuinely scared. It annoyed me that
Chitra had instilled in them such fear. "Well, come if you want."
We drove to the restaurant and ended up eating the pizza there. I drank a
beer and smoked a few cigarettes during the meal, and Rupa and Piu sipped
Cokes from tall paper cups. They asked me again if I would go with them to
Disney World. I told them I would think about it, and the lie was enough to fill
them with new hope. The phone was ringing when we returned to the house. It
was Jessica, so I poured myself a drink and took the phone into the guestroom.
When I told her about my father taking Chitra and the girls to Disney World,
Jessica suggested coming up to visit me while they were away. I missed her, I
thought about her and desired her at night in bed, and yet I did not want to see
her in my parents' house. I didn't say this, but she sensed my reluctance and we
began to quarrel for the first time. It was an awkward conversation, full of long
pauses, draining, even though it never escalated into a real argument. I felt guilty
about avoiding her, just as I felt guilty saying no to Disney World, but I knew
that were I to agree to either proposition I would feel worse. I told Jessica the
same lie that I told the girls, that I would think about it, and got off the phone.
When I opened the door to refresh my drink I saw that Rupa and Piu were
no longer watching television, which was what I'd assumed they'd been doing all
this time. I called for them, checking the kitchen, the bathroom, then went
upstairs, to the door of my old room. I didn't hear them talking and, seeing from
my watch that it was already ten o'clock, thought maybe they were asleep. I
opened the door, looking into the room for the first time since I'd come home.
The lights were on, and I saw my old bed, and a folding cot placed beside it
without any gap. The things I'd had on the walls, the poster of Jimi Hen-drix and
a copy of Paul Strand's "Blind Woman" I'd ripped out of a magazine, had not
been removed. The closet door was open, and there was a chair in front of it, as
if positioned to pull something down from the shelf. I had thought the room

would be transformed with Rupa and Piu's things, but there was no sign of them
apart from the extra bed and the small pile of toys they'd gotten for Christmas
neatly stacked in one corner. Close to this pile sat Rupa and Piu in their party
dresses. They had their backs to me, were hunched over something on the carpet
that I couldn't see. "She looks sad in this one," I heard Piu whisper in Bengali,
and then Rupa, saying, "She and KD smile the same way."
"What are you doing?" I said.
They leapt apart, startled, realizing I was there. Spread out on the gray
carpet, arranged like a game of Solitaire, were about a dozen photographs of my
mother taken from the box my father had sealed up and hidden after her death.
Even from a distance the banished images assaulted me: my mother wearing a
swimsuit by the edge of the pool at our old club in Bombay. My mother sitting
with me on her lap on the brown wooden steps of our house in Cambridge. My
mother and my father standing before I was born in front of a snow-caked hedge.
"What the hell do you think you're doing?" I said now.
Rupa looked at me, her dark eyes flashing, and Piu began to cry. I walked
into the room and picked up the pictures, putting them face down on my old
dresser. Then I grabbed Rupa by the shoulders from where she sat crouched on
the floor, shaking her forcefully. Her body had gone limp, her thin legs wobbling
in their cabled black tights. I wanted to throw her against the wall, but instead I
managed to direct her to the folding cot and forced her to sit, knowing that I was
squeezing too hard. "Tell me, where did you find these?" I demanded, just inches
from her face.
Now Rupa began to cry as well, but she pointed to the closet. I walked
toward it, but Piu, still sobbing on the carpet and shaking her head, said "It is not
there anymore." She crawled toward the cot where her sister was sitting and
pulled out a black shoebox, white at the edges, the masking tape that had once
bound it shut lifted away. This time it was Piu that I grabbed, dragging her away
from the shoebox as if her proximity would contaminate it, and thrusting her
aside.
"You have no right to be looking at those," I told them. "They don't belong
to you, do you understand?"
They nodded, Rupa trembling as if with cold, Piu's lips pressed tightly
together. Tears fell down their faces but words continued to pour out of me,
words that should not have been uttered, should not have been heard. "Well,
you've seen it for yourselves, how beautiful my mother was. How much prettier
and more sophisticated than yours. Your mother is nothing in comparison. Just a
servant to wash my father's clothes and cook his meals. That's the only reason
she's here, the only reason both of you are here."

Now the girls were no longer crying, their shiny black heads staring down
at the carpet, not moving, saying nothing in reply. I took the shoebox and the rest
of my mother's photographs and left the room. I wanted to remove the pictures
from the house, as far as I could. I returned to the guestroom, hastily packed my
things, and then got into my car, telling myself that my father and Chitra would
be back from their party soon enough. My actions felt spontaneous, almost
involuntary, propelled by the adrenaline of a state of emergency, but I realize
now that on some level I had been thinking of running away for days. Rupa and
Piu never came out of their room, never opened the door to see or question what
I was doing, and when I started the car they did not rush out of the house to beg
me to stay.
I had no idea where to go, but I got on the highway and started driving
north. I quickly left Massachusetts, driving through a small piece of New
Hampshire and over the bridge into Maine. As I approached Portland, I turned
onto a smaller, two-lane road that occasionally hugged the sea. I drove down
dark, empty stretches punctuated now and then by a cluster of churches and
restaurants and homes. I could not see the ocean but detected its salty smell and
the jerking sound of the wind, a sound like that of a fire burning, penetrating the
closed doors and windows of my car. I thought at first that I would drive through
the night, but eventually I began to feel tired and looked for a place to sleep.
Most of the hotels and motels were shut for the season, and the ones that looked
open were closed because it was so late. I was considering pulling onto the
shoulder to nap when I spotted a motel with a twenty-four-hour sign glowing in
the parking lot.
The next day I was woken by the calls of sea birds. I sat up in a sagging
brass bed and saw the water for the first time, outside my window. I remember
that the window was disproportionately small for the room, as if the motel itself
were a ship. The water was choppy, a gray a shade or two darker than the sky, its
nearness and activity unknown to me as I'd slept. The room was dank and
clammy, wallpapered with small blue anchors against a white ground, and the
empty medicine cabinet in the bathroom was edged with rust. The desk clerk
told me that there was a restaurant a few miles down the road, and that I was
somewhere on Penobscot Bay.
After breakfast I walked around the town and along the harbor, past
boarded-up businesses and homes of people who would occupy them in summer.
But I spent most of the day in the motel, either looking at the ocean from the
armchair in my room or downstairs at the bar, drinking, feeling sick to my
stomach about what had happened the night before, afraid of myself and
ashamed. I kept seeing Rupa and Piu with their heads bent, their bodies prepared

to be shaken again, absorbing all the things I was too afraid to tell my father and
Chitra. And I thought of them in the house after I'd left them there, knowing how
frightened they were to be alone. I wondered what had happened when my father
and Chitra returned from the party, what Rupa and Piu had told them. I assumed
they'd told everything, that they had done the dirty work of expressing what I
could not. I was aware that by disappearing I was causing my father concern,
though I felt worse about my treatment of the girls. It was to Rupa and Piu that I
owed the greater apology, but at the same time I knew that what was done was
done, that no matter what I said now I would never be able to make it right.
In the afternoon I went to a pay phone and called my father at work. "I
know that you aren't happy, that this is hard for you," he told me, as if my
disappearance were something he'd been prepared for. "But you could have done
the decent thing and waited until morning. You could have said good-bye."
I didn't offer an explanation. I had none. Instead, I asked how the girls had
been when my father and Chitra returned.
"They were asleep," my father said. "Still, you shouldn't have abandoned
them in the house, Kaushik, not so late at night. Anything might have happened.
Chitra was quite disturbed. She's worried that it's her fault you've run off, that
she's said or done something to upset you. She's trying her best, you know."
I realized then: the girls had said nothing. Chitra had no idea that I had
ranted at her daughters, that I had harmed and terrified them.
"We leave for Florida day after tomorrow," my father said. "Do you plan to
return by then?" "I don't think so."
"You will get back to college on time?" "Yes."
"We will speak in a few weeks, then."
He hung up the phone. He had not bothered to ask me where I'd gone.
The next morning I got back in my car, and for days I did the same thing:
driving up the coast, eating in restaurants when I was hungry, finding motels
when I was tired, paying for it with the money my father had given me for
Christmas. I didn't bother getting a map. A gas station attendant told me that
eventually I would hit Canada. Now and again I saw the water, little islands and
striped lighthouses and tiny spits of land. It was too brutally cold to get out of
the car, but occasionally I did, to look at the ocean or explore a bit of trail. It was
like no other place I'd seen, nothing like the North Shore of Massachusetts. The
sky was different, without color, taut and unforgiving. But the water was the
most unforgiving thing, nearly black at times, cold enough, I knew, to kill me,
violent enough to break me apart. The waves were immense, battering rocky
beaches without sand. The farther I went, the more desolate it became, more than
any place I'd been, but for this very reason the landscape drew me, claimed me

as nothing had in a long time.
Most of the fishing villages were shut down, the lobster boats out of the
water for winter, the wooden traps stacked and empty. At times I wished that I'd
had my camera with me, but there is no documentation of those days. The food
was generally terrible, but when I think of it I still savor the taste of diner coffee
that was at once bitter and insipid, the waffles drowned in syrup, the gummy
chowder and greasy eggs, as if no other food had nourished me before then. The
bars were the only consistent sign of life, strange small places that felt more like
people's living rooms, with clamshells for ashtrays and nets draped on the walls.
I had nothing to say to the fishermen and the other people who drank there and
had lived in those villages all their lives, their tobacco-stained beards concealing
their faces, their hands raw and chapped, their accents unfathomable. They were
neither friendly nor unfriendly, and I kept to myself, aware that I stood out,
watching whatever was on the television, observing whatever pool game was in
progress. I did not crave anyone's company. I had never traveled alone before
and I discovered that I liked it. No one in the world knew where I was, no one
had the ability to reach me. It was like being dead, my escape allowing me to
taste that tremendous power my mother possessed forever.
I spent five days getting to the border of Canada, another four heading
back, using my father's money almost to the penny. Somewhere during that time
the year ended; I was aware of it thanks only to a free shot of whiskey I received
one night in a bar. I was certain that if my mother had lived to visit that part of
the world, she would have persuaded my father to buy her one of the hundreds of
homes I passed, overlooking the open sea, many occupying islands all to
themselves. The bars and diners always had stacks of pamphlets listing
waterfront properties, everything from simple timeshares to turreted mansions,
and sometimes, lacking anything else to read, I looked through them. It
reminded me of my parents' search for our house after leaving Bombay. And it
was then, wandering alone that winter up the coast of Maine, that I thought of
you, and our weeks in your house during another winter five years before.
You would have been in college by then, on Christmas vacation as I was.
But I remembered you not much older than Rupa, and I remembered a day after
a snowstorm, when something I'd said caused you, like Rupa and Piu, to cry. I
had hated every day I spent under your parents' roof, but now I thought back to
that time with nostalgia. Though we didn't belong there, it was the last place that
had felt like a home. In pretending that my mother wasn't sick and being around
people who didn't know, a small part of me had been able to believe that it was
true, that she would go on living just as your mother had. The second house was
different. There phone calls were made freely to the doctors, medicine bottles

were strewn about, the paraphernalia of her illness taking over every corner of
every room. In spite of all the effort and money my mother put into that house,
we had never been able to inhabit it properly, and because of what was
happening to her we never felt happy. It was there that my mother prepared to
depart for another place altogether, one where we would be unable to join her,
and from which she would not return.
One day close to the Canadian border, walking along cliffs overlooking the
Bay of Fundy, I found a spot that was particularly striking. A sign told me I was
in the easternmost state park in the country. The trail was not easy, falling
through rich-smelling pine forests. The tops of the trees were spindly, their lower
boughs dusted with snow. The wind ripped and chewed through everything, and
the water was a sheer drop down. I crossed paths with no one. For a long time I
watched the approach and retreat of the waves, their thick caps crashing apart
against the rocks, that eternally restless motion having an inversely calming
effect on me. The following day I returned to the same spot, this time bringing
with me the shoebox of my mother's photographs. I sat on the ground, opened
the box, and began going through the pictures one by one, as if they were pieces
of mail that I was quickly scanning and would read later on. But there were too
many pictures, and after a few I, like my father, could no longer bear their sight.
A slight lessening in the pressure of my fingertips and the ones I was holding
would have blown away into that wild sea, scattering down to where my
mother's ashes already resided. But I could not bear that either, and so I put them
back in the box and began to break the hardened ground. I only had a stick and a
sharp-edged rock to work with and the hole was not impressive, but it was deep
enough to conceal the box. I covered it with dirt and stones. The moon's first
light was shining down when I was done, and I walked back, aided by that same
beam of light, to my car.
A few weeks before my college graduation my father called to say that he
was selling our house, that he and Chitra and the girls were moving to a more
traditional one in a less isolated suburb of Boston. There were other Bengalis
nearby and an Indian grocery in the town, things that were more important to
Chitra than the proximity of the ocean and Modernist architecture had been for
my mother. I would not be following my father to that new house; I had made
plans to travel in South America after graduating. The events over Christmas had
never been discussed, never acknowledged. Along with my father, Chitra and
Rupa and Piu watched my commencement sitting on folding chairs on the grass,
clapping when it was my turn to walk to the dais, posing beside me for
photographs in my cap and gown. The girls were polite to me, respectful of the

fact that it was my day, but at the same time it was as if we'd never met. I knew
that they had never revealed anything to Chitra or to my father about the things I
had said and done that night, that it would remain between the three of us, that in
their silence they continued both to protect and to punish me. The memory of
that night was now the only tie between us, eclipsing everything else. In their
utterly polite way they made that clear. They spoke only to each other, and
though their accents had turned American, my stepsisters, the closest thing I
would ever have to siblings, seemed more impenetrable to me now than just after
they'd arrived. "Everyone closer," my father directed from behind his new
camera, and Rupa and Piu held their shoulders tensely as I draped an arm around
each. "We are both moving forward, Kaushik," my father told me after the
ceremony. "New roads to explore." And without our having to say it, I knew we
were both thankful to Chitra for chafing under whatever lingered of my mother's
spirit in the place she had last called home and for forcing us to shut its doors.

G oing Ashore
Again she'd lied about what had brought her to Rome. A grant had relieved
her, this autumn, of teaching at Wellesley. But Hema was not in Italy in any
official capacity, only to take advantage of a colleague's empty apartment in the
Ghetto. She had invented something that sounded impressive, a visiting
lectureship at an institute of classical studies, and neither Navin nor her parents
had questioned her. Her scholarly life was a mystery to them, something at once
impressive and irrelevant. It had earned her a PhD and a tenure-track job, that
was the important thing. The colleague, Giovanna, had arranged for Hema to
have library privileges at the American Academy and given her the numbers of a
few people to call in Rome, and in October, Hema had packed her laptop and
clothes and flown across the ocean for an improvised leave of absence. Just
before Christmas she would go to Calcutta, where her parents had returned after
a lifetime in Massachusetts and where, in January, she would marry Navin.
Now it was November, the week before Thanksgiving. When Hema thought
of the existence she had evaded this semester, she saw the trees on Wellesley's
campus stripped of their leaves, patches of Lake Waban already freezing over,
darkness descending through classroom windows as her students struggled
through sentences from Wheelock's Latin: id factum esse tum non negavit. In
Rome the leaves were also falling, untended copper piles heaped on either side
of the Tiber. But the days felt languorous, warm enough to wander the streets in
a cardigan, and the tables outside the restaurant where Hema went each day for
lunch were still full.
The restaurant, five minutes from Giovanna's apartment, was next to the
Portico di Ottavia. There were of course hundreds of other restaurants she might
have tried, hundreds of versions of cacio e pepe and carbonara and deep-fried
artichokes she might have eaten. But the few times she wandered into different
places, she was either disappointed by the food or flustered by her broken
Italian, and so she remained faithful to the one she knew, the one where she was
no longer questioned. At this restaurant the waiters knew by now to bring her a
bottle of acqua gassata, a half-litre of vino bianco, swiftly to clear the second
place setting away. They left her alone with the book she would bring, though
mostly she sat and looked at the remains of the Portico, at its chewed-up
columns girded with scaffolding, its massive pediment with significant chunks
missing. Well-dressed chattering Romans would pass by without a glance, while
tourists would pause, gazing down at the excavations before proceeding on to

the Theater of Marcellus. In front of the Portico was a little piazza where,
according to the plaque Hema had managed to translate, over a thousand Jews
had been deported in October 1943.
She could not take credit for discovering the restaurant on her own. She had
eaten a meal there many years ago, with Julian, the other time she'd come to
Rome under false pretenses. And though she had not intended to eat there again,
she had found it during her first jet-lagged walk around Giovanna's
neighborhood in search of food. She had accompanied Julian secretly, still
confident in those days that his divorce was a matter of time. It was May, the
city clogged with people, already too hot for the clothes she'd brought. She and
Julian stayed together at a hotel behind the Colosseum, and he presented a paper
at a conference, a recycled chapter from his study of Petronius. Under normal
circumstances Hema might have presented her own paper. This was what she
had told her parents she'd be doing, and they had not questioned her. But she had
just defended her dissertation and was determined to take a few months off.
Before that, Hema had been to Rome only once, traveling with a girlfriend
after graduating from Bryn Mawr. That first visit, when she and her friend, both
classics majors, earnestly walked from landmark to landmark, translating
inscriptions and subsisting on panini and gelato, had left a lasting impression on
Hema. But the trip with Julian was a heap of rubble that added up to nothing.
She remembered breakfasts with him on the roof of the hotel, sitting among
small brown birds that hopped at her feet, eating fresh ricotta and mortadella and
salami under a glaring blue sky. She had been disconcerted by those salty, fleshy
meats so early in the day, yet never able to resist them. She remembered the
hotel room, the pink damask wallpaper, the broad bed. Every few days Julian
spoke to his wife and daughters, asking them how things were in Vermont, on
Lake Dunmore, where Julian and his family spent the summers. So much of their
affair had taken place in hotel and motel rooms, little places Julian would seek
out along the North Atlantic coast; he preferred them to the apartments Hema
shared with other students throughout graduate school at CUNY. It was never
possible to see each other at Julian's home in Amherst. Even their first date had
taken place at a hotel, Julian inviting her back to The Mark for a drink after her
department had treated him, following his lecture, to dinner.
There was no question of Navin coming to Rome. Before getting engaged
they had spent just three weekends together, spaced out over as many months,
Navin coming each time from Michigan to see Hema. They wandered chastely
around Boston, going to museums and movies and concerts and dinners, and
then, beginning on the second weekend, he kissed Hema goodnight at the door
of her home and slept at a friend's. He admitted to her that he'd had lovers in the

past, but he was old-fashioned when it came to a future wife. And it touched her
to be treated, at thirty-seven, like a teenaged girl. She had not had a boyfriend
until she was in graduate school, and by then she was too old for such measured
advances from men.
In Rome, she communicated with Navin by e-mail and spoke to him a few
times on the phone, conversations heavy with the weight of things to come but
lacking the foundation of any lived history between them. They talked about
their honeymoon in Goa, something Navin was planning, deciding together
which of the resorts they preferred. She did not miss him but looked forward to
Calcutta, to marrying him and returning with him on the plane in time to resume
teaching at Wellesley. Navin was what her parents termed a "non-Bengali," that
is, someone from any province in India other than West Bengal. His parents
were Hindu-Punjabis living in Calcutta, and Navin had come to America for his
PhD. Navin was also a professor, of physics, at Michigan State. But MIT had
promised him a job in the fall, and so he was moving to Massachusetts to be
with Hema.
She refused to think of it as an arranged marriage, but knew in her heart that
that was what it was. Though she'd met Navin before her parents, they had found
him for her. They had asked Hema if he might phone her, and finally, after years
of refusing similar requests, after years of believing that Julian would leave his
wife, she'd agreed. Her parents assumed that she was single because she was shy,
too devoted to her studies to bother with men. Her mother even asked, on
Hema's thirty-fifth birthday, if she preferred women. They'd had no idea, for all
those years, that she was involved with anyone, never mind a married man. Even
as she looked for the home her parents had helped her to buy in Newton, even as
she sat signing the closing papers in the lawyer's office, putting her solitary
signature where there was always space for another, she believed that eventually
she would have to add Julian's name. It was her inability, ultimately, to approach
middle age without a husband, without children, with her parents living now on
the other side of the world, and yet to own a home and shovel the driveway
when it snowed and pay her mortgage bill when it came-though she had proven
to herself, to her parents, to everyone, that she was capable of all of those thingsit was her unwillingness to abide that life indefinitely that led her to Navin.
From the beginning it was assumed that as long as she and Navin were
attracted to each other, as long as they got along, they would marry. And after
years of uncertainty with Julian, Hema found this very certainty, an attitude to
love she had scorned in the past, liberating, with the power to seduce her just as
Julian once had. It allowed her to find Navin physically appealing, to like his
tranquil brown eyes, his long tan face, the black line of mustache that grounded

it. After Navin there were no more surprise visits by Julian, no more bells
ringing in the middle of the afternoon demolishing the rest of her day. No more
waiting for the situation to change. After nearly a decade, a single phone
conversation had ended it. "I'm engaged to be married," she told Julian the last
time he wanted to arrange a weekend away, and he accused her of deceiving
him, called her heartless, and then he did not call again.
Now she was free of both of them, free of her past and free of her future in
a place where so many different times stood cheek by jowl like guests at a
crowded party. She was alone with her work, alone abroad for the first time in
her life, aware that her solitary existence was about to end. In Rome she savored
her isolation, immersed without effort in the silent routine of her days. At night,
after a bath, she slept soundly in Giovanna's bed, in a room with meager square
footage but breathtaking height, enormous shuttered windows that shielded her
from the sun but let in every sound: the scooters and cars on Via Arenula, the
grates of the shops being raised for business, the perpetual singsong of
ambulance sirens that she found strangely soothing. Certain elements of Rome
reminded her of Calcutta: the grand weathered buildings, the palm trees, the
impossibility of crossing the main streets. Like Calcutta, which she'd visited
throughout childhood, Rome was a city she knew on the one hand intimately and
on the other hand not at all-a place that fully absorbed her and also kept her at
bay. She knew the ancient language of Rome, its rulers and writers, its history
from founding to collapse. But she was a tourist in everyday Italy, and apart
from Giovanna, who was in Berlin on sabbatical, she did not have a single
Roman friend.
In the mornings she made espresso and heated up milk and spread jam on
squares of packaged toast, and by eight she was at Giovanna's desk, colonized
now with the ferment of Hema's books, her notebooks, her laptop, her Latin
grammar and dictionary. In spite of the hundreds of things she might be doing or
seeing in the city, until one o'clock each day she maintained this routine. This
was her anchor, this had been her anchor for years. She was a professor now, her
dissertation on Lucretius a bound, published, quietly praised thing. And yet it
was the aspect of her job that required her to sit for hours alone at a desk that
still fulfilled her more than anything. Since eighth grade, reading Latin had been
an addiction, every line a puzzle to coax into meaning. The knowledge she'd
slowly accumulated, the ancient words and declensions and syntax that dwelled
in her brain, felt sacred, enabling her to bring a dead world to life.
The Etruscans were her focus now. A few months ago she had attended a
lecture in Boston about Etruscan references in
Virgil, and this had ushered her headlong into that mysterious civilization

prior to Rome, people who had possibly wandered from Asia Minor to central
Italy and flourished for four centuries, who had ruled Rome for one hundred
years before turning obsolete. Their literature was nonexistent, their language
obscure. Their primary legacy was tombs and the things that were put in them:
jewels, pottery, weapons to accompany the dead. She was learning about the
haruspices, augurs who interpreted the will of the gods through the entrails of
animals, lightning bolts, dreams of pregnant women, flights of birds. She wanted
to put a seminar together when she returned to Wellesley, about Etruscan
influence in Roman antiquity, and possibly, based on her research, a proposal for
a second book. She had gone to the Vatican to see the Etruscan collection at the
Gregorian Museum, and also to the Villa Giulia. She was combing through
Cicero and Seneca, Livy and Pliny, reading fragments of the occultist senator
Nigidius Figulus, typing notes into her laptop, marking up the many books she
read.
And so Hema had not yet called anyone, not contacted any of Giovanna's
friends so that they could meet her for a coffee or drive her out to Tivoli or to
Ostia, as Giovanna assured her they would. She was content to spend the days
alone, working, reading, and then having lunch by the Portico. In the afternoons
she wandered in and out of churches, along dark cramped streets that opened
into enormous light-filled squares. She walked everywhere, almost never
resorting to a bus or the metro. In the evenings she retreated, preparing dinner at
home, simple meals she ate while watching Italian television. It felt wrong to be
out alone at night, more awkward to sit by herself at dinner than lunch. During
her years with Julian, even when she was by herself, men had sensed that her
heart was taken, that she would not pause to consider them, as if she were a
passing taxi with its off-duty light on. But now, though she was engaged, she
was aware of the Roman men who looked at her, sometimes called out. And
though she was flattered by their attention, it reminded her that her heart did not
belong to Navin in the same way.
Saturday mornings, instead of working, she would go to the Campo de'
Fiori, watching the stylish mothers in their high heels and jewels and quilted
jackets pushing strollers and buying vegetables by the kilo. These women, with
their rich, loose tangles of hair, their sunglasses concealing no wrinkles, were
younger than Hema, but she felt inexperienced in their company, innocent of the
responsibilities of rearing children and running a household and haggling
flirtatiously with vegetable vendors. She had grown used to this feeling over the
years with Julian-her position as the other woman, which had felt so
sophisticated when their affair began, was actually a holding pen that kept her
from growing up. She had denied herself the pleasure of openly sharing life with

the person she loved, denied herself even the possibility of thinking about
children. But Navin had changed that, too. They were both aware of her age, and
as soon as they were married, Navin told her, he was eager to begin a family.
One day after lunch, feeling energetic, she walked all the way to Piazza del
Popolo, and then over to the Villa Giulia for another visit. In the museum she
was moved once again by the ancient cups and spoons, still intact, that had once
touched people's lips; the fibulae that had fastened their clothes, the thin wands
with which they had applied perfume to their skin. But this time, looking at the
giant sarcophagus of the bride and groom enclosed in a box of glass, she found
herself in tears. She couldn't help but think of Navin. Like the young smiling
couple sitting affectionately on top of a shared casket, there was something dead
about the marriage she was about to enter into. And though she knew it had
every chance, over the years, of coming to life, on her way home, in the yellow
light of evening, she was conscious only of its deadness. She shopped for her
dinner in an alimentari on Via dei Giubbonari, and now she carried a bag
containing lettuce, a box of spaghetti, and mushrooms and cream to turn into a
sauce. She walked through the studded doorway of Giovanna's building, past a
window like a ticket booth where one of two porters greeted her each day as she
left and returned. In the courtyard a stone lion continually poured water from his
mouth. And then up the stone steps, unlit, unyielding beneath her tired feet, three
generous flights that felt like ten.
In the long hallway of Giovanna's apartment she saw the answering
machine blinking. She played back the tape. It was not Navin's voice but a friend
of Giovanna's. Normally these friends left messages in Italian that Giovanna
retrieved from Berlin. But this message, in English, was for Hema. It was a
person named Edo, a name she recognized from Giovanna's list of people to call.
For weeks, Edo said in his message, he had been expecting Hema to get in touch.
Was everything all right? He sounded kind, and genuinely distressed enough for
Hema to return the call. She assured Edo that all was well, and because she had
no other excuse, she accepted his invitation to have lunch with him and his wife
the following Sunday.
Edo's wife, Paola, was a photo editor at L'Espresso, but Kaushik had met
her in Netanya, a resort town on the Israeli coast, where they'd both gone to
cover the bombing of a hotel banquet hall, the victims about to begin their
Passover meal. It was only rarely that he worked in Italy, the odd photo essay
about Senegalese immigrants in Brescia, or shots of the nineteen caskets
containing the soldiers in Iraq being carried past the Colosseum. For most of the
past five years, Rome had simply been a place from which to get to where he

needed to go, and if he looked back at his pocket calendars, each with their three
hundred and sixty-five sky-blue pages, and counted the days, he could have
confirmed that most of them had been spent taking pictures in Gaza and the
West Bank.
His life as a photojournalist had begun nearly twenty years ago. He was
wandering through Latin America in 1987, living off the money his father gave
him after he graduated from college. He'd gone with his friend Douglas, and they
began in Tijuana, hoping to end up in Patagonia. They spent a few months in
Mexico, working their way south, through Guatemala and then into El Salvador.
And it was there that Douglas decided he'd had enough of Central America,
enough of being harassed for looking so obviously American, and bought a
ticket to Madrid. Like the Mexicans and Guatemalans, the Sal-vadorans were
never sure what to make of Kaushik, not the soldiers who patrolled the streets
with guns nearly as big as their bodies, not the children who posed eagerly for
pictures when they saw him with his camera. He began to explore the country
alone, a country that was smaller, he'd read in his guidebook, than
Massachusetts. He took pictures of the volcano that loomed west of the capital,
buildings pocked by bullets and cracked in half by the earthquake earlier that
year.
He'd never been in a place so obviously at war with itself. He'd understood,
in Guatemala, that the guerrillas were active, gathered from other backpackers
that there were parts of the country to avoid. An overnight bus he and Douglas
took to Tikal was stopped, and they and the rest of the passengers were ordered
to step out and show their passports, flashlights aimed at their faces by a group
of drunken checkpoint guards. One of the guards asked to see Douglas's wallet,
took the cash, and tossed the wallet back in Douglas's face. In Guatemala, that
had been the worst of it. But in El Salvador things were more violent, more
gruesome, the tourists more scarce. In Santa Ana, Kaushik befriended a Dutch
journalist named Espen and began to travel around, absorbing the history of the
conflict, the stories Espen told him of the death squads, decapitated bodies
strewn on highways, teenagers hanging from trees with fingernails missing and
thumbs tied behind their backs. With Espen he watched air force planes
dropping bombs at night on FMLN territory, went to visit a refugee camp across
the Hon-duran border. He absorbed the fear of the place and of its people, grew
used to the sound of machine-gun fire, accepted as everyone did the fact that he
could at any moment, anywhere, crossing a road or asleep at night, be killed. But
he'd never felt afraid, back then, for himself.
While sitting with Espen one afternoon, eating lunch in a village outside
Morazan, the table began to shake, dark stew spilling from bowls. By then he'd

grown used to occasional tremors, the earth's violence yielding a moment's
pause. They picked up their spoons, continued eating, but then people began
exclaiming, running past them through the small square. He and Espen leapt up,
following the crowd, thinking perhaps a building had fallen, but the commotion
had nothing to do with the tremors. They turned a corner to see a young man
lying on the street. He'd been shot in the head, blood pouring like a slowly
widening river away from his skull, but not a speck of blood, or even dirt,
Kaushik still remembered, staining his tan shirt and trousers. He was curled on
the pavement, eyes closed as if napping, the faintest sound escaping from his
throat, a cheap gold watch telling the time on his wrist.
A group of people gathered around the body, calling for a doctor, while a
young woman, a wife or a girlfriend in a pink sleeveless blouse, sat on the
ground weeping with her fist in her mouth. Kaushik's camera was around his
neck as usual, and Espen told him to take a picture. He did not have a long lens
with him, had to get in close, expecting at each step for someone in the group to
obstruct him, curse at him, shoo him away. But no one paid attention, and so he
crept forward and lifted the camera to his face. When he thought back to that
afternoon, he remembered that his hands were shaking but that otherwise he felt
untouched by the situation, unmoved once he was behind the camera, shooting to
the end of the roll. When he was finished, the calls for a doctor had stopped; the
man was dead.
Kaushik was the only person to document what had happened. And though
he had not saved the man's life he'd felt useful, aware that he had done
something to mitigate the crime. Still, he never believed that the pictures would
be published until Espen sent them to the right people. A week later, one ran in a
Catholic newspaper published out of Amsterdam. He received a small check,
and then, when the photo was picked up by a European newsmagazine, a larger
one. And so he began taking pictures for a living. At first he simply woke up and
followed the news, sticking close to Espen, staying in El Salvador through the
elections, the transportation strike, the killing of the six Jesuit priests and their
housekeepers. He photographed bodies with faces smashed and throats slit and
penises hacked from between their legs, handing the images over to a human
rights agency so that relatives could attempt to identify the disappeared. Thanks
to a connection of Espen's he was hired as a stringer for AP, and so he remained
in Latin America, first in Mexico, then Buenos Aires, working for wire services
and English-language papers. When he was thirty he was hired by The New
York Times, and they sent him to Africa and then to the Middle East. He could
no longer remember all the corpses he'd photographed, their faces bloated, their
mouths stuffed with dirt, their vacant eyes reflecting passing clouds over their

heads.
The demands of the job allowed him permanently to avoid the United
States. Occasional trips to New York to meet with an editor, to pick up
equipment-this was the extent of his time in America, and there were trips when
he'd not bothered to tell his father he was in the country, when he'd avoided the
miserable day trip to Massachusetts to see his father's new life, though by now
that life had surpassed, in years, the old. His father was in his seventies now,
living off a generous pension and devoting most of his time to golf. From
sporadic e-mails Kaushik learned that Rupa, the older of the girls, had married
an American named Peter and taught art to elementary school students in
Colorado. He had received an invitation to the wedding, but thanks to his work,
his excuse for so many things, he had not gone. The little one, Piu, was in
medical school at Tufts. And yet, also thanks to his work, Kaushik continued to
wash up on his father's doorstep, in the form of his photo credit in one of the
newsmagazines his father read, announcing that he was alive, indicating where
he'd been and what he'd seen.
He kept a place in Trastevere, a tiny apartment off Piazza di San Cosimato
with a generous terrace where, between assignments, he recovered. A woman
had brought Kaushik to Italy. Until Franca he had preferred Latin America to
Europe, and even now the Spanish he had learned all those years ago got in the
way of his serviceable Italian. Franca had convinced him to follow her back to
Milan. She came from a family of minor nobility, her heart-shaped face and
deep-set gray eyes speaking for a refinement she had not been able to hide when
he first met her working for a relief agency in Cameroon. For years he had
drifted across the globe without making meaningful ties, and suddenly he was
sharing an apartment with Franca, driving out to Bergamo on Sundays to eat
polenta and roasted rabbit at her nonna's home, aware that her grandmother, who
had spent years hand-stitching and embroidering a trousseau of nightgowns and
bedjackets for Franca, approved of him. It had ended bitterly; though at the time
he could never come up with a reason not to, he could not bring himself to
propose. She had not taken hold of him; he could see now that that was the
problem. And so he left the tears and fury in Milan and took the train down to
Rome. At first he thought he'd stay a week, to see a little bit of the city, then
move back to Buenos Aires. But the Second Intifada drew him back to the
Middle East, and he stayed on in Europe, never telling Franca that he was living
in her country, never once running into her.
He remembered Rome, of course, from the only other time he'd gone there,
on the way back from Bombay to Massachusetts with his parents. His mother
was dying, but at the time, apart from her thinness, there had been no signs. She

had just turned forty, Kaushik's age on his next birthday. He remembered the
look of the hotel where they stayed, the marble steps they would ascend to go to
the breakfast room. The strong shaft of light that poured through the dome of the
Pantheon, and the glances of admiration the waiters could not conceal as his
mother perused a menu. He remembered walking along the Janiculum and
seeing clusters of swallows like giant thumb-prints swiping the sky. And he had
returned like a pilgrim to those places, recalled that the hotel was close to the
Spanish Steps and managed to find it somehow.
Last year his father and Chitra had visited him in Rome, spending four days
on their way to Calcutta. He had obliged, reserving a room for them at the Hotel
d'Inghilterra and taking them everywhere. He stood in line with them to see the
Colosseum and walked with them through the Forum. He took pictures of their
stay, handing his father the rolls of film before they left as if it had been any
other job. He ordered Chitra tea with milk in every restaurant, every cafe,
because she did not like the taste of Italian coffee. But they had left no dent on
the place, and he never thought of their presence on the streets of Rome as he
continued to think, now and again, of his mother's.
It was in the course of those days with his father and Chitra that a faint gray
speck, smaller than the head of a pin, began floating across his left eye. He first
noticed it the afternoon they went to Testaccio, his father wanting to visit Keats's
grave. In the lush grounds of the Protestant Cemetery, Kaushik had thought that
a gnat was circling his head, and he kept swatting at it, putting out his fingers
trying to flick it away. But the speck continued to accompany him wherever he
went, quietly tormenting him, and he realized it was within him, that it was not
possible to remove it or make it stop. An optometrist explained that it was
caused by vitreous gel clumping and pulling away from the wall of his eye, that
it was a harmless symptom of getting older. He was told he would grow used to
it, and he had, more or less, not bothered these days unless he were in a bright
room with white walls, or outside without his sunglasses. It did not affect his
driving, or his picture-taking. And yet it felt like an invasion of the part of his
body, the physical sense that was most precious: something that betrayed him
and also refused to abandon him.
On Sunday he set out in his Fiat for Edo and Paola's, in a suburb south of
the city. The thought of leaving the city, the streets he now navigated with ease,
made him melancholy. For he was leaving; in the new year he would be gone. A
position as a photo editor for an international newsmagazine had opened up in
Hong Kong, and he had accepted. Apart from a few visits to Tokyo, he knew
little of East Asia. It would be the first time in his life that a job would mean
waking up and going to the same place each day, the first time he would have an

office, a desk, an assistant to schedule his appointments and take his calls. The
first time he would not wake up unprepared, until he was chasing after it, for
what the day would bring. In that sense he would taste a version of the
professional life his father had maintained for decades. He imagined he would
hate it. Paola told him he was making a mistake, warning him that it was death to
the photographer, that since becoming an editor she hadn't taken a decent
picture. The money would be better, but that wasn't what had attracted Kaushik.
It was his need for a different life that was taking him to Asia. The promise, for
the next few years at least, that he would be still.
The magazine was paying for his move, but apart from the Fiat, which he'd
already arranged to sell to a friend, he owned little. It was nothing like the times
he moved with his parents, those two colossal upheavals he had experienced as a
boy, first leaving America, then returning seven years later, the furniture and
paintings and tea sets his mother thought she could not live without following
them slowly, both times, on cargo ships. His mother had set up households again
and again in her life. It didn't matter where she was in the world, or whether or
not she was dying; she had always given everything to make her homes
beautiful, always drawn strength from her things, her walls. But Kaushik never
fully trusted the places he'd lived, never turned to them for refuge. From
childhood, he realized now, he was always happiest to be outside, away from the
private detritus of life. That was the first thing he'd loved about taking pictures-it
had gotten him out of the house. His earliest memories, of Cambridge,
Massachusetts, where he'd been born, were all outdoors. A chain-link fence
matted with forsythia. The herringbone pattern of bricks on a sidewalk. His
mother's voice calling his name as he ran across the Common.
He was reminded of his family's moves every time he visited another
refugee camp, every time he watched a family combing through rubble for their
possessions. In the end, that was life: a few plates, a favorite comb, a pair of
slippers, a child's string of beads. He wanted to believe that he was different, that
in ten minutes he could be on his way to anywhere in the world. But he knew
that it was impossible, wherever he landed, not to form attachments. He would
miss the short, tinted wine glasses in his Trastevere cupboards, the shrinking
trapezoid of sunlight cast on his bed in the afternoons. And he knew that in his
own way, with his camera, he was dependent on the material world, stealing
from it, hoarding it, unwilling to let it go. The move to Asia was official now.
His landlord, the owner of the gelateria on the corner, had found a new tenant.
And just yesterday he had booked his ticket, arranging for a layover in Thailand,
where he planned to spend the last week of December before continuing on to
Hong Kong.

Edo liked to cook, specializing in the cuisine of his native Cremona.
Kaushik imagined a gathering like all the others Edo and Paola liked to organize,
an international crowd of journalists and photographers and academics, always
three or four languages spoken at the table. Today, Paola had mentioned, an
American novelist was coming, someone homesick for Thanksgiving and
bringing an apple pie. There would also be an Indian woman, Paola said-a
scholar, a friend of a friend of Edo's. He pictured someone middle-aged in
spectacles and a sari, an archeologist like Edo. He had so little to do with India.
He had not gone back since the year his mother died, had never gone there for
work. As a photographer, his origins were irrelevant. And yet, in Rome, in all of
Europe, he was always regarded as an Indian first.
A few blocks from Edo and Paola's he parked the car and got out. The
neighborhood was spectacular in its own way: broad avenues lined with cypress,
concrete postwar buildings with glass entrances and protruding balconies
stacked one on top of the next. He realized he would probably not return here
before leaving Italy, wanted to take a picture, but he had left his camera at home.
Paola and Edo lived on a high floor, in an airy apartment overlooking a park.
Turning onto their street, Kaushik noticed a woman standing on the sidewalk,
long hair concealing her face, staring down at a map. "Signorina, dove deve
andare?" he asked.
The woman looked up, confused, and he realized, in spite of her dark hair
and fitted leather coat, that she was not Italian. That in fact she was Indian. That
he needn't have used the polite form in addressing her, that her face was one he'd
known.
From the moment they arrived together at Paola and Edo's, it was assumed,
by the other guests, that they were old friends. One of the guests had even
assumed they were lovers, asking how long they had been together, how they
had met. "Our parents," Kaushik had said lightly, but Hema thought back,
saddened by those two simple words. She was aware that he had not corrected
the guest's assumption. Aware, too, of the way he looked at her across the table
during lunch, surprised by the allure that had come to her late. He looked the
same to her, that was the astonishing thing. The sharp-faced boy who had
stepped reluctantly into her parents' home. Only the eyes appeared tired, the skin
surrounding them now darker, faintly bruised. He was dressed like an Italian,
wearing jeans and a thin black pullover, brown-and-white sneakers with Velcro
straps. She still remembered her first impression of him, a quiet teenager in a
jacket and tie, refusing her mother's food. She remembered the ridiculous
attraction she had felt that night, when she was thirteen years old, and that she
had secretly nurtured during the weeks they lived together. It was as if no time

had passed.
After lunch he drove her back, inviting her to his place, in a quiet
neighborhood where laundry hung between apricot-colored houses and old men
sat in folding chairs on the streets. The men watched, silently, as Kaushik
unlocked the bolts and Hema waited at his side. It was unquestioned that they
would not part yet, unquestioned that though they had not seen or thought of
each other in decades, not sought each other out, something precious had been
stumbled upon, a newborn connection that could not be left unattended, that
demanded every particle of their care. The building was nothing like Giovanna's,
the door easily overlooked, an enclosed staircase leading directly into his small
world. The apartment was a room and a bathroom and a two-burner stove. He
led her to the terrace to see the neighboring rooftops, the Romanesque belltower
of the church on the piazza. "You're that way," he said, putting his hands lightly
on her shoulders, orienting her. He told her that he'd returned to Rome recently,
that a week before he'd been in Ramallah, covering Arafat's funeral. Twenty
thousand people had turned up, he said, scaling walls and tearing down barbed
wire for a glimpse of the coffin.
They remained on the terrace, talking into the evening. She told him about
college and graduate school, learning that during her first year at Bryn Mawr
he'd been close by, at Swarthmore. She told him about her years in New York,
getting her PhD, her job at Wellesley. And while she mentioned nothing about
Julian-that long involvement, enough to make her feel, at times, like a divorced
woman, was rendered meaningless in the official chronicle of her pasteventually she told him that she was going to marry Navin.
Kaushik leaned toward her across the small metal table where they were
sitting. They had long ago digested Edo's pumpkin tortelli and bollito misto with
mostarda, their heads clear again after many glasses of wine, but there was no
food in Kaushik's refrigerator, only a box of salted biscotti he'd put between
them along with two glasses and a bottle of mineral water. He smoked a few
cigarettes. She had her hands flat on the table, as if to derive heat from its
surface, and he hooked one of his fingers, lightly but possessively, around the
gold bangle on her wrist, causing her hand to shift slightly in his direction.
"You wore this when you were a kid."
It was a gift from her grandmother, something she'd had since she was ten.
It was the only piece of jewelry she never bothered to remove. She had always
loved the design, small four-petaled flowers threaded along a vine, and when her
wrist grew thick she'd had the bangle cut off and enlarged. "You remember."
"But you don't wear an engagement ring."
"I don't have one."

He studied the bangle, turning it slowly around. "What kind of man
proposes without a ring?"
She explained, then, that there had not been a proposal, that she hardly
knew Navin. She was looking away, at a dried-out plant on the terrace, but she
felt his eyes on her, intrigued, unafraid.
"Then why are you marrying him?"
She told him the truth, a truth she had not told anybody. "I thought it might
fix things."
He did not question her further. Unlike her friends back in America, who
either thought she was doing something outrageously stupid or thrillingly bold,
Kaushik neither judged nor commended her, and the formal presentation of the
facts, the declaration that she was taken, opened the door. Only his kisses, rough,
aggressive kisses that were nothing like Navin's schoolboy behavior at her door,
made Hema feel guilty. But the rest of what they did that night felt fresh, new,
because she and Navin had never done them before, and there was nothing with
which to compare. Navin had never looked at her body unclothed, never
explored her with his hands, never told her she was beautiful. Hema remembered
that it was Kaushik's mother who had first paid her that compliment, in a fitting
room shopping for bras, and she told this to Kaushik. It was the first mention,
between them, of his mother, and yet it did not cause them to grow awkward. If
anything it bound them closer together, and Hema knew, without having to be
told, that she was the first person he'd ever slept with who'd known his mother,
who was able to remember her as he did. His bare feet were warm, surprisingly
smooth against her soles as they lay afterward side by side. He slept on his back
and at one point was startled awake by a nightmare, lunging forward and
springing off the edge of the bed before falling asleep again. It was Hema who
stayed awake, listening to him breathing, craving his touch again as light came
into the sky. In the morning, looking into the small mirror over the sink in
Kaushik's bathroom, she saw that the area around her lips, at the sides of her
mouth, was covered with small red bumps. And she was pleased by that
unbecoming proof, pleased that already he had marked her.
At first Hema tried to stick to her morning routine at Giovanna's desk. But
by eleven the phone would ring, and twenty minutes later she would be crossing
the Ponte Garibaldi to meet him, or he would pull up to Giovanna's building in
his Fiat to take her out for the day. And so she put away her books, lowered the
screen of her laptop, knowing she would not touch them again until she returned
to Wellesley. At night he took her to out-of-the-way restaurants and bars, to
fountains in abandoned squares where they sat like a teenaged couple, kissing.

They went outside the city walls, to places she'd never been and that he wanted
to see for the last time. It was Kaushik who drove her to Ostia and Tivoli, and to
Cerveteri to visit the hilly tombs of the Etruscan necropolis.
Hema told him about the history of those places, who had built them and
why. She told him what she was learning about the Etruscans, that it was they
who taught the Romans how to build their roads and irrigate their fields. She told
him about the Etruscans' love of the natural world, their belief in signs and
portents, their obsession with the journey out of life. They did not speak of their
own future, of where their days together would lead. Nor did they discuss the
past, the months during which he had lived in her home, the friendship between
their parents that was already dying, along with his mother, during that time.
Their parents had liked one another only for the sake of their origins, for the sake
of a time and place to which they'd lost access. Hema had never been drawn to a
person for that reason, until now.
Almost always, an international news channel played without sound on the
small television in Kaushik's apartment. His work depended wholly on the
present, and on things yet to come. It was not the repeated resurrection of texts
that had already been composed, of a time and people that had passed, and it
made Hema aware of the sheltered quality not only of her life but her mind. One
day, after she asked him to, he showed her his Web site. He left her alone to look
at it, going out to buy food for their dinner. She sat on his bed, wrapped in a
sheet, his laptop humming against her legs.
There were countless images, terrible things she'd read about in the
newspaper and never had to think about again. Buses blasted apart by bombs,
bodies on stretchers, young boys throwing stones. He had witnessed these things,
unseen and uninvolved, yet with an immediacy she had never felt. Because he
had become her lover, these images upset her. Kaushik had told her about fellow
photographers who were killed on the job, about the time an Israeli police officer
bashed his camera in his face. And she was secretly glad, as his mother would
have been, that his work would soon be different, that he would be behind a desk
in Hong Kong presiding over meetings. That he would not be constantly in
harm's way.
There were also shots of dusty streets and villages, markets and homes and
shop windows, arid, barren landscapes, pictures of people. An old man sat
peeling an orange under a tree, a flea-bitten dog dozing at his feet. A group of
women in head scarves threw back their heads, laughing. A young girl poked her
head out from behind a studded metal gate, baring a gap-toothed smile. As she
looked at the pictures, she began to appreciate his ability, perhaps his need, to
connect to strangers in this way, and the willingness of strangers to connect to

him. She began to understand his willingness-and she thought perhaps this was
also a need-to disappear at any moment. He lived in a rented room with rented
furniture, rented sheets and towels. In the corner his camera bags and tripods
were always packed, his passport always in his pocket. Apart from a detailed
map of the West Bank there was nothing on his walls. She suspected that even if
it were possible to turn back the clock, to never have met Navin and wait to
bump into Kaushik in Rome, it would not have made a difference. She guessed
that he had casually been with many women, that she should consider herself no
different. And she refused to go to that miserable place Julian had dragged her to
so many times, to hope for a thing that was unchangeable.
The key turned in the lock, and then Kaushik was with her again. He set
down the bags of food on a small square table set with two chairs, the only
furniture, apart from the bed, in his apartment. For the first time he seemed
hesitant in her presence, not kissing her first thing. He hung his coat on a hook,
loosened the thin red wool scarf at his throat.
"They're amazing," she said.
"They don't all pay the bills."
"Does it affect you, seeing these things?"
He shrugged, opened the cupboard, took out two glasses for wine. "It
doesn't help anyone if I'm affected."
They stayed in that night, eating the bread and cheese he'd bought, the
sliced meats and wine. Kaushik spent a while uploading images from his camera
onto his Web site, writing captions. She helped him to pack stacks of contact
sheets into boxes for the movers, gather up old photo magazines for the trash. He
showed her a portfolio of pictures he hoped someday might form a book. For the
first time they fell asleep without sex, not for lack of desire but because a
familiarity was growing.
But then she felt him pressing up against her, felt his breath and his lips on
the back of her neck, and she turned to face him, gave him her mouth. He could
be aloof in bed as he could be in general, focusing on some part of her body to
the point of seeming to forget her. But that distance no longer threatened her. It
was only in bed that he uttered her name, the hot word filling her ear. It was a
Saturday night, lingering voices in the piazza giving way to silence and at times
the distant barking of dogs.
"It does affect me," he said afterward as they lay in the dark, awake.
"What?"
"Taking pictures. Not always, but sometimes. Sometimes in ways I don't
like." He lit a cigarette, and then he told her about a day last summer, when he
was driving back from Fre-gene and passed an accident: two cars had collided at

an intersection. A crowd gathered, but the police had not yet arrived. Inside one
of the cars, a child was crying. It turned out that the passengers were not badly
hurt. Kaushik had pulled over, rushed out, but the first thing he'd done was take a
picture. "The first thing," he told Hema. "Before even asking if they were okay."
Three weeks had passed. One evening in December as they were returning
to Giovanna's, Navin called. The phone rang and then Navin left a message on
the answering machine, calling to say hello as Kaushik pressed Hema against the
door and began unbuttoning her jacket, the top of her blouse, uncovering her
breasts and causing the keys to drop from her hands onto the terracotta floor.
From the very beginning she had felt clear-eyed, aware that in a matter of weeks
it would end. In another two weeks everything would be wiped clean-they would
be in different countries, the keys to both Kaushik's and
Giovanna's apartments in the hands of other people. And this knowledge
allowed her once more to step out of her jeans as Navin's voice spoke into the
room. Even the fact that Kaushik had to wear a condom helped to keep him in
his place, reminding her, whenever he paused to rip open the little packet, that in
spite of what they were about to do, they would remain separate. Such thinking
was a consequence of Julian, she knew. She supposed that all those years of
loving a person who was dishonest had taught her a few things.
She told Navin that she was going to travel during her last week in Italy,
another lie to prevent him from contacting her again, and this gave Hema and
Kaushik the idea to take a trip together. They decided to go north, to Volterra, a
town founded by Etruscans, and it was in that austere, forbidding, solitary place
that they spent their remaining days together. They went in Kaushik's car, up the
coast into Tuscany, then cutting through the misted blue Maremma and the white
chalk hills of the Cecina Valley, climbing and descending a thin slip of road.
Volterra appeared in the distance, perched on a cliff high above the open
countryside like an island surrounded by land. The rough, restrained
architecture, the coats of arms and the hard dark walls, were something new for
Hema. The medieval buildings were more recent than the Forum, yet Volterra
felt more remote, impervious to tourists and time. Rome had hidden them,
enabled them, their affair one of thousands, but here she felt singled out,
exposed. She also sensed an indifference; they were among a handful of people
who seemed not to belong to Volterra, and she felt that the people who lived
there were waiting for them, politely but firmly, to pass on.
It was a nearly silent place, apart from the sharp sound of their footsteps,
the insistent coupled notes of the bells, the shriek of the wind. At that great
height the wind was constant, striking their faces and agitating their hair. It was

the week before Christmas, the town discreetly decorated, holly draped over the
antipasti tables in restaurants. They went into the workshops where alabaster was
cut and polished, the translucent material quarried in Volterra for thousands of
years.
It was colder than Rome, a cold that emanated from stone, and instead of
her leather jacket Hema now wore a peacoat of Kaushik's, grateful for the weight
over her shoulders, remembering that other coat of Kaushik's she'd so hated
wearing when she was a girl, back when they were nothing but already
something to each other.
They stayed in a hotel that had once been a convent, slept in the former
quarters of nuns. The food was plainer, bowls of ribollita, bread without salt,
bittersweet hot chocolate in the afternoons. As they ate their meals and rested
their feet from walking, they, too, felt fortified, tranquil, much like the town.
Kaushik took a few photographs, not many, never of Hema, less of the town
itself than the spectacular views it provided, the Carrara Mountains to the north
and the Ligurian Sea distantly gleaming, one cloudless afternoon, thirty miles to
the west. They looked down at the ruins of a Roman amphitheatre, and over the
walls at the Balze, a precipice beneath which the earth had fallen away, once
claiming a church, always threatening to take more of the town. Beneath the
Porta all'Arco, the Etruscan gateway, three featureless blackened heads gazed
down like sentinels upon them, and upon the world they had left behind.
Mainly, because it was so cold, they took refuge in the churches and
museums. They saved the the Guarnacci Etruscan Museum for last, and there
they saw, lined on shelves, hundreds of urns in which the ancient people of
Volterra had stored the ashes of their dead. They were called urns but were more
like little caskets, made of alabaster or terracotta, the lids topped with figures
with large heads and disproportionately small bodies, grotesquely but
indisputably alive. The women were veiled, held fans or pomegranates in their
hands. The sides were covered with carvings showing so many migrations across
land and departures in covered wagons to the underworld, so many fantastic
beasts and fish-tailed gods of the sea. Hema and Kaushik were the only visitors
to the museum that day, alone apart from the heat that hissed from the radiators,
the guards sitting patiently in their folding chairs. In the museum there was
another sarcophagus of a husband and wife. But they were nothing like the
languid, loving pair Hema had seen in Rome. Here they were older, cruder, still
bristling after years of marriage, ill at ease.
After the museum they went to lunch, in a restaurant on Piazza dei Priori
they had already tried and liked. After eating they would drive back to Rome,
and the following day Hema would fly to India. They had checked out of the

hotel that morning, their bags already in the car. The padrone seated them at the
table in the corner where they had sat before. They ordered bruschetta with black
cabbage, soft pappardelle flecked with wild boar. Hema looked at the postcards
she'd bought at the museum, lining them up on the table as they drank the first
glass of wine. One thing they'd seen there had been unlike anything else: a
bronze sculpture of a severely elongated boy's body, a skeleton more than flesh,
standing with his arms at his sides. At the center of the restaurant, at a long
messy table, a slightly raucous group was gathered, mostly men in their thirties
wearing suits.
"An office holiday party," Kaushik explained, after listening for a while to
the conversation. "They work in the bank." He continued listening, then said,
"They have lived here, in each other's company, all their lives. They will die
here."
"I envy them that," Hema said.
"Do you?"
"I've never belonged to any place that way." Kaushik laughed. "You're
complaining to the wrong person."
"What if you hate Hong Kong? Where will you go?"
"I don't know."
"Will you come back to Italy?"
"No."
"Why not?"
He poured more wine into her glass, then his. He leaned forward slightly,
looking at her, then seeming to change his mind about what he wanted to say.
"I've reached an end here, that's all."
The meal ended without conversation, with vin santo and a slice of chestnut
cake. They stepped outside, into the first twilight, for a last look at the town. It
was the hour of the passeg-giata, the older people promenading arm-in-arm
through the streets. The men were with men, women with women, segregated as
Hema's and Kaushik's parents once tended to be at parties. There was a
uniformity to their appearances, their faces and their clothing, the flat woolen
caps on the men's heads, the straight skirts and low-heeled black and navy-blue
shoes of the women. With them, alongside them, were children and
grandchildren, the generations knit casually and fondly together.
"Come with me," Kaushik said.
"Where?"
"To Hong Kong." And then he said, "Don't marry him,
Hema."
She stopped walking. They were on a street of steps, lined with cypress

trees, working their way down. Those behind her in the collective procession
murmured permesso and pressed past. She felt the lurch of a head rush. The boy
who had not paid attention to her; the man who'd embarked on an affair knowing
she could never be his; at the last moment he was asking for more. A piece of
her was elated. But she was also struck by his selfishness, by the fact that he was
telling her what to do. Unlike Navin, he was not offering to come to her.
"Don't answer now," he said, pulling her toward him, guiding her down a
few more steps, his arm around her waist. "Go to India first, straighten things
out. I can wait."
She moved away, upset for the first time by his touch. "It's too late,
Kaushik."
He extended a finger toward her jaw, turned her gently to look at him, into
the tired eyes she had begun to love. His face glowed with affection for her, with
hope, and she knew then that it was not just the wine talking, that he meant what
he'd said. "In a few weeks it will be. Not yet."
He sought her hand again, and they continued walking. They entered a
small piazza where she was aware everywhere of children, boys and girls of five
and seven, eight and ten, swarming around them as if a school had just been
dismissed. She had known Kaushik at that age, she had worn his coat, given him
her bed, dreamed of him kissing her, these facts of the past haunting her and
steadying her at the same time. The Italian children, eager for Christmas's
approach, calling out Buon Natale as they greeted one another, were embracing
in the cold air, their youthful excitement infectious and pure, so much so that
Hema's heart leapt with theirs. In ten years, she imagined, these boys and girls
would begin to fall in love with one another; in another five, their own children
would be at their feet.
On the drive down from Volterra, as the landscape disappeared and they
traveled through the night, she told him. She explained her reasons, reasons that
had nothing to do with Navin. She told Kaushik she was not able to give up her
life, not able to follow him that way. And that she didn't expect it of him. She
said she didn't want to try to change him, didn't want to be accused, one day, of
pinning him down.
"It doesn't mean we can't continue to see each other," she said, afraid to
suggest it, more afraid not to.
"I'm not interested in any sort of arrangement," he said, in the cold tone she
had not heard since they were teenagers. It was the only thing he said during the
drive, until he pulled up in front of Giovanna's apartment in the middle of the
night. Then he said, "You're a coward." She began to cry, unable to control

herself, aware that he would never forgive her for refusing him, that even if she
were to change her mind he had already retracted his invitation. He had told her
not to marry Navin, but he had not asked her to marry him, and Hema knew that
it was not a fair trade. As she cried he sat there, unmoved, as he must have been
when he took his pictures, as he'd been that morning when she was thirteen and
he had uncovered graves in the snow. She realized he had nothing more to say,
that he was only waiting for her to get out of the car. They spent the night apart,
and she did not expect to see him again. But the next morning he called to make
sure she was packed, told her that he'd be there in an hour.
He drove her to Fiumicino and accompanied her to checkin, speaking
Italian on her behalf. He walked her over to Security, kissed her lightly on the
mouth. And then he was gone, leaving her to wipe her tears, to take off her shoes
and empty her pockets of the pretty coins that would soon buy her nothing. She
navigated her way to the gate, riding an air train. She sat by a window, with a
view of Alitalia jets crisscrossing slowly on the tarmac, watching other
passengers, mostly Indians, fill up the seats. She sat alone, flipping though
Italian fashion magazines until the flight was called.
It wasn't until she was on the ramp leading to the plane that she realized
what she'd left behind. Her bangle, the one she never removed, the one Kaushik
had hooked his finger through that first night, drawing her to him. She saw it
now in her mind, sitting in the gray plastic tray she'd placed it in before passing
through the security gate. She turned around, began walking in the opposite
direction, back to the woman who had taken her boarding pass.
"Everyone is being seated now," the woman said in English. "The plane is
about to take off."
"I've left something behind," Hema said. "Jewelry."
The woman looked at her, vaguely interested. "What type of jewels?"
"A bangle," she said. A hand went to her naked wrist.
"You would like us to check where you have been sitting?"
"No." She remembered the ride on the air train, all the shops along the way.
"It's at Security. I went through this morning."
The woman shook her head. The whole time she was doing her job, taking
boarding passes from the other people. "There is no way to reach Security now.
If you like, we send a message."
She went back down the ramp, onto the plane, and found her seat. She
fastened her seat belt, her right arm feeling foreign, missing the sound the bangle
would have made coming into contact with the metal buckle. It would be
replaced tenfold in the course of her wedding. And yet she felt she had left a
piece of her body behind. She had grown up hearing from her mother that losing

gold was inauspicious, and as the plane began to climb, in those moments she
was still aware of it moving, a dark thought passed through her, that it would
crash or be blasted apart in the sky. Then the fear turned numb. Already on the
screen at the center of the plane there was a map with a white line emerging
away from Rome, creeping toward India. And this simple graphic composed her,
making clear the only road available now.
He was in a place where he knew no one. He was staying at a small resort a
little north of Khao Lak, in a one-room thatched bungalow on stilts. This was his
third day on the beach, and already he felt drugged by the routine: getting out of
bed, eating fruit and sticky rolls for breakfast, lying in his swimming trunks on
the hot sand. He glanced at back issues of the magazine where he was about to
work. But mainly he dozed. He had stopped shaving, an uneven beard beginning
to form on his face. The food reminded him a little of his childhood: steaming
rice, dense brown and yellow curries, whole red and green chilies floating in
sauce. Normally he harbored no nostalgia for the particular elements of his
upbringing, adapting to so many cuisines throughout his adult life. But this food
caused him to feel strangely sentimental. His eye distracted him, the shifting
speck visible whenever he happened to remove his sunglasses and confront the
untempered brightness of the day.
The beach faced west, and each evening he ordered a beer and watched the
sun set over the water. The water was calm and shallow, but he preferred
swimming in the pool. There had been an occasion off the coast of Venezuela,
many years ago, when the undertow caused him a genuine struggle, his throat
choking on salt water to the point where he feared he would not make it back. A
neighboring bather lent a hand, but since then he had not swum in the ocean, no
longer trusting it, knowing that his mother, who loved water so much that she
would have swum in a pool of algae, would have scoffed. Behind the beach,
rubber trees rose thickly on the hills. Somewhere across the water, beyond the
Andaman Sea, was the Bay of Bengal, and Calcutta, where Hema was.
On the plane from Italy his anger had dissolved, and now, in Thailand, he
was left only with longing for her. He wondered if he should have brought things
up earlier, wondered if he had sounded halfhearted. He regretted his surliness
when she had refused. She was the only person he'd met in his adult life who had
any understanding of his past, the only woman he wanted to remain connected
to. He didn't want to leave it up to chance to find her again, didn't want to share
her with another man. That last day in Volterra he had searched for a way to tell
her these things. She had not accused him, as Franca had, of his own cowardice,
of his inability to form attachments. But Hema's refusal to accuse him made him
feel worse, and without her he was lost.

There was a Swedish family in the neighboring bungalow, with a boy and a
girl who both sunbathed and swam in their underpants, as if they had forgotten
to pack their swimsuits. The children were tall for their ages; he was startled to
learn, overhearing the mother tell one of the women who served drinks at the
resort, that they were only five and seven. The mother was attractive, with a
lean, freckled face and closely cropped hair, and seemed to wear a new bathing
suit every few hours. In the mornings she would sit at their little round table in
front of the bungalow, peeling fruit, offering pieces of coconut and papaya to the
children, wearing a thin robe that was the color of a watermelon's flesh. While
the children played and chased each other on the sand she sat in a chair and read,
swatting them affectionately with a magazine when they attempted to involve
her in their games. The woman and her husband made an incongruous couple.
The husband was a large man, his skin burnt, straw-blond hair to his shoulders,
hair longer than his wife's, a face like a ham. He spent most of the days sleeping
in a hammock strung up between two trees, straining the knots that held him. As
far as Kaushik could tell, it was just himself and the Swedish family; the third
bungalow at this end of the resort, down a path from the main hotel building,
was empty.
He'd thought about moving around a bit, going down to Phuket after
Christmas, but for now he wasn't inspired to go anywhere else. He'd taken a few
pictures, of the view from his bungalow, longtail boats on the water, the Swedish
children playing on the sand. He felt no inclination to go walking through the
hillside to photograph the shrines or to take a boat to the Similan Islands. In
three days he left the resort only once, walking to a strip of souvenir and dive
shops that bored him. He found an Internet center, considered going inside to see
if Hema had written. Then he remembered that he had not given her his e-mail
address. Instead, he uploaded new pictures onto his Web site: of Volterra, where
Hema had been standing pressed up next to him, her hair flapping in the wind,
strands of it sometimes intruding in front of the lens, and a few pictures of the
Andaman Sea.
He spent Christmas on the beach as he had every other day. The restaurant
at the resort had put up a small fake tree. He had dinner on the patio as a full
moon poured its shimmering light across the water. The Swedish family
occupied the neighboring table, conversing, laughing, eating their meal. The
children's long limbs were dark from the sun. The family had ordered an array of
dishes, were messily picking at a whole curried fish. Kaushik thought of Hema
and anger coursed through him, thinking of her about to enter the world of
marriage, of children, of taking trips and sleeping for the rest of her life with
someone she did not love.

The wife stood up when they were finished, kissed the husband on the
forehead, and took the children away. "Join me for a drink?" the man called out
to Kaushik after they'd gone.
They walked indoors into the air-conditioned bar and ordered whiskey. A
band was setting up to play. The Swedish man, Henrik, worked as a film editor
for a television station in Stockholm. They spoke about the press in Sweden and
Italy, about the war in Iraq. "Our jobs, they are similar," Henrik said. "Our
names, too."
Kaushik nodded.
It was the fourth Christmas the family had spent at this resort, Henrik said.
"The first year, Lars was just a baby." "Your families don't mind?"
"What?"
"Your going to Thailand for Christmas?"
"My wife's parents complain. But we come anyway. They are in
Stockholm, living across the street. My parents are divorced, both remarried."
Henrik shook his big head. "Too many people to see. And you, where is your
family?"
"My mother's dead. My father lives in the United States."
"But you are Indian, no?"
"Yes."
"You live in India?"
"I don't live anywhere at the moment. I'm about to move to Hong Kong."
"Married?" Henrik asked. He shook his head.
"But you are thinking of someone. My wife says so. Missing her."
He had not thought that he had been obvious, that the family had been
paying attention to him. He thought about denying it. "Now and again."
"You will see her soon?"
"No."
Henrik shrugged. "Alone is good, too." He drained his whiskey.
Kaushik's mood darkened. As much as he'd wanted Hema to be with him
now, he knew it would be easier to begin life in Hong Kong alone. He knew
there was nothing for her to do there, that the move would have stripped her of
her work, her world. The band started to play, the stale cover music grating. He
wanted to be alone, to lie down and think. "I'm going to bed," he said.
"Goodnight," Henrik told him. He ordered another whiskey. "One last for
me."
Once more the day was flawless. Kaushik got up, walked over to the
restaurant for breakfast. Henrik was sitting at the bar where Kaushik had left him

the night before, but he was freshly showered, dressed in swimming trunks and a
Hawaiian shirt, drinking coffee, breaking apart his rolls. "You felt your bed
shake this morning?" Kaushik shook his head.
"They said in the hotel, a small earthquake," Henrik said. "Over now."
Whatever had happened, Kaushik had slept through it. He thought back to
the day in El Salvador when he'd taken his first real picture, and the tremor that
had come just before: the stew spilling from its bowls, the young man in
impeccably clean tan trousers lying in a pool of blood on the street.
"There is a shallow coral reef not far from here. Like to come? My wife and
the kids want to buy things in town."
Kaushik looked out at the water. "I'm not a very good swimmer."
Henrik laughed. "Someone else will be doing the swimming for us." He
pointed to a fishing boat resting on the shoreline. "I've arranged for a good price.
When we get there, you can relax while I poke around."
After breakfast they walked over to the boat. The owner, a bare-chested
teenage Thai boy wearing long red shorts, was clearing it of leaves and withered
frangipani petals. Two small lime-colored frogs hopped out, leaping onto the
sand. Henrik scooped up one in each of his large hands and brought them over to
his children, who began chasing the frogs around in circles, their heads bent
toward the ground. The Thai boy began to pull the boat into the water, Kaushik
following, white foam like soap suds hissing around his ankles. He had brought
one of his cameras, wearing it around his neck. Henrik had an extra set of
snorkeling gear, in case Kaushik changed his mind.
They got into the boat, the boy taking his place at the front. On the beach
Henrik's wife raised a thin arm from where she was sitting, gave a lazy wave.
The children looked up briefly as Henrik and Kaushik settled themselves inside.
There was plenty of room on board, and when Henrik called out to his wife and
said something in Swedish, pointing to the empty seats, Kaushik guessed that it
was to ask her and the children to join them. But she replied in the negative,
shaking her head and retreating behind one of her magazines.
He experienced a moment's nervousness because Henrik was so large, but
the boat absorbed their shared weight. The Thai boy lifted his oar and they began
to move. Kaushik felt the swell of the sea beneath the hull, close to his body, not
touching him but penetrating him at the same time. The resort retreated from
view, the bungalows beneath the palms and the darting forms of Henrik's
children turning to specks, the familiar coastline curving away like a flat smiling
beast. The boy spoke a little English, told Henrik about a school of parrotfish
he'd seen the day before. The morning sun was already strong, and after a while
Henrik took off his shirt. Kaushik looked at Henrik's broad pink back, glistening

with sweat. They were skirting an abandoned cove. "It's getting hot," Henrik
said. He tapped the boy on the shoulder. "I take a dip here to cool off."
The boy nodded, rested his oar. Henrik dived over the edge of the boat and
started to swim, his ungainly body turning graceful as it cut through the water
with swift, skillful strokes. And alongside Henrik, for a moment, Kaushik saw
his mother also swimming, saw her body still vital, a brief blur that passed as
effortlessly as the iridescent fish darting from time to time beneath the boat. His
torso cast a shadow into the sea. He thought of the thin bronze sculpture of the
boy he'd seen with Hema in Volterra, in the Etruscan Museum. It was called L'
Ombra della Sera: the Shadow of Evening. But in Khao Lak it was morning, the
sun burning down on Kaushik, his shadow still in proportion to his body.
When he looked up, he saw that the boy had guided them close to shore.
Henrik emerged from the water, waded clumsily toward the deserted cove. The
white sand was spotless, limestone cliffs looming behind. Kaushik lifted the
camera to his face, took a picture, and set the camera down at his feet. He dipped
his hands into the water, cooling off his neck and face, not expecting its salty
taste. Then he unbuttoned his shirt, felt the sun strike his skin. He wanted to
swim to the cove as Hen-rik had, to show his mother he was not afraid. He took
off his sunglasses, leaving them in the boat next to his camera. The speck in his
vision rose and fell, erasing its random trail. He held on to the edge of the boat,
swinging his legs over the side, lowering himself. The sea was as warm and
welcoming as a bath. His feet touched the bottom, and so he let go.

***

All day I was oblivious. I was out with my mother and two aunts, being
fitted for blouses, selecting jewels. We had spent hours on a thin futon, drinking
Cokes and eating mutton rolls, as men in a sari shop unfolded the greater part of
their inventory. I went along with all of it, chose a red Benarasi to wear. But the
whole time I was thinking of you, fearful of the mistake I was making. I was still
slightly jet-lagged, hungry for meals we were used to eating together, for the
taste of good coffee and wine. On the crowded street, walking back to my
parents' flat off Triangular Park, I searched foolishly for your face. "A terrible
thing has happened," the gatekeeper told us when we arrived.
On television, in a pink sitting room with stark fluorescent light, I saw
images of the Indian and Sri Lankan coastline, glimpses from vacationers' video

cameras never intended to capture such a thing. I saw a massive surge of water
moving so quickly that the tape seemed to be playing at an unnatural speed. At
first it was only the damage in South India and Sri Lanka I was aware of, the
fishing villages that had been obliterated, tourists stranded on Vivekananda's
Rock. And then I learned that Thailand had also been hit very badly.
I did not know where you were in Thailand, only that you planned to be on
a beach. I had not asked you the details, thinking, as I prepared to leave you, that
such information would make it worse. The next morning I went to the
newsstand and bought the papers, studying every picture, looking for your name
in one of the credits, hoping you had been lucky and that you had continued to
do your work. I went to an Internet center, drew up your Web site. I saw the last
images you had posted. A faint sliver of the shoreline we had seen from
Volterra. Three blackened faces, supposed to be Etruscan divinities, that loomed
over our heads. And then, scenes of another coast. Two children playing, a
gentle turquoise sea.
At the end of that week, Navin arrived to marry me. I was repulsed by the
sight of him, not because I had betrayed him but because he still breathed,
because he was there for me and had countless more days to live. And yet
without his even realizing it, firmly but without force, Navin pulled me away
from you, as the final gust of autumn wind pulls the last leaves from the trees.
We were married, we were blessed, my hand was placed on top of his, and the
ends of our clothing were knotted together. I felt the weight of each ritual, felt
the ground once more underfoot. Our honeymoon in Goa was canceled. Navin
said it didn't feel right to swim in the polluted waters that surrounded India at
that time.
I returned to my existence, the existence I had chosen instead of you. It was
another winter in Massachusetts, thirty years after you and your parents had first
gone away. In February, Giovanna got in touch to say she had heard the news
from Paola. A small obituary ran in The New York Times. By then I needed no
proof of your absence from the world; I felt it as plainly and implacably as the
cells that were gathering and shaping themselves in my body. Those cold, dark
days I spent in bed, unable to speak, burning with new life but mourning your
death, went unquestioned by Navin, who had already begun to take a quiet pride
in my condition. My mother, who called often from India to check on me, had
heard, too. "Remember the Chaudhuris, the family that once stayed with us?" she
began. It might have been your child but this was not the case. We had been
careful, and you had left nothing behind.
Part I

Chapter 1
East of the Tolly Club, after Deshapran Sashmal Road splits in two, there is a
small mosque. A turn leads to a quiet enclave. A warren of narrow lanes and
modest middle-class homes.
Once, within this enclave, there were two ponds, oblong, side by side. Behind
them was a lowland spanning a few acres.
After the monsoon the ponds would rise so that the embankment built
between them could not be seen. The lowland also filled with rain, three or four
feet deep, the water remaining for a portion of the year.
The flooded plain was thick with water hyacinth. The floating weed grew
aggressively. Its leaves caused the surface to appear solid. Green in contrast to
the blue of the sky.
Simple huts stood here and there along the periphery. The poor waded in to
forage for what was edible. In autumn egrets arrived, their white feathers
darkened by the city’s soot, waiting motionless for their prey.
In the humid climate of Calcutta, evaporation was slow. But eventually the
sun burned off most of the floodwater, exposing damp ground again.
So many times Subhash and Udayan had walked across the lowland. It was a
shortcut to a field on the outskirts of the neighborhood, where they went to play
football. Avoiding puddles, stepping over mats of hyacinth leaves that remained
in place. Breathing the dank air.
Certain creatures laid eggs that were able to endure the dry season. Others
survived by burying themselves in mud, simulating death, waiting for the return
of rain.

Chapter 2
They’d never set foot in the Tolly Club. Like most people in the vicinity, they’d
passed by its wooden gate, its brick walls, hundreds of times.
Until the mid-forties, from behind the wall, their father used to watch horses
racing around the track. He’d watched from the street, standing among the
bettors and other spectators unable to afford a ticket, or to enter the club’s
grounds. But after the Second World War, around the time Subhash and Udayan
were born, the height of the wall was raised, so that the public could no longer
see in.
Bismillah, a neighbor, worked as a caddy at the club. He was a Muslim who
had stayed on in Tollygunge after Partition. For a few paise he sold them golf
balls that had been lost or abandoned on the course. Some were sliced like a gash
in one’s skin, revealing a pink rubbery interior.
At first they hit the dimpled balls back and forth with sticks. Then Bismillah
also sold them a putting iron with a shaft that was slightly bent. A frustrated
player had damaged it, striking it against a tree.
Bismillah showed them how to lean forward, where to place their hands.
Loosely determining the objective of the game, they dug holes in the dirt, and
tried to coax the balls in. Though a different iron was needed to drive the ball
greater distances, they used the putter anyway. But golf wasn’t like football or
cricket. Not a sport the brothers could satisfactorily improvise.
In the dirt of the playing field, Bismillah scratched out a map of the Tolly
Club. He told them that closer to the clubhouse there was a swimming pool,
stables, a tennis court. Restaurants where tea was poured from silver pots,
special rooms for billiards and bridge. Gramophones playing music. Bartenders
in white coats who prepared drinks called pink lady and gin fizz.
The club’s management had recently put up more boundary walls, to keep
intruders away. But Bismillah said that there were still sections of wire fencing
where one might enter, along the western edge.
They waited until close to dusk, when the golfers headed off the course to
avoid the mosquitoes, and retreated to the clubhouse to drink their cocktails.
They kept the plan to themselves, not mentioning it to other boys in the
neighborhood. They walked to the mosque at their corner, its red-and-white

minarets distinct from the surrounding buildings. They turned onto the main road
carrying the putting iron, and two empty kerosene tins.
They crossed to the other side of Technicians’ Studio. They headed toward
the paddy fields where the Adi Ganga once flowed, where the British had once
sailed boats to the delta.
These days it was stagnant, lined with the settlements of Hindus who’d fled
from Dhaka, from Rajshahi, from Chittagong. A displaced population that
Calcutta accommodated but ignored. Since Partition, a decade ago, they had
overwhelmed parts of Tollygunge, the way monsoon rain obscured the lowland.
Some of the government workers had received homes in the exchange
program. But most were refugees, arriving in waves, stripped of their ancestral
land. A rapid trickle, then a flood. Subhash and Udayan remembered them. A
grim procession, a human herd. A few bundles on their heads, infants strapped to
parents’ chests.
They made shelters of canvas or thatch, walls of woven bamboo. They lived
without sanitation, without electricity. In shanties next to garbage heaps, in any
available space.
They were the reason the Adi Ganga, on the banks of which the Tolly Club
stood, was now a sewer canal for Southwest Calcutta. They were the reason for
the club’s additional walls.
Subhash and Udayan found no wire fencing. They stopped at a spot where the
wall was low enough to scale. They were wearing shorts. Their pockets were
stuffed with golf balls. Bismillah said they would find plenty more inside the
club, where the balls lay on the ground, alongside the pods that fell from
tamarind trees.
Udayan flung the putting iron over the wall. Then one of the kerosene tins.
Standing on the remaining tin would give Subhash enough leverage to make it
over. But Udayan was a few inches shorter in those days.
Lace your fingers, Udayan said.
Subhash brought his hands together. He felt the weight of his brother’s foot,
the worn sole of his sandal, then his whole body, bearing down for an instant.
Quickly Udayan hoisted himself up. He straddled the wall.
Should I stand guard on this side while you explore? Subhash asked him.
What fun would that be?
What do you see?
Come see for yourself.
Subhash nudged the kerosene tin closer to the wall. He stepped onto it,

feeling the hollow structure wobble beneath him.
Let’s go, Subhash.
Udayan readjusted himself, dropping down so that only his fingertips were
visible. Then he released his hands and fell. Subhash could hear him breathing
hard from the effort.
You’re all right?
Of course. Now you.
Subhash gripped the wall with his hands, hugging it to his chest, scraping his
knees. As usual he was uncertain whether he was more frustrated by Udayan’s
daring, or with himself for his lack of it. Subhash was thirteen, older by fifteen
months. But he had no sense of himself without Udayan. From his earliest
memories, at every point, his brother was there.
Suddenly they were no longer in Tollygunge. They could hear the traffic
continuing down the street but could no longer see it. They were surrounded by
massive cannonball trees and eucalyptus, bottle-brush and frangipani.
Subhash had never seen such grass, as uniform as a carpet, unfurled over
sloping contours of earth. Undulating like dunes in a desert, or gentle dips and
swells in a sea. It was shorn so finely on the putting green that it felt like moss
when he pressed against it. The ground below was as smooth as a scalp, the
grass appearing a shade lighter there.
He had not seen so many egrets in one place, flying off when he came too
close. The trees threw afternoon shadows on the lawn. Their smooth limbs
divided when he looked up at them, like the forbidden zones of a woman’s body.
They were both giddy from the thrill of trespassing, from the fear of being
caught. But no guard on foot or horseback, no groundsman spotted them. No one
came to chase them away.
They began to relax, discovering a series of flags planted along the course.
The holes were like navels in the earth, fitted with cups, indicating where the
golf balls were supposed to go. There were shallow pits of sand interspersed here
and there. Puddles on the fairway, strangely shaped, like droplets viewed under a
microscope.
They kept far from the main entrance, not venturing toward the clubhouse,
where foreign couples walked arm in arm, or sat on cane chairs under the trees.
From time to time, Bismillah had said, there was a birthday party for the child of
a British family still living in India, with ice cream and pony rides, a cake in
which candles burned. Though Nehru was Prime Minister, it was the new Queen
of England, Elizabeth II, whose portrait presided in the main drawing room.
In their neglected corner, in the company of a water buffalo that had strayed

in, Udayan swung forcefully. Raising his arms over his head, assuming poses,
brandishing the putting iron like a sword. He broke apart the pristine turf, losing
a few golf balls in one of the bodies of water. They searched for replacements in
the rough.
Subhash was the lookout, listening for the approach of horses’ hooves on the
broad red-dirt paths. He heard the taps of a woodpecker. The faint strikes of a
sickle as a section of grass elsewhere in the club was trimmed by hand.
Groups of jackals sat erect in packs, their tawny hides mottled with gray. As
the light dwindled a few began to search for food, their lean forms trotting in
straight lines. Their distraught howling, echoing within the club, signaled that it
was late, time for the brothers to go home.
They left the two kerosene tins, the one on the outside to mark the place.
They made sure to hide the one inside the club behind some shrubbery.
On subsequent visits Subhash collected feathers and wild almonds. He saw
vultures bathing in puddles, spreading their wings to dry.
Once he found an egg that had dropped, intact, from a warbler’s nest.
Carefully he carried it home with him, placing it in a terra-cotta container from a
sweet shop, covering it with twigs. Digging a hole for it in the garden behind
their house, at the base of the mango tree, when the egg did not hatch.
Then one evening, throwing over the putting iron from inside the club, climbing
back over the wall, they noticed that the kerosene tin on the other side was
missing.
Someone took it, Udayan said. He started to search. The light was scant.
Is this what you boys are looking for?
It was a policeman, appearing from nowhere, patrolling the area around the
club.
They could distinguish his height, his uniform. He was holding the tin.
He took a few steps toward them. Spotting the putting iron on the ground, he
picked it up, inspecting it. He set down the tin and switched on a flashlight,
focusing its beam on each of their faces, then down the length of their bodies.
Brothers?
Subhash nodded.
What’s in your pockets?
They removed the golf balls and surrendered them. They watched the
policeman put them in his own pockets. He kept one out, tossing it into the air
and catching it in his hand.

How did you come to acquire these?
They were silent.
Someone invited you today, to play golf at the club?
They shook their heads.
You don’t need me to tell you that these grounds are restricted, the policeman
said. He rested the shaft of the putting iron lightly against Subhash’s arm.
Was today your first visit?
No.
Was this your idea? Aren’t you old enough to know better?
It was my idea, Udayan said.
You have a loyal brother, the policeman said to Subhash. Wanting to protect
you. Willing to take the blame.
I’ll do you a favor this time, he continued. I won’t mention it to the Club. As
long as you don’t intend to try it again.
We won’t return, Subhash said.
Very well. Shall I escort you home to your parents, or should we conclude
our conversation here?
Here.
Turn around, then. Only you.
Subhash faced the wall.
Take another step.
He felt the steel shaft striking his haunches, then the backs of his legs. The
force of the second blow, only an instant of contact, brought him to his hands
and knees. It would take some days for the welts to go down.
Their parents had never beaten them. He felt nothing at first, only numbness.
Then a sensation that was like boiling water tossed from a pan against his skin.
Stop it, Udayan shouted to the policeman. He crouched next to Subhash,
throwing an arm across his shoulders, attempting to shield him.
Together, pressed against one another, they braced themselves. Their heads
were lowered, their eyes closed, Subhash still reeling from pain. But nothing
more happened. They heard the sound of the putting iron being tossed over the
wall, landing a final time inside the club. Then the policeman, who wanted
nothing more to do with them, retreating.

Chapter 3
Since childhood Subhash had been cautious. His mother never had to run after
him. He kept her company, watching as she cooked at the coal stove, or
embroidered saris and blouse pieces commissioned by a ladies’ tailor in the
neighborhood. He helped his father plant the dahlias that he grew in pots in the
courtyard. The blooming orbs, violet and orange and pink, were sometimes
tipped with white. Their vibrancy was shocking against the drab courtyard walls.
He waited for chaotic games to end, for shouts to subside. His favorite
moments were when he was alone, or felt alone. Lying in bed in the morning,
watching sunlight flickering like a restless bird on the wall.
He put insects under a domed screen to observe them. At the edges of the
ponds in the neighborhood, where his mother sometimes washed dishes if the
maid happened not to come, he cupped his hands in turbid water, searching for
frogs. He lives in his own world, relatives at large gatherings, unable to solicit a
reaction from him, sometimes said.
While Subhash stayed in clear view, Udayan was disappearing: even in their
two-room house, when he was a boy, he hid compulsively, under the bed, behind
the doors, in the crate where winter quilts were stored.
He played this game without announcing it, spontaneously vanishing,
sneaking into the back garden, climbing into a tree, forcing their mother, when
she called and he did not answer, to stop what she was doing. As she looked for
him, as she humored him and called his name, Subhash saw the momentary
panic in her face, that perhaps she would not find him.
When they were old enough, when they were permitted to leave the house,
they were told not to lose sight of one another. Together they wandered down
the winding lanes of the enclave, behind the ponds and across the lowland, to the
playing field where they sometimes met up with other boys. They went to the
mosque at the corner, to sit on the cool of its marble steps, sometimes listening
to a football game on someone’s radio, the guardian of the mosque never
minding.
Eventually they were allowed to leave the enclave, and to enter the greater
city. To walk as far as their legs would carry them, to board trams and busses by
themselves. Still the mosque on the corner, a place of worship for those of a

separate faith, oriented their daily comings and goings.
At one point, because Udayan suggested it, they began to linger outside
Technicians’ Studio, where Satyajit Ray had shot Pather Panchali, where
Bengali cinema stars spent their days. Now and then, because someone who
knew them was employed on the shoot, they were ushered in amid the tangle of
cables and wires, the glaring lights. After the call for silence, after the board was
clapped, they watched the director and his crew taking and retaking a single
scene, perfecting a handful of lines. A day’s work, devoted to a moment’s
entertainment.
They caught sight of beautiful actresses as they emerged from their dressing
rooms, shielded by sunglasses, stepping into waiting cars. Udayan was the one
brave enough to ask them for autographs. He was blind to self-constraints, like
an animal incapable of perceiving certain colors. But Subhash strove to
minimize his existence, as other animals merged with bark or blades of grass.
In spite of their differences one was perpetually confused with the other, so
that when either name was called both were conditioned to answer. And
sometimes it was difficult to know who had answered, given that their voices
were nearly indistinguishable. Sitting over the chessboard they were mirror
images: one leg bent, the other splayed out, chins propped on their knees.
They were similar enough in build to draw from a single pile of clothes. Their
complexions, a light coppery compound derived from their parents, were
identical. Their double-jointed fingers, the sharp cut of their features, the wavy
texture of their hair.
Subhash wondered if his placid nature was regarded as a lack of
inventiveness, perhaps even a failing, in his parents’ eyes. His parents did not
have to worry about him and yet they did not favor him. It became his mission to
obey them, given that it wasn’t possible to surprise or impress them. That was
what Udayan did.
In the courtyard of their family’s house was the most enduring legacy of
Udayan’s transgressions. A trail of his footprints, created the day the dirt surface
was paved. A day they’d been instructed to remain indoors until it had set.
All morning they’d watched the mason preparing the concrete in a
wheelbarrow, spreading and smoothing the wet mixture with his tools. Twentyfour hours, the mason had warned them, before leaving.
Subhash had listened. He had watched through the window, he had not gone
out. But when their mother’s back was turned, Udayan ran down the long
wooden plank temporarily set up to get from the door to the street.
Halfway across the plank he lost his balance, the evidence of his path forming

impressions of the soles of his feet, tapering like an hourglass at the center, the
pads of the toes disconnected.
The following day the mason was called back. By then the surface had dried,
and the impressions left by Udayan’s feet were permanent. The only way to
repair the flaw was to apply another layer. Subhash wondered whether this time
his brother had gone too far.
But to the mason their father said, Leave it be. Not for the expense or effort
involved, but because he believed it was wrong to erase steps that his son had
taken.
And so the imperfection became a mark of distinction about their home.
Something visitors noticed, the first family anecdote that was told.
Subhash might have started school a year earlier. But for the sake of
convenience—also because Udayan protested at the notion of Subhash going
without him—they were put into the same class at the same time. A Bengali
medium school for boys from ordinary families, beyond the tram depot, past the
Christian Cemetery.
In matching notebooks they summarized the history of India, the founding of
Calcutta. They drew maps to learn the geography of the world.
They learned that Tollygunge had been built on reclaimed land. Centuries
ago, when the Bay of Bengal’s current was stronger, it had been a swamp dense
with mangroves. The ponds and the paddy fields, the lowland, were remnants of
this.
As part of their life-science lesson they drew pictures of mangrove trees.
Their tangled roots above the waterline, their special pores for obtaining air.
Their elongated seedlings, called propagules, shaped like cigars.
They learned that if the propagules dropped at low tide they reproduced
alongside the parents, spearing themselves in brackish marsh. But at high water
they drifted from their source of origin, for up to a year, before maturing in a
suitable environment.
The English started clearing the waterlogged jungle, laying down streets. In
1770, beyond the southern limits of Calcutta, they established a suburb whose
first population was more European than Indian. A place where spotted deer
roamed, and kingfishers darted across the horizon.
Major William Tolly, for whom the area was named, excavated and desilted a
portion of the Adi Ganga, which came also to be known as Tolly’s Nullah. He’d
made shipping trade possible between Calcutta and East Bengal.

The grounds of the Tolly Club had originally belonged to Richard Johnson, a
chairman of the General Bank of India. In 1785, he’d built a Palladian villa.
He’d imported foreign trees to Tollygunge, from all over the subtropical world.
In the early nineteenth century, on Johnson’s estate, the British East India
Company imprisoned the widows and sons of Tipu Sultan, the ruler of Mysore,
after Tipu was killed in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War.
The deposed family was transplanted from Srirangapatna, in the distant
southwest of India. After their release, they were granted plots in Tollygunge to
live on. And as the English began to shift back to the center of Calcutta,
Tollygunge became a predominantly Muslim town.
Though Partition had turned Muslims again into a minority, the names of so
many streets were the legacy of Tipu’s displaced dynasty: Sultan Alam Road,
Prince Bakhtiar Shah Road, Prince Golam Mohammad Shah Road, Prince
Rahimuddin Lane.
Golam Mohammad had built the great mosque at Dharmatala in his father’s
memory. For a time he’d been permitted to live in Johnson’s villa. But by 1895,
when a Scotsman named William Cruickshank stumbled across it on horseback,
looking for his lost dog, the great house was abandoned, colonized by civets,
sheathed in vines.
Thanks to Cruickshank the villa was restored, and a country club was
established in its place. Cruickshank was named the first president. It was for the
British that the city’s tramline was extended so far south in the early 1930s. It
was to facilitate their journey to the Tolly Club, to escape the city’s commotion,
and to be among their own.
In high school the brothers studied optics and forces, the atomic numbers of the
elements, the properties of light and sound. They learned about Hertz’s
discovery of electromagnetic waves, and Marconi’s experiments with wireless
transmissions. Jagadish Chandra Bose, a Bengali, in a demonstration in
Calcutta’s town hall, had shown that electromagnetic waves could ignite
gunpowder, and cause a bell to ring from a distance.
Each evening, at opposite sides of a metal study table, they sat with their
textbooks, copybooks, pencils and erasers, a chess game that would be in
progress at the same time. They stayed up late, working on equations and
formulas. It was quiet enough at night to hear the jackals howling in the Tolly
Club. At times they were still awake when the crows began quarreling in near
unison, signaling the start of another day.
Udayan wasn’t afraid to contradict their teachers about hydraulics, about plate

tectonics. He gesticulated to illustrate his points, to emphasize his opinions, the
interplay of his hands suggesting that molecules and particles were within his
grasp. At times he was asked by their Sirs to step outside the room, told that he
was holding up his classmates, when in fact he’d moved beyond them.
At a certain point a tutor was hired to prepare them for their college entrance
exams, their mother taking in extra sewing to offset the expense. He was a
humorless man, with palsied eyelids, held open with clips on his glasses. He
could not keep them open otherwise. Every evening he came to the house to
review wave-particle duality, the laws of refraction and reflection. They
memorized Fermat’s principle: The path traversed by light in passing between
two points is that which will take the least time.
After studying basic circuitry, Udayan familiarized himself with the wiring
system of their home. Acquiring a set of tools, he figured out how to repair
defective cords and switches, to knot wires, to file away the rust that
compromised the contact points of the table fan. He teased their mother for
always wrapping her finger in the material of her sari because she was terrified
to touch a switch with her bare skin.
When a fuse blew, Udayan, wearing a pair of rubber slippers, never flinching,
would check the resistors and unscrew the fuses, while Subhash, holding the
flashlight, stood to one side.
One day, coming home with a length of wire, Udayan set about installing a
buzzer for the house, for the convenience of visitors. He mounted a transformer
on the fuse box, and a black button to push by the main door. Hammering a hole
in the wall, he fed the new wires through.
Once the buzzer was installed, Udayan said they should use it to practice
Morse code. Finding a book about telegraphy at a library, he wrote out two
copies of the dots and dashes that corresponded to the letters of the alphabet, one
for each of them to consult.
A dash was three times as long as a dot. Each dot or dash was followed by
silence. There were three dots between letters, seven dots between words. They
identified themselves simply by initial. The letter s, which Marconi had received
across the Atlantic Ocean, was three quick dots. U was two dots and a dash.
They took turns, one of them standing by the door, the other inside, signaling
to one another, deciphering words. They got good enough to send coded
messages that their parents couldn’t understand. Cinema, one of them would
suggest. No, tram depot, cigarettes.
They concocted scenarios, pretending to be soldiers or spies in distress.
Covertly communicating from a mountain pass in China, a Russian forest, a cane

field in Cuba.
Ready?
Clear.
Coordinates?
Unknown.
Survivors?
Two.
Losses?
Pressing the buzzer, they would tell each other that they were hungry, that
they should play football, that a pretty girl had just passed by the house. It was
their private back-and-forth, the way two players passed a ball between them as
they advanced together toward the goal. If one of them saw their tutor
approaching, they pressed SOS. Three dots, three dashes, three dots again.
They were admitted to two of the city’s best colleges. Udayan would go to
Presidency to study physics. Subhash, for chemical engineering, to Jadavpur.
They were the only boys in their neighborhood, the only students from their
unremarkable high school, to have done so well.
To celebrate, their father went to the market, bringing back cashews and
rosewater for pulao, half a kilo of the most expensive prawns. Their father had
started working at nineteen to help support his family. Not having a college
degree was his sole regret. He had a clerical position with the Indian Railways.
As word spread of his sons’ success, he said he could no longer step outside the
house without being stopped and congratulated.
It had had nothing to do with him, he told these people. His sons had worked
hard, they’d distinguished themselves. What they’d accomplished, they’d
accomplished on their own.
Asked what they wanted as a gift, Subhash suggested a marble chess set to
replace the worn wooden pieces they’d always had. But Udayan wanted a
shortwave radio. He wanted more news of the world than what came through
their parents’ old valve radio, encased in its wooden cabinet, or what was printed
in the daily Bengali paper, rolled slim as a twig, thrown over the courtyard wall
in the mornings.
They put it together themselves, searching in New Market, in junk shops,
finding parts from Indian Army surplus. They followed a set of complicated
instructions, a worn-out circuit diagram. They laid out the pieces on the bed: the
chassis, the capacitors, the various resistors, the speaker. Soldering the wires,

working together on the task. When it was finally assembled, it looked like a
little suitcase, with a squared-off handle. Made of metal, bound in black.
The reception was often better in winter than in summer. Generally better at
night. This was when the sun’s photons weren’t breaking up molecules in the
ionosphere. When positive and negative particles in the air quickly recombined.
They took turns sitting by the window, holding the receiver in their hands, in
various positions, adjusting the antenna, manipulating two controls at once.
Rotating the tuning dial as slowly as possible, they grew familiar with the
frequency bands.
They searched for any foreign signal. News bulletins from Radio Moscow,
Voice of America, Radio Peking, the BBC. They heard arbitrary information,
snippets from thousands of miles away, emerging from great thickets of
interference that tossed like an ocean, that wavered like a wind. Weather
conditions over Central Europe, folk songs from Athens, a speech by Abdel
Nasser. Reports in languages they could only guess at: Finnish, Turkish, Korean,
Portuguese.
It was 1964. The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution authorized America to use
military force against North Vietnam. There was a military coup in Brazil.
In Calcutta Charulata was released in cinema halls. Another wave of riots
between Muslims and Hindus killed over one hundred people after a relic was
stolen from a mosque in Srinagar. Among the communists in India there was
dissent over the border war with China two years before. A breakaway group,
sympathetic to China, called itself the Communist Party of India, Marxist: the
CPI(M).
Congress was still running the central government in Delhi. After Nehru died
of a heart attack that spring his daughter, Indira, entered the cabinet. Within two
years, she would become the Prime Minister.
In the mornings, now that Subhash and Udayan were beginning to shave, they
held up a hand mirror and a pan of warm water for one another in the courtyard.
After plates of steaming rice and dal and matchstick potatoes they walked to the
mosque at the corner, leaving their enclave behind. They continued together
down the busy main road, as far as the tram depot, then boarded different busses
to their colleges.
On separate sides of the city, they made different friends, mixing with boys
who’d gone to English medium schools. Though some of their science courses
were similar, they took exams on different schedules, studying with different
professors, running different experiments in their labs.

Because Udayan’s campus was farther away, it took him longer to get home.
Because he started to befriend students from North Calcutta, the chessboard
stood neglected on the study table, so that Subhash started to play against
himself. Still, each day of his life began and ended with Udayan beside him.
One evening in the summer of 1966, on the shortwave, they listened to
England play Germany in the World Cup at Wembley. It was the famous final,
the ghost goal that was to be disputed for years. They took notes as the lineup
was announced, diagramming the formation on a sheet of paper. They trailed
their index fingers to mimic the moves being relayed, as if the bed were the
playing field.
Germany scored first; in the eighteenth minute came Geoff Hurst’s equalizer.
Toward the end of the second half, with England leading two to one, Udayan
turned off the radio.
What are you doing?
Improving the reception.
It’s good enough. We’re missing the end of the match.
It’s not over.
Udayan reached under the mattress, which was where they stashed their odds
and ends. Notebooks, compasses and rulers, razor blades to sharpen their
pencils, sports magazines. The instructions for putting the radio together. Some
spare nuts and bolts, the screwdriver and pliers they’d needed for the task.
Using the screwdriver, he started taking the radio apart again.
The wiring to one of the coils or switches must be loose, he said.
You need to fix that now?
He didn’t stop to answer. He’d already removed the cover, his nimble fingers
unthreading the screws.
It took us days to put that together, Subhash said.
I know what I’m doing.
Udayan isolated the chassis, realigning some wires. Then he put the receiver
back together again.
The game was still going on, the crackle less distracting. While Udayan had
been fiddling with the radio, Germany had scored late in the second half, to force
overtime.
Then they heard Hurst score again for England. The ball had hit the underside
of the crossbar, and bounced down over the line. When the referee gave him the
goal, the German team immediately contested. Everything came to a halt as the
referee consulted with a Soviet linesman. The goal stood.

England’s won it, Udayan said.
There were still some minutes left, Germany desperate to tie. But Udayan was
right, Hurst even scored a fourth goal at the end of the match. And by then the
English spectators, triumphant before the final whistle, were already spilling
onto the field.

Chapter 4
In 1967, in the papers and on All India Radio, they started hearing about
Naxalbari. It was a place they’d never heard of before.
It was one of a string of villages in the Darjeeling District, a narrow corridor
at the northern tip of West Bengal. Tucked into the foothills of the Himalayas,
nearly four hundred miles from Calcutta, closer to Tibet than to Tollygunge.
Most of the villagers were tribal peasants who worked on tea plantations and
large estates. For generations they’d lived under a feudal system that hadn’t
substantially changed.
They were manipulated by wealthy landowners. They were pushed off fields
they’d cultivated, denied revenue from crops they’d grown. They were preyed
upon by moneylenders. Deprived of subsistence wages, some died from lack of
food.
That March, when a sharecropper in Naxalbari tried to plough land from
which he’d been illegally evicted, his landlord sent thugs to beat him. They took
away his plough and bullock. The police had refused to intervene.
After this, groups of sharecroppers began retaliating. They started burning
deeds and records that cheated them. Forcibly occupying land.
It wasn’t the first instance of peasants in the Darjeeling District revolting. But
this time their tactics were militant. Armed with primitive weapons, carrying red
flags, shouting Long Live Mao Tse-tung.
Two Bengali communists, Charu Majumdar and Kanu Sanyal, were helping
to organize what was happening. They’d been raised in towns close to Naxalbari.
They’d met in prison. They were younger than most of the communist leadership
in India—men who’d been born in the late 1800s. Majumdar and Sanyal were
contemptuous of those leaders. They were dissidents of the CPI(M).
They were demanding ownership rights for sharecroppers. They were telling
peasants to till for themselves.
Charu Majumdar was a college dropout from a landowning family, a lawyer’s
son. In the papers there were pictures of a frail man with a bony face, a hooked
nose, bushy hair. He was an asthmatic, a Marxist-Leninist theoretician. Some of
the senior communists called him a madman. At the time of the uprising, though
not yet fifty, he was suffering a heart ailment, confined to his bed.

Kanu Sanyal was a disciple of Majumdar’s, in his thirties. He was a Brahmin
who’d learned the tribal dialects. He refused to own property. He was devoted to
the rural poor.
As the rebellion spread, the police started patrolling the area. Imposing
undeclared curfews, making arbitrary arrests.
The state government in Calcutta appealed to Sanyal. They were hoping he’d
get the peasants to surrender. At first, assured that he wouldn’t be arrested, he
met with the land revenue minister. He promised a negotiation. At the last
minute he backed out.
In May it was reported that a group of peasants, male and female, attacked a
police inspector with bows and arrows, killing him. The next day the local police
force encountered a rioting crowd on the road. An arrow struck one of the
sergeants in the arm, and the crowd was told to disband. When it didn’t, the
police fired. Eleven people were killed. Eight of them were women.
At night, after listening to the radio, Subhash and Udayan talked about what was
unfolding. Secretly smoking after their parents had gone to bed, sitting at the
study table, with an ashtray between them.
Do you think it was worth it? Subhash asked. What the peasants did?
Of course it was worth it. They rose up. They risked everything. People with
nothing. People those in power do nothing to protect.
But will it make a difference? What good are bows and arrows against a
modern state?
Udayan pressed his fingertips together, as if to clasp a few grains of rice. If
you were born into that life, what would you do?
Like so many, Udayan blamed the United Front, the left-wing coalition led by
Ajoy Mukherjee that was now running West Bengal. Earlier in the year both he
and Subhash had celebrated its victory. It had put communists into the cabinet. It
had promised to establish a government based on workers and peasants. It had
pledged to abolish large-scale landholdings. In West Bengal, it had brought
nearly two decades of Congress leadership to an end.
But the United Front hadn’t backed the rebellion. Instead, in the face of
dissent, Jyoti Basu, the home minister, had called in the police. And now Ajoy
Mukherjee had blood on his hands.
The Peking People’s Daily accused the West Bengal government of bloody
suppression of revolutionary peasants. Spring Thunder Over India, its headline
read. In Calcutta all the papers carried the story. On the streets, on college

campuses, demonstrations broke out, defending the peasants, protesting the
killings. At Presidency College, and at Jadavpur, Subhash and Udayan saw
banners hanging from the windows of certain buildings, in support of Naxalbari.
They heard speeches calling for state officials to resign.
In Naxalbari the conflict only intensified. There were reports of banditry and
looting. Peasants setting up parallel administrations. Landowners being abducted
and killed.
In July the Central Government banned the carrying of bows and arrows in
Naxalbari. The same week, authorized by the West Bengal cabinet, five hundred
officers and men raided the region. They searched the mud huts of the poorest
villagers. They captured unarmed insurgents, killing them if they refused to
surrender. Ruthlessly, systematically, they brought the rebellion to its heels.
Udayan sprang up from the chair where he’d been sitting, pushing a pile of
books and papers away from him in disgust. He switched off the radio. He
started to pace the room, looking down at the floor, running his fingers through
his hair.
Are you all right? Subhash asked him.
Udayan stood still. Shaking his head, resting a hand on his hip. For a moment
he was speechless. The report had shocked them both, but Udayan was reacting
as if it were a personal affront, a physical blow.
People are starving, and this is their solution, he eventually said. They turn
victims into criminals. They aim guns at people who can’t shoot back.
He unlatched the door of their bedroom.
Where are you going?
I don’t know. I need to take a walk. How could it have come to this?
Sounds like it’s over in any case, Subhash said.
Udayan paused before leaving. This could only be the beginning, he said.
The beginning of what?
Something bigger. Something else.
Udayan quoted what the Chinese press had predicted: The spark in Darjeeling
will start a prairie fire and will certainly set the vast expanses of India ablaze.
By autumn Sanyal and Majumdar had both gone into hiding. It was the same
autumn Che Guevara was executed in Bolivia, his hands cut off to prove his
death.
In India journalists started publishing their own periodicals. Liberation in
English, Deshabrati in Bengali. They reproduced articles from Chinese

Communist magazines. Udayan began bringing them home.
This rhetoric is nothing new, their father said, leafing through a copy. Our
generation read Marx, too.
Your generation didn’t solve anything, Udayan said.
We built a nation. We’re independent. The country is ours.
It’s not enough. Where did it get us? Who has it helped?
These things take time.
Their father dismissed Naxalbari. He said young people were getting excited
over nothing. That the whole thing had been a matter of fifty-two days.
No, Baba. The United Front thinks it’s won, but it’s failed. Look at what’s
happening.
What is happening?
People are reacting. Naxalbari is an inspiration. It’s an impetus for change.
I’ve already lived through change in this country, their father said. I know
what it takes for one system to replace another. Not you.
But Udayan persisted. He started challenging their father the way he used to
challenge their teachers at school. If he was so proud that India was independent,
why hadn’t he protested the British at the time? Why had he never joined a labor
union? Given that he voted communist in elections, why had he never taken a
stand?
Both Subhash and Udayan knew the answer. Because their father was a
government employee, he was barred from joining any party or union. During
Independence he was forbidden to speak out; those were the terms of his job.
Though some ignored the rules, their father had never taken such risks.
It was for our sake. He was being responsible, Subhash said.
But Udayan didn’t see it that way.
Among Udayan’s physics texts there were now other books he was studying.
They were marked up with little scraps of paper. The Wretched of the Earth.
What Is to Be Done? A book sheathed in a red plastic cover, hardly larger than a
deck of cards, containing aphorisms of Mao.
When Subhash asked where he was getting the money to buy these materials,
Udayan said they were common property, circulated among a group of boys at
Presidency with whom he’d been growing friendly.
Under the mattress Udayan stored some pamphlets he’d obtained, written by
Charu Majumdar. Most of them had been written before the Naxalbari uprising,
while Majumdar was in prison. Our Tasks in the Present Situation. Take This

Opportunity. What Possibility the Year 1965 Is Indicating?
One day, needing a break from his studies, Subhash reached under the
mattress. The essays were brief, bombastic. Majumdar said India had turned into
a nation of beggars and foreigners. The reactionary government of India has
adopted the tactics of killing the masses; they are killing them through
starvation, with bullets.
He accused India of turning to the United States to solve its problems. He
accused the United States of turning India into its pawn. He accused the Soviet
Union of supporting India’s ruling class.
He called for the building of a secret party. He called for cadres in the
villages. He compared the method of active resistance to the fight for civil rights
in the United States.
Throughout the essays, he invoked the example of China. If we can realize
the truth that the Indian revolution will invariably take the form of civil war, the
tactic of area-wise seizure of power can be the only tactic.
You think it can work? Subhash asked Udayan one day. What Majumdar is
proposing?
They’d both just finished sitting for the last of their college exams. They were
cutting through the neighborhood, going to play football with some of their old
school friends.
Before heading toward the field they’d gone to the corner, so that Udayan
could buy a newspaper. He’d folded it to an article pertaining to Naxalbari,
absorbed by it as they walked.
They proceeded down the curving walled-off lanes, passing people who’d
watched them grow up. The two ponds were calm and green. The lowland was
still flooded, so they had to skirt around it instead of across.
At one point Udayan stopped, taking in the ramshackle huts that surrounded
the lowland, the bright water hyacinth that teemed on its surface.
It’s already worked, he replied. Mao changed China.
India isn’t China.
No. But it could be, Udayan said.
Now if they happened to pass the Tolly Club together on their way to or from
the tram depot, Udayan called it an affront. People still filled slums all over the
city, children were born and raised on the streets. Why were a hundred acres
walled off for the enjoyment of a few?
Subhash remembered the imported trees, the jackals, the bird cries. The golf
balls heavy in their pockets, the undulating green of the course. He remembered

Udayan going over the wall first, challenging him to follow. Crouching on the
ground the last evening they were there, trying to shield him.
But Udayan said that golf was the pastime of the comprador bourgeoisie. He
said the Tolly Club was proof that India was still a semicolonial country,
behaving as if the British had never left.
He pointed out that Che, who had worked as a caddy on a golf course in
Argentina, had come to the same conclusion. That after the Cuban revolution
getting rid of the golf courses was one of the first things Castro had done.

Chapter 5
By early 1968, in the face of increasing opposition, the United Front government
collapsed, and West Bengal was placed under President’s Rule.
The education system was also in crisis. It was an outdated pedagogy, at odds
with India’s reality. It taught the young to ignore the needs of common people.
This was the message radical students started to spread.
Echoing Paris, echoing Berkeley, exams were boycotted throughout Calcutta,
diplomas torn up. Students called out during convocation addresses, disrupting
the speakers. They said campus administrations were corrupt. They barricaded
vice-chancellors in their offices, refusing them food and water until their
demands were met.
In spite of the unrest, encouraged by professors, both brothers began
postgraduate studies, Udayan at Calcutta University, Subhash continuing on at
Jadavpur. They were expected to fulfill their potential, to support their parents
one day.
Udayan’s schedule turned more erratic. One night when he did not return for
dinner, their mother kept his food waiting in the corner of the kitchen, under a
plate. When she asked, in the morning, why he hadn’t eaten what she’d set aside,
he told her he’d eaten at the home of a friend.
When he was gone, there was no talk during mealtimes of how the Naxalbari
movement was spreading to other parts of West Bengal, also to some other parts
of India. No discussion about the guerillas active in Bihar, in Andhra Pradesh.
Subhash gathered that Udayan turned to others now, with whom he could talk
freely about these things.
Without Udayan they ate in silence, without strife, as their father preferred.
Though Subhash missed his brother’s company, at times it came as a relief to sit
down at the study table by himself.
When Udayan was at home, odd hours, he turned on the short-wave.
Dissatisfied by official reports, he found secret broadcasts from stations in
Darjeeling, in Siliguri. He listened to broadcasts from Radio Peking. Once, just
as the sun was rising, he succeeded in transporting Mao’s distorted voice,
interrupted by bursts of static, addressing the people of China, to Tollygunge.

Because Udayan invited him, because he was curious, Subhash went with him
one evening to a meeting, in a neighborhood in North Calcutta. The small smoky
room was filled mostly with students. There was a portrait of Lenin, wrapped in
plastic, hanging on a mint-green plaster wall. But the mood in the room was antiMoscow, pro-Peking.
Subhash had pictured a raucous debate. But the meeting was orderly, run like
a study session. A wispy-haired medical student named Sinha assumed the role
of professor. The others were taking notes. One by one they were called upon to
prove their familiarity with events in Chinese history, tenets of Mao.
They distributed the latest copies of Deshabrati and Liberation. There was an
update on the insurgency at Srikakulam. One hundred villages across two
hundred mountainous miles, falling under Marxist sway.
Peasant rebels were creating strongholds where no policeman dared enter.
Landowners were fleeing. There were reports of families burned to death in their
sleep, their heads displayed on stakes. Vengeful slogans painted in blood.
Sinha spoke quietly. Sitting at a table, ruminating, his fingers clasped.
A year has passed since Naxalbari, and the CPI(M) continues to betray us.
They have disgraced the red banner. They have flaunted the good name of Marx.
The CPI(M), the policies of the Soviet Union, the reactionary government of
India, all amount to the same thing. They are lackeys of the United States. These
are the four mountains we must seek to overthrow.
The objective of the CPI(M) is maintaining power. But our objective is the
formation of a just society. The creation of a new party is essential. If history is
to take a step forward, the parlor game of parliamentary politics must end.
The room was silent. Subhash saw Udayan hanging on Sinha’s words.
Riveted, just as he used to look listening to a football match on the radio.
Though Subhash was also present, though he sat beside Udayan, he felt
invisible. He wasn’t convinced that an imported ideology could solve India’s
problems. Though a spark had been lit a year ago, he didn’t think a revolution
would necessarily follow.
He wondered if it was a lack of courage, or of imagination, that prevented
him from believing in it. If the deficits he’d always been conscious of were what
prevented him from sharing his brother’s political faith.
He remembered the silly signals he and Udayan used to send to one another,
pressing the buzzer, making each other laugh. He didn’t know how to respond to
the message Sinha was transmitting, which Udayan so readily received.

Under their bed, against the wall, there was a can of red paint and a brush that
had not been there before. Beneath their mattress Subhash found a folded piece
of paper containing a list of slogans, copied out in Udayan’s hand. China’s
Chairman is our Chairman! Down with elections! Our path is the path of
Naxalbari!
The walls of the city were turning thick with them now. The walls of campus
buildings, the high walls of the film studios. The lower walls flanking the lanes
of their enclave.
One night, Subhash heard Udayan come into the house and go straight to the
bathroom. He heard the sound of water hitting the floor. Subhash was sitting at
the study table. Udayan pushed the can of paint beneath their bed.
Subhash closed his notebook, replaced the cap on his pen. What were you
doing just now?
Rinsing off.
Udayan crossed the room and sat in a chair by the window. He was wearing
white cotton pajamas. His skin was damp, the hair dark on his chest. He put a
cigarette to his lips and slid open a matchbox. It took him a few strikes to light
the match.
You were painting slogans? Subhash asked him.
The ruling class puts its propaganda everywhere. Why should they be allowed
to influence people and no one else?
What happens if the police catch you?
They won’t.
He turned on the radio. If we don’t stand up to a problem, we contribute to it,
Subhash.
After a pause he added, Come with me tomorrow, if you want.
Again Subhash was the lookout. Again alert to every sound.
They crossed a wooden bridge that spanned a narrow section of Tolly’s
Nullah. It was a neighborhood considered remote when they were younger,
where they’d been told not to wander.
Subhash held the flashlight. He illuminated a section of the wall. It was close
to midnight. They’d told their parents that they were going to a late show of a
film.
He stood close. He held his breath. The pond frogs were calling, monotonous,
insistent.
He watched as Udayan dipped the paintbrush into the can. He was writing, in

English, Long live Naxalbari!
Quickly Udayan formed the letters of the slogan. But his hand was unsteady,
adding to the challenge. Subhash had noticed this previously, in recent weeks—
an occasional tremor as his brother adjusted the radio dial, or framed the air in
front of his face in the course of saying something, or turned the pages of the
newspaper.
Subhash remembered climbing over the wall of the Tolly Club. This time,
Subhash wasn’t afraid of being caught. Perhaps it was foolish of him, but
something told him that such a thing could happen only once. And he was right,
no one noticed what they did, no one punished them for it, and a few minutes
later they were crossing the bridge again, quickly, smoking cigarettes to calm
themselves down.
This time it was only Udayan who was giddy. Only Udayan who was proud
of what they’d done.
Subhash was angry with himself for going along with it. For still needing to
prove he could.
He was sick of the fear that always rose up in him: that he would cease to
exist, and that he and Udayan would cease to be brothers, were Subhash to resist
him.
After their studies ended, the brothers were among so many others in their
generation, overqualified and unemployed. They began tutoring to bring in
money, contributing their earnings to the household. Udayan found a job
teaching science at a technical high school close to Tollygunge. He seemed
satisfied with an ordinary occupation. He was indifferent to building up a career.
Subhash decided to apply to a few Ph.D. programs in the United States.
Immigration laws had changed, making it easier for Indian students to enter. In
graduate school he’d begun to focus his research on chemistry and the
environment. The effects of petroleum and nitrogen on oceans and streams and
lakes.
He thought it was better to broach it with Udayan first, before telling his
parents. He hoped his brother would understand. He suggested that Udayan
should go abroad, too, where there were more jobs, where it might be easier for
both of them.
He mentioned the famous universities that supported the world’s most gifted
scientists. MIT. Princeton, where Einstein had been.
But none of this impressed Udayan. How can you walk away from what’s
happening? There, of all places?

It’s a degree program. It’s only a matter of a few years.
Udayan shook his head. If you go, you won’t come back.
How do you know?
Because I know you. Because you only think of yourself.
Subhash stared at his brother. Lounging on their bed, smoking, preoccupied
by the newspapers.
You don’t think what you’re doing is selfish?
Udayan turned a page of the newspaper, not bothering to look up. I don’t
think wanting to make a difference is selfish, no.
This isn’t a game you’re playing. What if the police come to the house? What
if you get arrested? What would Ma and Baba think?
There’s more to life than what they think.
What’s happened to you, Udayan? They’re the people who raised you. Who
continue to feed and clothe you. You’d amount to nothing, if it weren’t for them.
Udayan sat up, and strode out of the room. A moment later he was back. He
stood before Subhash, his face lowered. His anger, quick to flare, had already
left him.
You’re the other side of me, Subhash. It’s without you that I’m nothing.
Don’t go.
It was the only time he’d admitted such a thing. He’d said it with love in his
voice. With need.
But Subhash heard it as a command, one of so many he’d capitulated to all
his life. Another exhortation to do as Udayan did, to follow him.
Then, abruptly, it was Udayan who went away. He traveled outside the city, he
did not specify where. It was during a period that the school he worked in was
closed. He informed Subhash and his parents the morning of his departure that
he’d made this plan.
It was as if he were heading out for a day, nothing but a cloth bag over his
shoulder. Just enough money in his pocket for the train fare back.
This is some sort of tour? their father asked. You’ve planned it with friends?
That’s right. A change of scene.
Why all of a sudden?
Why not?
He bent down to take the dust from their parents’ feet, telling them not to
worry, promising to return.
They did not hear from him while he was gone. No letter, no way to know if

he was alive or dead. Though Subhash and his parents didn’t talk about it, none
of them believed that Udayan had gone sightseeing. And yet no one had done
anything to stop him. He returned after a month, a lungi around his waist, the
beard and moustache overtaking his face not concealing the weight he’d lost.
The tremor in his fingers had gotten worse, persistent enough so that his
teacup sometimes rattled on the saucer when he held it, so that it could be
noticed when he buttoned his shirt or gripped a pen. In the mornings the sheet on
his side of the bed was cold with sweat, dark with the imprint of his body. When
he woke up one morning, his heart racing, a rash covering his neck, a doctor was
consulted, a blood test performed.
They worried he’d contracted an illness in the countryside, malaria or
meningitis. But it turned out to be an overactive thyroid gland, something
medication could keep in check. The doctor mentioned to the family that the
drug could take some time to work. That it needed to be taken consistently. That
the disease could cause a person to be irritable, to be moody.
He regained his health, and lived among them, but some part of Udayan was
elsewhere. Whatever he had learned or seen outside the city, whatever he’d
done, he kept to himself.
He no longer tried to convince Subhash not to go to America. When they
listened to the radio in the evenings, when he looked through the papers, he
betrayed little reaction. Something had subdued him. Something that had nothing
to do with Subhash, with any of them, preoccupied him now.
On Lenin’s birthday, April 22, 1969, a third communist party was launched in
Calcutta. The members called themselves Naxalites, in honor of what had
happened at Naxalbari. Charu Majumdar was named the general secretary, Kanu
Sanyal the party chairman.
On May Day, a massive procession filled the streets. Ten thousand people
marched to the center of the city. They gathered on the Maidan, beneath the
domed white column of Shahid Minar.
Kanu Sanyal, just released from prison, stood at a rostrum, and addressed the
exuberant crowd.
With great pride and boundless joy I wish to announce today at this meeting
that we have formed a genuine Communist Party. The official name was the
Communist Party of India, Marxist-Leninist. The CPI(ML).
He did not express gratitude to the politicians who had released him. His
release had been made possible by the law of history. Naxalbari had stirred the
whole of India, Sanyal said.

The revolutionary situation was ripe, both at home and abroad, he told them.
A high tide of revolution was sweeping through the world. Mao Tse-tung was at
the helm.
Internationally and nationally, the reactionaries have grown so weak that
they crumble whenever we hit them. In appearance they are strong, but in reality
they are only giants made of clay, they are truly paper tigers.
The chief task of the new party was to organize the peasantry. The tactic
would be guerilla warfare. The enemy was the Indian state.
Theirs was a new form of communism, Sanyal declared. They would be
headquartered in the villages. By the year 2000, that is only thirty-one years
from now, the people of the whole world will be liberated from all kinds of
exploitation of man by man and will celebrate the worldwide victory of Marxism,
Leninism, Mao Tse-tung’s thought.
Charu Majumdar wasn’t present at the rally. But Sanyal called for allegiance
to him, comparing him to Mao in his wisdom, warning against those who
challenged Majumdar’s doctrine.
We will certainly be able to make a new sun and a new moon shine in the sky
of our great motherland, he said, his words ringing out for miles.
In the papers there were photographs, taken from a distance, of those who
gathered to hear Sanyal’s speech, to give the Red Salute. A battle cry declared, a
generation transfixed. A piece of Calcutta standing still.
It was a portrait of a city Subhash no longer felt a part of. A city on the brink
of something; a city he was preparing to leave behind.
Subhash knew that Udayan had been there. He hadn’t accompanied him to the
rally, nor had Udayan asked him to come. In this sense they had already parted.

Chapter 6
A few months later Subhash also traveled to a village; this was the word the
Americans used. An old-fashioned word, designating an early settlement, a
humble place. And yet the village had once contained a civilization: a church, a
courthouse, a tavern, a jail.
The university had begun as an agricultural school. A land grant college still
surrounded by greenhouses, orchards, fields of corn. On the outskirts were lush
pastures of scientifically cultivated grass, routinely irrigated and fertilized and
trimmed. Nicer than the grass that grew inside the walls of the Tolly Club.
But he was no longer in Tollygunge. He had stepped out of it as he had
stepped so many mornings out of dreams, its reality and its particular logic
rendered meaningless in the light of day.
The difference was so extreme that he could not accommodate the two places
together in his mind. In this enormous new country, there seemed to be nowhere
for the old to reside. There was nothing to link them; he was the sole link. Here
life ceased to obstruct or assault him. Here was a place where humanity was not
always pushing, rushing, running as if with a fire at its back.
And yet, certain physical aspects of Rhode Island—a state so small within the
context of America that on some maps its landmass was indicated only by an
arrow pointing to its location—corresponded roughly to those of Calcutta, within
India. Mountains to the north, an ocean to the east, the majority of land to the
south and west.
Both places were close to sea level, with estuaries where fresh and salt water
combined. As Tollygunge, in a previous era, had been flooded by the sea, all of
Rhode Island, he learned, had once been covered with sheets of ice. The advance
and retreat of glaciers, spreading and melting over New England, had shifted
bedrock and soil, leaving great trails of debris. They had created marshes and the
bay, dunes and moraines. They had shaped the current shore.
He found a room in a white wooden house, close to the main road of the
village, with black shutters flanking the windows. The shutters were decorative,
never opening or closing as they did throughout the day in Calcutta, to keep
rooms cool or dry, to block rain or let in a breeze or adjust the light.
He lived at the top of the house, sharing a kitchen and bathroom with another

Ph.D. student named Richard Grifalconi. At night he heard the precise ticking of
an alarm clock at the side of his bed. And in the background, like an ongoing
alarm itself, the shrill thrum of crickets. New birds woke him in the morning,
small birds with delicate chirps that ruptured sleep nevertheless.
Richard, a student of sociology, wrote editorials for the university newspaper.
When he wasn’t working on his dissertation he decried, in terse paragraphs, the
recent firing of a zoology professor who had spoken out against the use of
napalm, or the decision to build a swimming pool instead of more dormitories on
campus.
He came from a Quaker family in Wisconsin. He wore his dark hair in a
ponytail, and didn’t bother to trim his beard. He peered closely through wirerimmed spectacles as he pecked out his editorials with two fingers at their
kitchen table, a cigarette burning between his lips.
He told Subhash that he’d just turned thirty. For the sake of the next
generation, he’d decided to become a professor. He’d traveled to the South, as an
undergraduate, to protest segregation on public transportation. He’d spent two
weeks in a Mississippi jail.
He invited Subhash to go with him to the campus pub, where they shared a
pitcher of beer and watched the television reports of Vietnam. Richard opposed
the war, but he wasn’t a communist. He told Subhash that Gandhi was a hero to
him. Udayan would have scoffed, saying that Gandhi had sided with enemies of
the people. That he had disarmed India in the name of liberation.
One day, walking past the quadrangle, Subhash saw Richard at the center of a
group of students and faculty. He was wearing a black armband, standing on top
of a van that had been driven onto the grass.
Speaking through a megaphone, Richard said Vietnam was a mistake, and
that the American government had had no right to intervene. He said innocent
people in Vietnam were suffering.
Some people called out or cheered, but most of them just listened and
clapped, as they might at the theatre. They sprawled back on their elbows,
sunning their faces, listening to Richard protest a war that was being fought
thousands of miles away.
Subhash was the only foreigner. No students from other parts of Asia were
there. It was nothing like the demonstrations that erupted now in Calcutta.
Disorganized mobs representing rival communist parties, running helter-skelter
through the streets. Chanting, unrelenting. They were demonstrations that almost
always turned violent.
After listening to Richard for a few minutes, Subhash left. He knew how

much Udayan would have mocked him at that moment, for his desire to protect
himself.
He didn’t support the war in Vietnam, either. But like his father, he knew he
had to be careful. He knew he could get arrested in America for denouncing the
government, perhaps even for holding up a sign. He was here courtesy of a
student visa, studying thanks to a fellowship. He’d been invited to America as
Nixon’s guest.
Here, each day, he remembered how he’d felt those evenings he and Udayan
had snuck into the Tolly Club. This time he’d been admitted officially, and yet
he remained vigilant, at the threshold. He knew that the door could close just as
arbitrarily as it had opened. He knew that he could be sent back to where he’d
come from, and that there would be plenty to take his place.
There were a few other Indians at the university, mostly bachelors like him. But
as far as Subhash could tell, he was the only one from Calcutta. He met an
economics professor named Narasimhan, from Madras. He had an American
wife and two tanned, light-eyed sons who looked like neither of their parents.
Narasimhan wore heavy sideburns, bell-bottomed jeans. His wife had a pretty
neck, long beaded earrings, short red hair. Subhash saw them all for the first
time on the quadrangle. They were the only people that Saturday afternoon in the
square green enclosure at the center of campus, rimmed with trees.
The boys were kicking a ball on the grass with their father. As Subhash and
Udayan used to do, on the field on the other side of the lowland, though their
father had never joined them. The wife was lying on a blanket on the grass, on
her side, smoking, sketching something in a notebook.
This was the woman Narasimhan had married, as opposed to whatever girl
from Madras his family had wanted for him. Subhash wondered how his family
had reacted to her. He wondered if she’d ever been to India. If she had, he
wondered whether she’d liked it or hated it. He could not guess from looking at
her.
The ball rolled over in Subhash’s direction, and he kicked it back to them,
preparing to continue on his way.
You must be the new student in marine chemistry, Narasimhan said, walking
toward him, shaking his hand. Subhash Mitra?
Yes.
From Calcutta?
He nodded.

I’m supposed to keep an eye out for you. I was born in Calcutta, Narasimhan
added, saying that he still understood a word or two of Bengali.
Subhash asked where in Rhode Island he lived, whether it was close to
campus.
Narasimhan shook his head. Their house was closer to Providence. His wife,
Kate, was a student at the Rhode Island School of Design.
And you? Where in Calcutta is your family?
In Tollygunge.
Ah, where the golf club is.
Yes.
You’re staying at the International House?
I preferred a place with a kitchen. I wanted to make my own meals.
And you’ve settled in? Made some friends?
A few.
Tolerating the cold?
So far.
Kate, write down our phone number for him, will you?
She turned to the back of her notebook and tore out a page. She wrote down
the number and handed it to Subhash.
Anything you need, just give a call, Narasimhan said, patting him on the
shoulder, turning back to his sons.
Thank you.
I’ll make you my yogurt rice one of these days, Narasimhan called out.
But an invitation never came.
The oceanography campus, where most of his classes were held, overlooked the
Narragansett Bay. Every morning, on a bus, he left the village behind, traveling
along a wooded road where mailboxes stuck on posts were visible, but many of
the homes were not. Past a set of traffic lights, and a wooden observation tower,
before proceeding downhill toward the bay.
The bus crossed over a winding estuary, to an area that felt more remote.
Here the air was never still, so that the windows of the bus would rattle. Here the
quality of the light changed.
The laboratory buildings were like small airplane hangars, flat-topped
structures made of corrugated gray metal. He studied the gases that were
dissolved in the sea’s solution, the isotopes found in deep sediments. The iodine
found in seaweed, the carbon in plankton, the copper in the blood of crabs.

At the foot of the campus, at the base of a steep hill, there was a small beach
strewn with gray-and-yellow stones where he liked to eat his lunch. There were
views of the bay, and the two bridges going to islands offshore. The Jamestown
Bridge was prominent, the Newport Bridge, a few miles in the distance, more
faint. On cloudy days, at intervals, the sound of a foghorn pierced the air, as
conch shells were blown in Calcutta to ward off evil.
Some of the smaller islands, reachable only by boat, were without electricity
and running water. Conditions under which, he was told, certain wealthy
Americans liked to spend their summers. On one island there was space only for
a lighthouse, nothing more. All the islands, however tiny, had names: Patience
and Prudence, Fox and Goat, Rabbit and Rose, Hope and Despair.
At the top of the hill, leading up from the beach, there was a church with
white shingles arranged like a honeycomb. The central portion rose to a steeple.
The paint was no longer fresh, the wood beneath it having absorbed so much salt
from the air, so many storms that had traveled up the Rhode Island coast.
One afternoon he was surprised to see cars lining the road where it crested.
For the first time he saw that the front doors of the church were open. A group of
people, a mix of adults and children, no more than twenty, stood outside.
He glimpsed a couple in middle age, newly married. A gray-haired groom
with a carnation in his lapel, a woman in a pale blue jacket and skirt. They stood
smiling on the steps of the church, ducking their heads as the group showered
them with rice. Looking like they should have been parents of the bride and
groom, closer to his parents’ generation than to his own.
He guessed that it was a second marriage. Two people trading one spouse for
another, dividing in two, their connections at once severed and doubled, like
cells. Or perhaps it was a case of a couple who had both lost their spouses in
midlife. A widow and widower with grown children, remarrying and moving on.
For some reason the church reminded him of the small mosque that stood at
the corner of his family’s neighborhood in Tollygunge. Another place of worship
designated for others, which had served as a landmark in his life.
One day, when the church was empty, Subhash walked up the stone path to
the entrance. He felt the strange urge to embrace it; the narrow proportions were
so severe that it seemed scarcely wider than his arm span. The only entrance was
the rounded dark green door at the front. Above it, the windows, also rounded,
were as thin as slits. Space for a hand to poke out but not a face.
The door was locked, so he walked around the building, standing on the balls
of his feet and looking into the windows. Some of the panes were made of red
glass, interspersed with clear ones.

Inside he saw gray pews, edged with red trim. It was an interior at once
pristine and vibrant, bathed with light. He wanted to sit inside, to feel the pale
walls around him. The simple, tightly angled ceiling overhead.
He thought of the couple he’d seen, getting married. He imagined them
standing next to one another.
For the first time, he thought of his own marriage. For the first time, perhaps
because he always felt in Rhode Island that some part of him was missing, he
desired a companion.
He wondered what woman his parents would choose for him. He wondered
when it would be. Getting married would mean returning to Calcutta. In that
sense he was in no hurry.
He was proud to have come alone to America. To learn it as he once must
have learned to stand and walk and speak. He’d wanted so much to leave
Calcutta, not only for the sake of his education but also—he could admit this to
himself now—to take a step Udayan never would.
In the end this was what had motivated him. And yet the motivation had done
nothing to prepare him. Each day, in spite of its growing routine, felt uncertain,
improvisational. Here, in this place surrounded by sea, he was drifting far from
his point of origin. Here, detached from Udayan, he was ignorant of so many
things.
Most nights Richard was out at dinnertime, but if he happened to be home he
accepted Subhash’s invitation to share a meal, bringing out his ashtray and a
packet of cigarettes, offering one of his beers as Subhash cooked curry and
boiled a pot of rice. In exchange, Richard began to drive Subhash, once a week,
to the supermarket in town, splitting the cost of the groceries.
One weekend, when they both needed a break from studying, Richard drove
Subhash to an empty parking lot on campus, teaching him to shift gears so that
Subhash could apply for a driver’s license and borrow the car when he needed
to.
When Richard decided Subhash was ready, he let him take the car through
town, navigating him toward Point Judith, the corner of Rhode Island that
abutted no land. It was a thrill to maneuver the car, slowing down for the odd
traffic light and then accelerating again on the abandoned seaside road.
He drove through Galilee, where the fishing boats came and went, past
mudflats where men waded in rubber boots to harvest clams. Past closed-up
shacks with menus of fried seafood painted like graffiti onto the facades. They
came to a lighthouse on a grassy hill. Dark rocks draped with seaweed, a flag

that writhed like a flame in the sky.
They had arrived in time to see the sun setting behind the lighthouse, the
white foam of the waves pouring over the rocks, the flag and the choppy blue
water gleaming. They stepped out to smoke a cigarette, and feel the salt spray on
their faces.
The talked about My Lai. The details had just appeared. Reports of a mass
murder, bodies in ditches, an American lieutenant under investigation.
There’s going to be a protest in Boston. I have friends who can put us up for a
night. Why don’t you come with me?
I don’t think so.
You’re not angry about the war?
It’s not my place to object.
Subhash found that he could be honest with Richard. Richard listened to him
instead of contradicting him. He didn’t merely try to convert him.
As they drove back to the village Richard asked Subhash about India, about
its caste system, its poverty. Who was to blame?
I don’t know. These days everyone just blames everyone else.
But is there a solution? Where does the government stand?
Subhash didn’t know how to describe India’s fractious politics, its
complicated society, to an American. He said it was an ancient place that was
also young, still struggling to know itself. You should be talking to my brother,
he said.
You have a brother?
He nodded.
You’ve never mentioned him. What’s his name?
He paused, then uttered Udayan’s name for the first time since he’d arrived in
Rhode Island.
Well, what would Udayan say?
He would say that an agrarian economy based on feudalism is the problem.
He would say the country needs a more egalitarian structure. Better land
reforms.
Sounds like a Chinese model.
It is. He supports Naxalbari.
Naxalbari? What’s that?
A few days later, in his mailbox at his department, Subhash found a letter from
Udayan. Paragraphs in Bengali, dark blue ink against the lighter blue of the

aerogramme. It had been mailed in October; it was November now.

If this reaches you destroy it. No need to compromise either
of us. But given that my only chance to invade the United
States is by letter, I can’t resist. I’ve just returned from
another trip outside the city. I met Comrade Sanyal. I was
able to sit with him, speak with him. I had to wear a
blindfold. I’ll tell you about it sometime.
Why no news? No doubt the flora and fauna of the
world’s greatest capitalist power captivate you. But if you
can bear to tear yourself away try to make yourself useful. I
hear the antiwar movement there is in full swing.
Here developments are encouraging. A Red Guard is
forming, traveling to villages, propagating Mao Tse-tung’s
quotations. Our generation is the vanguard; the struggle of
students is part of the armed peasant struggle, Majumdar
says.
You’ll come back to an altered country, a more just
society, I’m confident of this. A changed home, too. Baba’s
taken out a loan. They’re adding to what we already have.
They seem to think it’s necessary. That we won’t get
married and raise families under the same roof if the house
stays the way it is.
I told them it was a waste, an extravagance, given that
you don’t even live here. But they didn’t listen and now it’s
too late, an architect came and the scaffolding’s gone up,
they claim they’ll be finished in a year or two.
The days are dull without you. And though I refuse to
forgive you for not supporting a movement that will only
improve the lives of millions of people, I hope you can
forgive me for giving you a hard time. Will you hurry up
with whatever it is you’re doing? An embrace from your
brother.

He’d concluded with a quotation. War will bring the revolution; revolution
will stop the war.
Subhash reread the letter several times. It was as if Udayan were there,
speaking to him, teasing him. He felt their loyalty to one another, their affection,
stretched halfway across the world. Stretched to the breaking point by all that
now stood between them, but at the same time refusing to break.
Perhaps the letter would have been safe among his possessions in Rhode
Island. It was written in Bengali, it could have been something Subhash kept.
But he knew Udayan was right, and that the contents, the reference to Sanyal, in
the wrong hands, might threaten them both. The next day he took it to his lab,
lingering on some pretense at the end of the session, waiting to be alone.
Ceremonially he placed it on the dark stone counter, striking a match, watching
the edges blacken, his brother’s words disappear.

I’ve been studying chemical processes unique to estuaries,
sediments that oxidize at low tide. Strips of barrier beach
run parallel to the mainland. The ferrous sulfide leaves
wide black stains on the sand.
As strange as it sounds, when the sky is overcast, when
the clouds are low, something about the coastal landscape
here, the water and the grass, the smell of bacteria when I
visit the mudflats, takes me home. I think of the lowland, of
paddy fields. Of course, no rice grows here. Only mussels
and quahogs, which are among the types of shellfish
Americans like to eat.
They call the marsh grass spartina. I learned today that
it has special glands for excreting salt, so that it’s often
covered with a residue of crystals. Snails migrate up and
down the stems. It’s been growing here over millennia, in
deposits of peat. Its roots stabilize the shore. Did you know,
it propagates by spreading rhizomes? Something like the
mangroves that once thrived in Tollygunge. I had to tell
you.
The lawn of the campus quadrangle was covered now as if with a sea of rust, the

dead leaves scuttling and heaving in the wind. He waded, ankle-deep, through
their bulk. The leaves sometimes rose around him, as if something living were
submerged beneath them, threatening to show its face before settling down
again.
He had obtained his driver’s license, and he had the keys to Richard’s car.
Richard had taken a bus to visit his family for Thanksgiving. The campus had
shut down and there was nowhere to go; for a few days even the library and the
student union were closed.
In the afternoons he got into the car and drove with no destination in mind.
He drove across the bridge to Jamestown, he drove to Newport and back. He
listened to pop songs on the radio, weather conditions for those on land and on
sea. North winds ten to fifteen knots, becoming northeast in the afternoon. Seas
two to four feet. Visibility one to three nautical miles.
Evenings came quickly, headlights on by five. One night when it was time for
dinner he decided to have eggplant parmigiana at an Italian restaurant he went to
sometimes with Richard. He sat at the bar, drinking beer, eating the heavy dish,
watching American football on the television. He was one of the only customers.
He was told, as he paid his bill, that the restaurant would be closed for
Thanksgiving.
That day the roads were empty, the whole town at rest. Whatever happened
on the occasion, however it was celebrated, there was no sign of it. No
procession that he knew of, no public festivity. Apart from a crowd that had
gathered for a football game on campus, there was nothing to observe.
He drove through residential neighborhoods, areas where some of the faculty
members lived. He saw smoke rising from chimneys, cars with license plates
from different states, parked along the leaf-strewn streets.
He continued out to the breachway in Charlestown, where the spartina had
turned pale brown. The sun was already low in the sky, its glare too strong.
Approaching a salt pond, he pulled over to the side of the road.
Blending into the grass was a heron, close enough for Subhash to see the
amber bead of its eye, its slate-colored body tinted with the late afternoon light.
Its neck was settled into an S, the sharp length of the bill like the brass letter
opener his parents had given him when he left India.
He rolled down his window. The heron was still, but then the curved neck
extended and contracted, as if the bird were aware of Subhash’s gaze. The egrets
in Tollygunge, stirring the muddy water as they hunted, were scrawnier. Never
as shapely, as regal as this.
His satisfaction was in watching: its breast feathers drooping as it dipped its

head toward the water, as it took slow strides on long, backward-bent legs.
He wanted to sit in the car and watch as the bird stood there, staring out
toward the sea. But on the narrow dirt road, which was normally empty, a car
approached from behind, wanting to pass, forcing Subhash to drive on. By the
time he circled back, the bird was gone.
The next afternoon he returned to the same spot. He walked along the edge of
the marsh, searching for the bird’s outline. He stood watching the horizon as the
light turned golden and the sun began to set. He wondered if perhaps the bird
had flown off for the season. Then suddenly he heard a harsh, repetitive
croaking.
It was the heron taking flight over the water, its great wings beating slowly
and deliberately, looking at once encumbered and free. Its long neck was tucked
in, dark legs dangling behind. Against the lowering sky the silhouette was black,
the tips of its primary feathers distinct, the forked division of its toes.
He went back a third day, but was unable to see it anywhere. For the first time
in his life, he felt a helpless love.
A new decade began: 1970. In winter, when the trees were naked, the stiff
ground covered with snow, a second letter came from Udayan, in an envelope
this time.
Subhash tore it open and found a small black-and-white photograph of a
young woman, standing. Her slender arms were folded across her chest.
She was at ease, also a little skeptical. Her head turned partly to one side, her
lips closed but playful, her smile slightly askew. Her hair was in a braid, draped
over the front of one shoulder. Her complexion was deep.
She was compelling without being pretty. Nothing like the demure girls that
his mother used to point out to Udayan and Subhash at weddings, when they
were in college. It was a candid shot, somewhere on the streets of Calcutta, in
front of a building he did not recognize. He wondered if Udayan had taken the
picture. If he’d inspired the playful expression on her face.

This is in lieu of a formal introduction, and it will be as
formal an announcement as you will get. But it’s time that
you met her. I’ve known her for a couple of years. We kept
it quiet, but you know how it is. Her name is Gauri and
she’s finishing a degree in philosophy at Presidency. A girl
from North Calcutta, Cornwallis Street. Both her parents

are dead, she lives with her brother—a friend of mine—and
some relatives. She prefers books to jewels and saris. She
believes as I do.
Like Chairman Mao, I reject the idea of an arranged
marriage. It is one thing, I admit, that I admire about the
West. And so I’ve married her. Don’t worry, apart from
running off with her there’s no scandal. You’re not about
to be an uncle. Not yet, anyway. Too many children are
victims of our defective social structure. This needs first to
be fixed.
I wish you could have been here, but you didn’t miss
any type of celebration. It was a civil registration. I told
Ma and Baba after the fact, as I am telling you. I told them,
either you accept her, and we return to Tollygunge
together, or we live as husband and wife somewhere else.
They are still in shock, upset with me and also for no
reason with Gauri, but we’re with them now, learning to
live with one another. They can’t bear to tell you what I’ve
done. So I’m telling you myself.
At the end of the letter, he asked Subhash to buy a few books for Gauri,
saying that they would be easier to find in the States. Don’t bother putting them
in the mail, they’ll only get lost or stolen. Bring them with you. You will show up
to congratulate me one of these days, won’t you?
This time he didn’t reread the letter. Once was enough.
Though Udayan had a job, it was hardly enough to support himself, never
mind a family. He was not yet twenty-five years old. Though the house would
soon be big enough, to Subhash the decision felt impulsive, an imposition on his
parents, premature. And he was puzzled that Udayan, so dedicated to his politics,
so scornful of convention, would suddenly take a wife.
Not only had Udayan married before Subhash, but he’d married a woman of
his choosing. On his own he’d taken a step that Subhash believed was their
parents’ place to decide. Here was another example of Udayan forging ahead of
Subhash, of denying that he’d come second. Another example of getting his

way.
The back of the photograph was dated in Udayan’s handwriting. It was from
over a year ago, 1968. Udayan had gotten to know her and fallen in love with her
while Subhash was still in Calcutta. All that time, Udayan had kept Gauri to
himself.
Once more Subhash destroyed the letter. The photograph he kept, at the back
of one of his textbooks, as proof of what Udayan had done.
From time to time he drew out the picture and looked at it. He wondered
when he would meet Gauri, and what he would think of her, now that they were
connected. And part of him felt defeated by Udayan all over again, for having
found a girl like that.

Part II

Chapter 1
Normally she stayed on the balcony, reading, or kept to an adjacent room as her
brother and Udayan studied and smoked and drank cups of tea. Manash had
befriended him at Calcutta University, where they were both graduate students in
the physics department. Much of the time their books on the behaviors of liquids
and gases would sit ignored as they talked about the repercussions of Naxalbari,
and commented on the day’s events.
The discussions strayed to the insurgencies in Indochina and in Latin
American countries. In the case of Cuba it wasn’t even a mass movement,
Udayan pointed out. Just a small group, attacking the right targets.
All over the world students were gaining momentum, standing up to
exploitative systems. It was another example of Newton’s second law of motion,
he joked. Force equals mass times acceleration.
Manash was skeptical. What could they, urban students, claim to know about
peasant life?
Nothing, Udayan said. We need to learn from them.
Through an open doorway she saw him. Tall but slight of build, twenty-three
but looking a bit older. His clothing hung on him loosely. He wore kurtas but
also European-style shirts, irreverently, the top portion unbuttoned, the bottom
untucked, the sleeves rolled back past the elbow.
He sat in the room where they listened to the radio. On the bed that served as
a sofa where, at night, Gauri slept. His arms were lean, his fingers too long for
the small porcelain cups of tea her family served him, which he drained in just a
few gulps. His hair was wavy, the brows thick, the eyes languid and dark.
His hands seemed an extension of his voice, always in motion, embellishing
the things he said. Even as he argued he smiled easily. His upper teeth
overlapped slightly, as if there were one too many of them. From the beginning,
the attraction was there.
He never said anything to Gauri if she happened to brush by. Never glancing,
never acknowledging that she was Manash’s younger sister, until the day the
houseboy was out on an errand, and Manash asked Gauri if she minded making
them some tea.
She could not find a tray to put the teacups on. She carried them in, nudging

open the door to the room with her shoulder. Looking up at her an instant longer
than he needed to, Udayan took his cup from her hands.
The groove between his mouth and nose was deep. Clean-shaven. Still
looking at her, he posed his first question.
Where do you study? he asked.
Because she went to Presidency, and Calcutta University was just next door, she
searched for him on the quadrangle, and among the bookstalls, at the tables of
the Coffee House if she went there with a group of friends. Something told her
he did not go to his classes as regularly as she did. She began to watch for him
from the generous balcony that wrapped around the two sides of her
grandparents’ flat, overlooking the intersection where Cornwallis Street began. It
became something for her to do.
Then one day she spotted him, amazed that she knew which of the hundreds
of dark heads was his. He was standing on the opposite corner, buying a packet
of cigarettes. Then he was crossing the street, a cotton book bag over his
shoulder, glancing both ways, walking toward their flat.
She crouched below the filigree, under the clothes drying on the line, worried
that he would look up and see her. Two minutes later she heard footsteps
climbing the stairwell, and then the rattle of the iron knocker on the door of the
flat. She heard the door being opened, the houseboy letting him in.
It was an afternoon everyone, including Manash, happened to be out, and
she’d been reading, alone. She wondered if he’d turn back, given that Manash
wasn’t there. Instead, a moment later, he stepped out onto the balcony.
No one else here? he asked.
She shook her head.
Will you talk to me, then?
The laundry was damp, some of her petticoats and blouses were clipped to the
line. The material of the blouses was tailored to the shape of her upper torso, her
breasts. He unclipped one of the blouses and put it further down the line to make
room.
He did this slowly, a mild tremor in his fingers forcing him to focus more
than another person might on the task. Standing beside him, she was aware of his
height, the slight stoop in his shoulders, the angle at which he held his face. He
struck a match against the side of a box and lit a cigarette, cupping his whole
hand over his mouth when he drew the cigarette to his lips. The houseboy
brought out biscuits and tea.

They overlooked the intersection, from four flights above. They stood beside
one another, both of them leaning into the railing. Together they took in the
stone buildings, with their decrepit grandeur, that lined the streets. Their tired
columns, their crumbling cornices, their sullied shades.
Her face was supported by the discreet barrier of her hand. His arm hung over
the edge, the burning cigarette was in his fingers. The sleeves of his Punjabi
were rolled up, exposing the veins running from his wrist to the crook of the
elbow. They were prominent, the blood in them greenish gray, like a pointed
archway below the skin.
There was something elemental about so many human beings in motion at
once: walking, sitting in busses and trams, pulling or being pulled along in
rickshaws. On the other side of the street were a few gold and silver shops all in
a row, with mirrored walls and ceilings. Always crowded with families,
endlessly reflected, placing orders for wedding jewels. There was the press
where they took clothes to be ironed. The store where Gauri bought her ink, her
notebooks. Narrow sweet shops, where trays of confections were studded with
flies.
The paanwallah sat cross-legged at one corner, under a bare bulb, spreading
white lime paste on stacks of betel leaves. A traffic constable stood at the center,
in his helmet, on his little box. Blowing a whistle and waving his arms. The
clamor of so many motors, of so many scooters and lorries and busses and cars,
filled their ears.
I like this view, he said.
She’d observed the world, she told him, all of life, from this balcony. Political
processions, government parades, visiting dignitaries. The momentous stream of
vehicles that started each day at dawn. The city’s poets and writers passing by
after death, their corpses concealed by flowers. Pedestrians wading knee-deep
through the streets, during the monsoon.
In autumn came the effigies of Durga, and in winter, Saraswati. Their
majestic clay forms were welcomed into the city as dhak were beaten, as
trumpets played. They were ushered in on the backs of trucks, then carried away
at the end of the holidays to be immersed in the river. These days students were
marching up from College Street. Groups in solidarity with the uprising at
Naxalbari, carrying flags and placards, raising their fists in the air.
He noticed the folding chair on which she’d been sitting. It had a sagging
piece of striped fabric, like a sling, for a seat. A book was neglected beside it. A
volume of Descartes’s Meditations on First Philosophy. He picked it up.
You read here, with all this going by?

It helps me to concentrate, she said.
She was used to the noise as she studied, as she slept; it was the ongoing
accompaniment to her life, her thoughts, the constant din more soothing than
silence would have been. Indoors, with no room of her own, it was harder. But
the balcony had always been her place.
When she was a little girl, she told him, she would sometimes stumble out of
bed during the night, and her grandparents would find her in the morning, fast
asleep on the balcony, her face against the blackened filigree, her body on the
stone floor. Deaf to the traffic that rumbled past. She had loved waking up outof-doors, without the protection of walls and a ceiling. The first time, seeing that
she was missing from the bed, they thought she had disappeared. They had sent
people down to the street to search for her, shouting her name.
And? Udayan asked.
They discovered that I was here, still sleeping.
Did your grandparents forbid you from doing it again?
No. As long as it wasn’t too cold or raining, they left a little quilt out for me.
So this is your bodhi tree, where you achieve enlightenment.
She shrugged.
His eyes fell to the pages she’d been reading.
What does Mr. Descartes tell us about the world?
She told him what she knew. About the limits of perception and the
experiment with a piece of wax. Held up to heat, the essence of the wax
remained, even as its physical aspect changed. It was the mind, not the senses,
that was able to perceive this, she said.
Thinking is superior to seeing?
For Descartes, yes.
Have you read any Marx?
A little.
Why do you study philosophy?
It helps me to understand things.
But what makes it relevant?
Plato says the purpose of philosophy is to teach us how to die.
There’s nothing to learn unless we’re living. In death we’re equal. It has that
advantage over life.
He handed the book back to her, closing it so that he caused her to lose her
place.
And now a degree has become meaningless in this country.

You’re getting a master’s in physics, she pointed out.
My parents expect me to. It doesn’t matter to me.
What matters to you?
He looked down at the street, gesturing. This impossible city of ours.
He changed the subject, asking about the others who lived with her and
Manash: two uncles, their wives, two sets of children. Her maternal
grandparents, who had once owned the flat, were dead, as were her own parents.
Her older sisters lived elsewhere, scattered here and there, now that they were
married.
You all grew up here?
She shook her head. There had been various homes in East Bengal, in
Khulna, in Faridpur, where her parents and sisters had once lived. Her father was
a district judge, and her parents and her sisters had moved every few years from
place to place, to beautiful bungalows paid for by the government, in pretty parts
of the countryside. The houses had come with cooks, servants who’d opened the
doors.
Manash was born into one of these homes. He barely remembered, but her
sisters still spoke of that phase of their upbringing, their shared past. The
teachers who would come to give them dance and singing lessons, the marble
tables on which they ate meals, the broad verandahs on which they played, a
separate room in the house that was just for their dolls.
In 1946 those postings ended, and the family came back to Calcutta. But after
a few months her father said he did not want to live out his retirement there.
After a lifetime outside it, he had no patience for city life, especially when its
people were butchering each other, when entire neighborhoods were going up in
flames.
One morning during the riots, from the same balcony Gauri and Udayan were
standing on now, her parents had witnessed a scene: a mob surrounding the
Muslim man who delivered their milk on his bicycle. The mob was seeking
revenge; it was reported that a cousin of the milkman had been involved in an
attack on Hindus in some other part of the city. They watched one of the Hindus
plunge a knife into the ribs of the milkman. They saw the milk the family would
have drunk that day spilling onto the street, turning pink with his blood.
So the family moved to a village west of Calcutta, a few hours away. In an
uneventful place, removed from their relatives, protected from turmoil, her
parents preferred to establish their final domain. There was a pond to fish and
wade in, chickens for their eggs, a garden her father liked to tend. Nothing but
farmland, dirt roads, sky and trees. The closest movie theatre was twenty miles

away. A fair brought booksellers once a year. The darkness at night was
absolute.
By the time Gauri was born, in 1948, her mother was already preoccupied
with settling the marriages of her older sisters. Her sisters belonged almost to
another generation: teenaged girls when she was an infant, young women when
she was a child. She was an aunt to children her own age.
How long did you live in the countryside?
Until I was five.
Her mother was bedridden around that time. She’d had tuberculosis in her
spine. Gauri’s older sisters had been useful, helping with household chores, but
she and Manash were only a complication. So they were sent away to the city,
cared for by their grandparents, in the company of their aunts and uncles.
After her mother was on her feet again they had stayed on. Manash had
enrolled at Calcutta Boys’ School, and Gauri didn’t want to be without Manash.
When it was her turn to start school, given that the city’s schools were better, it
made sense for her to remain.
There had always been the option to return to her parents’ village. But though
she visited, taking the train to see them for holidays, rural life held no appeal for
her. She didn’t think she resented her parents for not raising her. It was the way
of many large families, and considering the circumstances, it was not so strange.
Really, she appreciated them for letting her go her own way.
That was their gift to you, Udayan said. Autonomy.
A motor accident on a mountain road had killed them. They were traveling in
bad weather to a hill station, for a change of scene. Gauri had been sixteen. The
house was sold, no trace of her family in that quiet place remained. It was a blow
to lose them suddenly, but her grandparents’ deaths, more recently, had
saddened her more. She’d grown up in their home, slept on a bed between them.
She’d seen them day after day, watched them turn ill and frail. It was her
grandfather, who’d been a professor at the Sanskrit College, who’d died with a
book on his chest, who’d inspired her to study what she did.
She saw that the unremarkable journey of her life thus far was fascinating to
him: her birth in the countryside, her willingness to live apart from her parents,
her estrangement from most of her family, her independence in this regard.
He lit another cigarette. He told her his childhood was different. There was
only himself and a brother. It had been only the two of them and their parents, in
a house in Tollygunge.
What does your brother do?
He talks these days of going to America.

Will you go, too?
No. He turned to look at her. And you? Will you miss all this, when you get
married?
She saw that his mouth never fully closed, that there was a diamond-shaped
aperture at the center.
I’m not getting married.
Your relatives don’t pressure you?
I’m not their responsibility. They have their own children to worry about.
What would you do instead?
I could teach philosophy at a college or a school.
And stay here?
Why not?
That’s good. For you, I mean. Why should you leave a place you love, and
stop doing what you love to do, for the sake of a man?
He was flirting with her. She felt him forming an opinion even as he stood
there looking at her, talking to her. An aspect of her, in his mind, that he already
possessed. He’d plucked it from her without permission, a transaction no other
man had attempted, one that she could not object to, because it was him.
After a moment, pointing toward the intersection, he said:
If you married someone who lived on one of these other three corners, if you
only had to move to one of the other balconies, would it be all right then?
She couldn’t help herself; she smiled at this, at first hiding the smile with her
hand. Then laughing, looking away.
They began meeting at his campus, and at hers. But now, even when they hadn’t
arranged a meeting, they kept running into each other. He would walk through
the gates over to Presidency, watching as she came down the great staircase after
a class. They sat along the portico, draped with banners the Students’ Union put
up. When speeches were delivered on the quadrangle, about the continuing rise
in food prices, about the growing population, about the shortage of jobs, they
listened to them together. When marches sprouted along College Street, he
brought her along.
He started giving her things to read. From the bookstalls he bought her
Marx’s Manifesto, and Rousseau’s Confessions. Felix Greene’s book on
Vietnam.
She saw that she impressed him, not only by reading what he gave her, but by
talking to him about it. They exchanged opinions about the limits of political

freedom, and whether freedom and power meant the same thing. About
individualism, leading to hierarchies. About what society happened to be at the
moment, and what it might become.
She felt her mind sharpening, focusing. Wrestling with the concrete
mechanisms of the world, instead of doubting its existence. She felt closer to
Udayan on the days she did not see him, thinking about the things that mattered
to him.
At first they tried to keep things a secret from Manash, only to find out that
Manash had been quietly plotting it; that he’d been certain the two of them
would get along. He made it easier for Gauri to spend time with Udayan,
explaining away to the rest of the family where she’d gone.
Their partings were abrupt, the attention he paid her suddenly coming to an
end because there was somewhere he had to go. Some meeting, some study
session, he never fully explained. He never looked back at her but always paused
in a spot where she was sure to see him, raising his hand in farewell before
cupping it to light a cigarette, and then she watched his long legs carrying him
away from her, across campus, or across the wide and busy street.
He talked sometimes about traveling, going to one of the villages where she
might have been raised had she not fled. Where after Naxalbari, she gathered,
life was not so quiet anymore.
He wanted to see more of India, he said, the way Che had traveled through
South America. He wanted to understand the circumstances of its people. He
wanted to see China one day.
He mentioned certain friends who had already left Calcutta, to live among the
peasants. Would you understand, if I ever needed to do something like that?
Udayan asked her.
She was aware that he was testing her. That he would lose respect if she
turned sentimental, if she was unwilling to face certain risks. And so, though she
did not want him to be away from her, did not want any harm to come to him,
she told him that she would.
Without him she was reminded of herself again. A person most at ease with
her books, spending afternoons filling her notebooks in the cool high-ceilinged
reading room of Presidency’s library. But this was a person she was beginning to
question after meeting Udayan. A person that Udayan, with his unsteady fingers,
was firmly pushing aside, wiping clean. So that she began to see herself more
clearly, as a thin film of dust was wiped from a sheet of glass.
In childhood, aware of her accidental arrival, she had not known who she
was, where or to whom she’d belonged. With the exception of Manash she had

not been able to define herself in relation to her siblings, nor to see herself as a
part of them. She had no memory of spending a moment, even in a house in such
an isolated place, ever, alone with her mother or father. Always at the end of a
queue, in the shadow of others, she believed she was not significant enough to
cast a shadow of her own.
Around men she’d felt invisible. She knew she was not the type they turned to
look at on the street, or to notice across the room at a cousin’s wedding. She’d
not been asked after and married off a few months later, as some of her sisters
had been. She was a disappointment to herself, in this regard.
Aside from her complexion, deep enough to be considered a flaw, perhaps
there was nothing wrong with her. And yet, whenever she stopped to consider
what made her appearance distinctive, she objected to it, thinking the shape of
her face was too long, that her features were too severe. Wishing she could alter
herself, believing that any other face would have been preferable.
But Udayan regarded her as if no other woman in the city existed. Gauri
never doubted, when they were together, that she had an effect on him. That it
excited him to stand beside her, turning his face toward her, his gaze never
wavering. He noticed the day she switched the parting in her hair, saying it
suited her.
One day, inside one of the books he’d given her, there was a note asking her to
meet him at the cinema. A matinee showing—a hall close to Park Street.
She was afraid to go, afraid not to. It was one thing to fall into conversations
with him on the portico, or at the Coffee House, or to walk over to College
Square to watch the swimmers in the pool. They had not yet strayed from that
immediate neighborhood, where they were simply fellow students, where it was
always reasonable for them to be.
The afternoon of the film she hesitated, and she ended up being so late that
she didn’t arrive until the interval, flustered, worried that he’d changed his mind
or had given up on her, almost daring him to do this. But he had dared her, too,
to show up.
He was there, outside the theatre, smoking a cigarette, standing apart from the
groups of people already discussing the first part of the film. The sun was
beating down and he lifted his hand as she approached, angling his head toward
her face, forming a little canopy over their heads. The gesture made her feel
alone with him, sheltered in that great crowd. Distinct from the pedestrians,
afloat on the city’s swell.
She saw no sign of irritation or impatience in his expression when he spotted

her. She saw only his pleasure in seeing her. As if he knew she would come; as
if he knew, even, that she would deliberate, and be as ridiculously late as she
was. When she asked what had happened in the film so far, he shook his head.
I don’t know, he said, handing her the ticket. He’d been standing there all the
while on the sidewalk, waiting for her. Waiting, until they were in the darkness
of the theatre, to take her hand.

Chapter 2
In the second year of his Ph.D. Subhash lived on his own, now that Richard,
who’d found a teaching job in Chicago, was gone.
In the spring semester, for three weeks, he boarded a research vessel with a
group of students and professors. As the ship pulled away, the water cleaved a
foaming trail that vanished even as it was being formed. The shoreline receded,
resting calmly like a thin brown snake upon the water. He saw the earth’s mass
shrinking, turning faint.
Under the sun’s glare, as they picked up speed, he felt the wind’s motion on
his face, the wild turbulence of the atmosphere. They docked first in Buzzards
Bay. A barge had hit rocks off the coast of Falmouth two years before, running
aground on a foggy night, spilling nearly two hundred thousand gallons of fuel
oil. The wind had pushed it into Wild Harbor. The hydrocarbons had killed off
the marsh grass. Fiddler crabs, unable to bury themselves, had frozen in place.
They lowered nets for trawling fish and coffee cans for sampling the
sediment. They learned that the contamination could persist indefinitely.
They continued on to survey Georges Bank, where the phytoplankton was in
bloom, the population of diatoms exploding in great swirls of peacock blue. But
on cloudy days the ocean looked opaque, as dark as tar.
He watched the life that circled the ship, gannets with creamy heads and
black-and-white wings, dolphins that leaped in pairs. Humpback whales spouted
mists as they breathed, playfully breaching in the water, sometimes swimming
beneath the ship without disturbing it, emerging on the other side.
Sailing even slightly east reminded Subhash of how far away he was from his
family. He thought of the time it took to cross even a tiny portion of the earth’s
surface.
Isolated on the ship with the scientists and other students and crew, he felt
doubly alone. Unable to fathom his future, severed from his past.
For a year and a half he had not seen his family. Not sat down with them, at
the end of the day, to share a meal. In Tollygunge his family did not have a
phone line. He’d sent a telegram to let them know he’d arrived. He was learning
to live without hearing their voices, to receive news of them only in writing.
Udayan’s letters no longer referred to Naxalbari, or ended with slogans. He

didn’t mention politics at all. Instead he wrote about football scores, or about
this or that in the neighborhood—a certain store closing down, a family they’d
known moving away. The latest film by Mrinal Sen.
He asked Subhash how his studies were going, and how he spent his days in
Rhode Island. He wanted to know when Subhash would return to Calcutta,
asking him, in one of the letters, if he planned to get married.
Subhash saved a few of these letters, since it no longer seemed necessary to
throw them away. But their blandness puzzled him. Though the handwriting was
the same, it was almost as if they’d been written by a different person. He
wondered what was happening in Calcutta, what Udayan might be masking. He
wondered how he and his parents were getting along.
Letters from his parents referred only obliquely to Gauri, and only as an
example of what not to do. We hope, when the time comes, you will trust us to
settle your future, to choose your wife and to be present at your wedding. We
hope you will not disregard our wishes, as your brother did.
He replied, reassuring his mother and father that his marriage was up to them
to arrange. He sent a portion of his stipend to help pay for the work on the house,
and wrote that he was eager to see them. And yet, day after day, cut off from
them, he ignored them.
Udayan was not alone; he’d remained in Tollygunge, attached to the place,
the way of life he’d always known. He’d provoked his parents but was still
protected by them. The only difference was that he was married, and that
Subhash was missing. And Subhash wondered if the girl, Gauri, had already
replaced him.
•••
One cloudy day in summer he went down to the beach at the foot of the campus.
At first he saw no one there apart from a fisherman casting for scup at the tip of
the jetty. Nothing but shallow waves breaking over the gray-and-yellow stones.
Then he noticed a woman walking, with a child and a jet-black dog.
The woman was locating sticks on the sand and throwing them to the dog.
She wore tennis sneakers without socks, a rubber rain slicker. A cotton skirt
billowed out around her knees.
The boy was holding a bucket, and Subhash watched as they untied their
sneakers and wandered over the rocks into the tide pools. They were looking for
starfish. The boy was frustrated, complaining that he could not find any.
Subhash rolled up his pants. He removed his shoes and waded in, knowing

where they hid. He pried one off a rock, and allowed it to rest, stiff but alive, in
his hand. He turned his wrist to reveal the underside, pointing to the eyespots at
the tips of the arms.
Do you know what will happen if I put it for a moment on your arm?
The boy shook his head.
It will pull off the little hairs on your skin.
Does it hurt?
Not really. Let me show you.
Where have you come from? the woman asked him.
Her face was plain but appealing, the pale blue of her eyes like the lining of a
mussel shell. She looked a bit older than Subhash. Her hair was long, dark blond,
marsh grass in winter.
India. Calcutta.
This must be pretty different.
It is.
Do you like it here?
No one had asked him this, until now. He looked out at the water, at the steel
piles of the two bridges stretching across the bay: the lower, cantilevered
centerpiece of the first, and the soaring steel towers of the second. The
symmetrical rise and fall of the Newport Bridge, recently completed, had arched
portals and cables that would light up at night.
He had learned from one of his professors about the bridge’s construction.
End to end, he was told, the wires of all the suspended cables would span just
over eight thousand miles. It was the distance between America and India; the
distance that now separated him from his family.
He saw the small, squared-off lighthouse, with three windows, like three
buttons on the placket of a shirt, that stood at Dutch Island’s tip. There was a
wooden pier that ended with a covered hut, where boats were moored, jutting out
at one end of the beach. A few sailboats were out, specks of white against the
navy sea.
There are times I think I have discovered the most beautiful place on earth, he
said.
He didn’t belong, but perhaps it didn’t matter. He wanted to tell her that he
had been waiting all his life to find Rhode Island. That it was here, in this minute
but majestic corner of the world, that he could breathe.
Her name was Holly. The boy, Joshua, was nine, and his summer vacation had

just begun. The dog’s name was Chester. They lived in Matunuck, close to one
of the salt ponds. They came to the campus beach every so often to walk the dog.
They’d gotten to know it because a woman who was looking after Joshua, on the
days Holly worked as a nurse at a small hospital in East Greenwich, lived
nearby.
She didn’t mention what her husband did. But Joshua had referred to him in
the course of the afternoon, asking Holly if his father was going to take him
fishing that weekend. Subhash supposed he worked at an office at that time of
day.
The next time he noticed Holly’s car parked in the lot he ventured out to say
hello. She seemed pleased to see him, waving from a distance, Chester bounding
ahead of her, Joshua trailing behind.
They began walking together, loosely, as they talked, up and down the short
beach. Seaweed was strewn everywhere, rockweed with air bladders like
textured orange grapes, lonely scraps of sea lettuce, tangled nests of rusty kelp
caught in the waves. A jellyfish had drifted up from the Caribbean, spread like a
flattened chrysanthemum on the hard sand.
When he asked her about her background, she said she had been born in
Massachusetts, that her family was French Canadian, that she had lived in Rhode
Island most of her life. She’d studied nursing at the university. She asked about
his studies there, and he explained that after his course work there was a
comprehensive exam to study for, then an original piece of research to conduct,
a dissertation to submit.
How long will all that take?
Another three years. Maybe more.
Holly knew all about the seabirds. She told him how to distinguish
buffleheads and pintails, gulls and terns. She pointed to the sandpipers sprinting
to the water’s edge and back. When he described the heron he’d seen his first
autumn in Rhode Island, she told him it had been a juvenile great blue without
its plumes.
Going to her car to fetch binoculars, she showed him how to magnify a group
of mergansers, beating their wings in a steadfast direction over the bay.
Do you know what the baby plovers do?
No.
They group themselves in the sky because the adults keep calling to each
other. They fly all the way from Nova Scotia to Brazil, resting only occasionally
on the waves.
They sleep on the sea?

They navigate the world better than we can. As if compasses were built into
their brains.
She was curious about birds in India, and so he described those that she
would not have seen. Mynas that nested in the walls of buildings, kokils that
cried throughout the city at the start of spring. Spotted owlets hooting at twilight
in Tollygunge, tearing apart geckoes and mice.
And you? she asked. Will you return to Calcutta when you finish?
If I can find work there.
For she was right; it was assumed, by his family, by himself, that his life here
was temporary.
What do you miss about it?
It’s where I was made.
He told her he had parents, a brother who was slightly younger. He told her
he had a sister-in-law now, a woman he had yet to meet.
Where do your brother and his wife live, now that they’re married?
With my parents.
He explained that daughters joined their in-laws after they married, and sons
stayed at home. That generations didn’t separate as they did here.
He knew that it was impossible for Holly, probably for any American woman,
to imagine that life. But she considered what he’d described.
It sounds better, in a way.
One afternoon Holly spread a bedcover, unpacking cheese sandwiches, sticks of
cucumber and carrot, almonds and sliced fruit. She shared this simple food with
him, and because the light lingered, it became their dinner. In the course of
conversation, while Joshua was playing at a distance from them, she mentioned
that she and Joshua’s father lived separately. This had been the case for nearly a
year.
She looked out at the water, her legs folded, her knees bent, her fingers
clasped loosely around them. Her hair was like a schoolgirl’s that day, in two
braids that trailed over her shoulders.
He didn’t want to pry. But without his having to ask she said, He’s with
another woman now.
He understood that she was making something clear to him. That though she
was a mother, she belonged to no one else.
It was the presence of Joshua, always with them, always between them, that
continued to motivate him to seek Holly out. It kept their friendship in check.

Under the broad sky, on the beach with her, his mind emptied. Until now he had
worked through evenings and weekends without a break. As if his parents were
watching him, monitoring his progress, and he was proving to them that he was
not wasting his time.
One particularly warm day, when she wore a sheer button-down shirt, he saw
the contour of one side of her body. The curve of her underarm.
When she unbuttoned her shirt and removed it, revealing the bathing suit top
she wore underneath, he saw that her stomach was soft. Her rounded breasts, set
wide apart, faced slightly away from one another. Her shoulders were spotted
with freckles from many summers in the sun.
She lay out on the beach while he played with Joshua at the water’s edge.
Joshua called him Subhash, just as Holly did. He was a mild-tempered boy,
speaking only when spoken to, drawn to Subhash but also suspicious of him.
They formed a tentative bond, skipping stones, and playing with Chester, who
pranced into the water to wash himself, shaking off his fur, bounding back with a
tennis ball in his teeth. Holly lay watching them through her sunglasses, lying on
her stomach, sometimes closing her eyes, napping a little.
When Subhash came back to her, to dry off his quickly tanning skin, she
neither lifted her eyes from the book she was reading nor moved away as he
settled himself beside her on the blanket, close enough for their bare shoulders
nearly to touch.
He was aware of the great chasms that separated them. It was not only that
she was American, and that she was probably ten years older than he was. He
was twenty-seven, and he guessed she was about thirty-five. It was that she had
already fallen in love, and been married, and had a child, and had her heart
broken. He had yet to experience any of those things.
Then one afternoon, going down to meet her, he saw that Joshua was not there.
It was a Friday, and the boy would be spending the night with his father. It was
important for Joshua to continue to have contact with him, she said.
It disturbed Subhash to think of Holly speaking to Joshua’s father, making
this plan. Behaving reasonably toward a man who had hurt her. Perhaps even
seeing him, in the course of dropping Joshua off.
When a light rain began to fall soon after the blanket was spread, Holly
invited him to join her for dinner at her home. She said there was some stew in
the refrigerator that would be enough for them both. And he accepted, not
wanting to part from her.
As the rain turned steadier he followed her toward Matunuck in Richard’s car.

He still thought of it that way, even though, when Richard moved to Chicago,
Subhash had bought the car from him.
After the highway the landscape turned flatter and emptier. He drove down a
dirt road lined with bulrushes. Then he arrived at the restrained palette of sand
and sea and sky.
He pulled behind her into the driveway, bleached shells crackling under the
tires as he slowed to a stop. The back of the cottage overlooked a salt pond.
There was no lawn at the front, just a bit of slanted fencing, bound together by
rusted wire. Here and there were other single-story cottages, plainly built.
Why are the windows boarded up? he asked, noticing the house that was
closest to hers.
In case of storms. No one’s living in that one now.
He gazed at the other homes that were visible, all of them facing the sea. Who
owns these?
Rich people. They come down from Boston or Providence on the weekends,
now that it’s summer. Some stay a week or two. They’ll all be gone by fall.
No one rents them, when they’re empty?
Sometimes students do, because they’re cheap. In spring I was the only one
out here.
Holly’s cottage was tiny: a kitchen and a sitting area at the front, a bathroom
and two bedrooms at the back, the ceilings low. Even the home he’d grown up in
had felt more spacious. She’d opened the door without inserting a key.
The radio was on, reporting the weather as they walked through the door.
Showers that evening would be heavy at times. Chester greeted them with his
barking, wagging his tail and pressing his body against their legs.
Did you forget to shut it off? he asked her, as she turned down the radio’s
volume.
I keep it on. I hate coming back to a quiet house.
He remembered the shortwave radio that he and Udayan had put together,
drawing information from all over the world to another isolated place. He
realized that in some sense Holly was more alone than he was. Her isolation,
without a husband, without neighbors around her, seemed severe.
The roof of the cottage was as thin as a membrane, the pelting sound of the
rain like an avalanche of gravel. Sand was everywhere, between the cushions of
the sofa, on the floor, on the round carpet in front of the fireplace where Chester
liked to sit.
Hastily she swept it out, just as the dust was swept out twice a day in

Calcutta, then shut the windows. The mantel above the fireplace was piled with
stones and shells, pieces of driftwood; there seemed to be little else decorating
the house.
He looked out the window, seeing the ocean covered with storm clouds, the
dark sand at the water’s edge.
Why bother going to the campus beach, when you have this?
It’s a change of scene. I love arriving at the bottom of that hill.
She busied herself in the kitchen. She was turning on the oven, filling the sink
with water, soaking lettuce leaves.
Will you get a fire started?
He went to the fireplace and looked at it. There were logs to one side, a set of
iron tools. Some ashes within. He removed the screen. He noticed a book of
matches on top of the mantel.
Let me show you, she said, already next to him before he needed to turn
around and ask.
She opened a vent that was inside, then arranged the logs and the thinner
sticks. Handing him one of the tools, she told him to nudge them together after
the flame was lit. He sat monitoring the fire, but she had lit it perfectly. There
was nothing to do other than allow it to warm his face and hands as Holly
prepared the meal.
He wondered if this was where she had lived with Joshua’s father, and if this
was the home he had left her in. Something told him no. There were only
Holly’s things, and Joshua’s. Their two raincoats and summer jackets hanging
on pegs by the door, their pairs of boots and sandals lined up beneath.
Do you mind checking the window over Joshua’s bed? I think I left it open.
The boy’s room was like a ship’s cabin, constricted and low. He saw the bed
beneath the window, covered with a plaid quilt, the pillow damp with rain.
On the floor, below a bookcase, was a partially completed jigsaw puzzle of
horses grazing in a meadow, looking like a frame to a missing image. He
crouched down and put a hand into the box, sifting through seemingly identical
pieces that were nevertheless distinct.
When he stood up he noticed a snapshot lying on Joshua’s chest of drawers.
Right away Subhash knew it was Joshua’s father, Holly’s husband. A man in
shorts, barefoot, on a beach somewhere, holding a smaller version of Joshua on
his shoulders. His face tilted up at his son, both of them laughing.
Holly called him to dinner. They ate pieces of chicken cooked in mushrooms
and wine, served with bread warmed in the oven instead of with rice. The taste

was complex, flavorful but without heat of any kind.
He pulled out the bay leaf she’d put in. These grow on a tree behind my
family’s home, he said. Only they’re twice the size.
Will you bring some back for me, when you go to visit them?
He told her he would, but it felt unreal, in her company, that he would ever be
back in Tollygunge, with his family. Even more unreal that Holly would still
care to spend time with him when he returned.
She told him she’d lived in the cottage since last September. Joshua’s father
had offered to move out of the old place they’d shared, off Ministerial Road, but
she didn’t want to be there. The cottage had belonged to her grandparents. She’d
spent time in it as a young girl.
After the stew there were slices of an apple cake and mugs of lemon tea. As
the rain fell harder, lashing the windowpanes, Holly spoke of Joshua. She was
worried about how the separation was affecting him. Since his father had left,
she said, he’d turned inward, frightened by things that had not frightened him
before.
What things?
He’s afraid of sleeping alone. You see how close our rooms are. But he’s
been coming into my bed at night. He hasn’t done that for years. He’s always
loved swimming, but this summer he’s nervous in the water, afraid of the waves.
And he doesn’t want to go back to school in the fall.
He swam at the beach the other day.
Maybe because you were there.
Chester began to bark and Holly got up and clipped the leash to his collar.
She threw on her rain jacket, and picked up an umbrella by the entrance.
You stay where it’s dry. I’ll only be a minute or two.
While he waited for her to return, he went to the sink and washed the dishes.
He marveled at the self-sufficient nature of her life. And he was also slightly
nervous for her, living alone in such a remote place, without bothering to lock
her door. There was no one to help her, apart from the babysitter who looked
after Joshua while she worked. Though her parents were alive, though they lived
nearby, in another part of Rhode Island, they had not come to take care of her.
And yet he himself did not feel completely alone with her here. They were
accompanied by Chester, and Joshua’s clothes and toys. Even a picture of the
man she’d once loved.
That’s the first night in a long time I haven’t had to do the dishes after dinner,
she said, joining him again. The plates and glasses had been put away, the dish

towel was drying on a hook.
I don’t mind.
You’ll be all right, driving home in this weather? Can I lend you a jacket?
I’ll be fine.
Let me walk you under the umbrella to your car.
He put his hand on the doorknob. But he didn’t want to go; he still didn’t
want to leave her. As he stood wavering, he felt the side of her face, pressed
lightly against the back of his shirt. Then her hand, resting on his shoulder. Her
voice, asking if he’d like to stay.
Her bedroom was the mirror image of Joshua’s. But because the bed was
larger there was room for practically nothing else. Inside this room he was able
to forget about what his parents would think, and the consequences of what he
was about to do. He forgot about everything other than the body of the woman in
the bed with him, guiding his fingers to the hollow of her throat, over the ridge
of her collarbones, down toward the softer skin of her breasts.
The surface of her skin fascinated him. All the minute markings and
imperfections, the patterns of freckles and moles and spots. The range of tones
and shades she contained, not only the inverse shadows from tanning,
highlighting portions of her body he was seeing for the first time, but also an
inherent, more subtle mixture, as quietly variegated as a handful of sand, that he
could discern only now, under the lamplight.
She allowed him to touch the slack skin of her belly, the coarse mound,
darker than her hair, between her legs. When he paused, uncertain, she looked up
at him, incredulous.
Really?
He turned his face. I should have told you.
Subhash, it doesn’t matter. I don’t care.
He felt her fingers clasping his erection, positioning it, drawing him near. He
was embarrassed, exhilarated. He felt and did what he had only imagined until
now. He moved inside her, against her, unaware and also aware, with every
nerve of his being, of where he was.
The rain had stopped. He heard the sound of water, from the leaves of the tree
that spread over the roof of her house, a sound that was like sporadic bursts of
applause. He lay beside her, meaning to go back to his apartment before the next
day began, but he realized after a few minutes that Holly was not simply being
quiet. Without warning, she had fallen asleep.
It felt wrong to wake her, or to go without telling her. So he remained. In the

bed that was warm from the heat of their bodies, he was unable at first to fall
asleep. He was distracted by her presence in spite of the intimacy they’d just
shared.
In the morning he woke up to the sound of Chester’s breathing, to the smell
of his fur, his paws clicking softly around the three sides of the bed. The dog
stood patiently, panting by Holly’s side. The room was warm and bright.
She’d been sleeping with her back to Subhash, nestled against him,
unclothed. She got out of bed and pulled on the jeans and blouse she’d been
wearing the night before.
I’ll make coffee, she said.
He dressed quickly. Stepping out to use the bathroom, he saw the open door
to Joshua’s room. The boy’s absence had made it possible. He was there because
Joshua was not.
Holly came back from taking Chester outside, and offered to make breakfast.
But Subhash told her he had work to catch up on.
Should I let you know, the next time Joshua goes over to his father’s?
He felt uncertain; he saw that the encounter of the night before might be a
beginning, not an end. At the same time he was impatient to see her again.
If you like.
Opening the door, he saw that the tide was in. The sky was bright, the ocean
calm. No sign, apart from all the seaweed that had washed like empty nests up
on the sand, of the storm there had been.

Chapter 3
He wanted to tell Udayan. Somehow, he wanted to confess to his brother the
profound step he’d taken. He wanted to describe who Holly was, what she
looked like, how she lived. To discuss the knowledge of women that they now
shared. But it wasn’t something he could convey in a letter or a telegram. Not a
conversation he could imagine, even if a connection were possible, taking place
over the phone.
Friday evenings: this was when he was able to visit Holly at the cottage and
to spend the night. The rest of the time he kept a distance, sometimes meeting
her for a sandwich on the beach but nothing more. For most of the week he was
able to pretend, if he needed to, that he did not know her, and that nothing in his
life had changed.
But on Friday evenings he drove to her cottage, turning off the highway onto
the long wooded road that gave way to the salt marsh. Through Saturday,
sometimes as late as Sunday morning, he stayed. She was undemanding, always
at ease with him. Trusting, each time they parted, that they would meet again.
They walked along the beach, on firm sand ribbed by the tide. He swam with
her in the cold water, tasting its salt in his mouth. It seemed to enter his
bloodstream, into every cell, purifying him, leaving sand in his hair. On his back
he floated weightless, his arms spread, the world silenced. Only the sea’s lowpitched hum, and the sun glowing like hot coals behind his eyes.
Once or twice they did certain ordinary things, as if they were already
husband and wife. Going together to the supermarket, filling the cart with food,
putting the bags in the trunk of her car. Things he would not have done with a
woman, in Calcutta, before getting married.
In Calcutta, when he was a student, it had been enough to feel an attraction
toward certain women. He’d been too shy to pursue them. He didn’t court Holly
as he’d observed college friends trying to impress women they were interested
in, women who almost always became their wives. As Udayan had surely
courted Gauri. He didn’t take Holly to the movies or to restaurants. He didn’t
write her notes, delivered, so as not to rouse suspicion from a girl’s parents, by
the aid of a friend, asking her to meet him here or there.
Holly was beyond such things. The only place it made sense for them to meet

was at her home, where it was easiest to be, where he liked to spend time, and
where she saw to their needs. The hours passed with their talking, long
conversations about their families, their pasts, though she didn’t talk about her
marriage. She never tired of asking him about his upbringing. The most ordinary
details of his life, which would have made no impression on a girl from Calcutta,
were what made him distinctive to her.
One evening, as they drove back together from the grocery store, where
they’d bought corn and watermelon to celebrate the Fourth of July, Subhash
described his father setting out each morning to the market, carrying a burlap
sack in his hand. Shopping for what was available, what was affordable that day.
If their mother complained that he hadn’t brought back enough, he’d say, Better
to eat a small piece of fish with flavor than a large one without. He’d witnessed a
famine of devastating proportions, never taking a single meal for granted.
Some mornings, Subhash told her, he and Udayan had accompanied their
father to shop, or to pick up rationed rice and coal. They had waited with him in
the long lines, under the shade of his umbrella when the sun was strong.
They had helped him to carry back the fish and the vegetables, the mangoes
that their father sniffed and prodded, that he sometimes set to further ripen under
the bed. On Sundays they bought meat from the butcher, carved from a hanging
goat carcass, weighed on the scale, wrapped in a packet of dried leaves.
Are you close to your father? Holly asked him.
For some reason he thought of the picture in Joshua’s room, of Joshua on top
of his father’s shoulders. Subhash’s father had not been an affectionate parent,
but he had been a consistent one.
I admire him, he said.
And your brother? Do you two get along?
He paused. Yes and no.
So often it’s both, she said.
•••
In her cramped bedroom, setting aside his guilt, he cultivated an ongoing
defiance of his parents’ expectations. He was aware that he could get away with
it, that it was merely the shoals of physical distance that allowed his defiance to
persist.
He thought of Narasimhan as an ally now; Narasimhan and his American
wife. Sometimes he imagined what it would be like to lead a similar life with
Holly. To live the rest of his life in America, to disregard his parents, to make

his own family with her.
At the same time he knew that it was impossible. That she was an American
was the least of it. Her situation, her child, her age, the fact that she was
technically another man’s wife, all of it would be unthinkable to his parents,
unacceptable. They would judge her for those things.
He didn’t want to put Holly through that. And yet he continued to see her on
Fridays, forging this new clandestine path.
Udayan would have understood. Perhaps he would even respect him for it.
But there was nothing Udayan could say that Subhash did not already know; that
he was involved with a woman he didn’t intend to marry. A woman whose
company he was growing used to, but whom, perhaps due to his own
ambivalence, he didn’t love.
And so he divulged nothing about Holly to anyone. The affair remained
concealed, inaccessible. His parents’ disapproval threatened to undermine what
he was doing, lodged like a silent gatekeeper at the back of his mind. But
without his parents there, he was able to keep pushing back their objection,
farther and farther, like the promise of the horizon, anticipated from a ship, that
one never reached.
One Friday he was unable to see her; Holly phoned to say there had been a lastminute change in plans, and Joshua was not going to go to his father’s. Subhash
understood that these were the terms. And yet, that weekend, he found himself
wishing the plan would change.
The following weekend, when he visited her again, the phone rang as they
were having dinner. She began talking, trailing the cord so that she was able to
sit on the sofa, on her own. He realized it was Joshua’s father.
Joshua had come down with a fever, and Holly was telling her husband to put
him into a lukewarm bath. Explaining how much medicine to give.
Subhash was surprised, also troubled, that she could speak to him calmly,
without acrimony. The person on the other end of the line remained deeply
familiar to her. He saw that because of Joshua, in spite of their separation, their
lives were permanently tied.
He sat at the table with his back to her, not eating, waiting for the
conversation to end. He looked at the calendar that was on the wall next to
Holly’s phone.
The following day was August 15, Indian Independence. A holiday for the
country, lights on government buildings, flag hoisting and parades. An ordinary
day here.

Holly hung up the phone. You look upset, she observed. Is something wrong?
I just remembered something.
What’s that?
It was his first memory, August 1947, though sometimes he wondered if it
was only a comforting trick of the mind. For it was a night the entire country
claimed to remember, and the recollection that was his had always been
saturated by his parents’ retelling.
It had been the only thing on his parents’ minds that evening, as fireworks
went off in Delhi, as ministers were sworn in. As Gandhi fasted to bring peace to
Calcutta, as the country was born. Udayan had been just two, Subhash closer to
four. He remembered the unfamiliar touch of a doctor’s hand on his forehead,
the slight slaps on his arms, on the soles of his feet. The weight of the quilts
when chills overtook them.
He remembered turning to his younger brother, both of them shivering. He
remembered the unfocused glaze in Udayan’s eyes, the flush of his face, the
nonsensical things he’d said.
My parents were worried that it was typhoid, he told Holly. They were
worried, for a few days, that we might die, the way another young boy in our
neighborhood recently had. Even now, when they talk about it, they sound
afraid. As if they’re still waiting for our fevers to break.
That’s what happens when you become a parent, Holly told him. Time stops
when something threatens them. The meaning goes away.

Chapter 4
One weekend in September, when Joshua was visiting his father, Holly
suggested that the two of them go to a part of Rhode Island he hadn’t seen. They
took the ferry from Galilee to Block Island, traveling more than ten miles out to
sea, and walked together from the harbor to an inn.
There had been a last-minute cancellation, and so they were given a room on
the top floor, nicer than the one Holly had booked, with a view of the ocean, a
four-poster bed. They had come to see the kestrels, starting to fly south now over
the island. Unpacking their things for the weekend, she presented him with a
gift: it was a pair of binoculars, in a brown leather case.
This is unnecessary, he said, admiring them.
I thought it was time to stop passing mine between us.
He kissed her shoulder, her mouth. He had nothing else to give her in
exchange. He studied the little compass that was affixed between the lenses, and
placed the strap around his neck.
The island would soon be shutting down for the season, the tourists
disappearing, only one or two restaurants remaining open for the tiny population
that never left. The aster was in bloom, the poison ivy turning red. But the sun
shone and the air was calm, a perfect late summer’s day.
They rented bikes and cycled around. It took him a moment to regain his
balance. He had not been on a bicycle since he was a boy, since he and Udayan
had learned to ride on the quiet lanes of Tollygunge. He remembered the front
wheel wobbling, one of them on the seat, the other one pedaling the heavy black
bicycle they’d managed to share.
Folded in his pocket was a letter from Udayan. It had come the day before.

A sparrow got into the house today, into the room we used
to share. The shutters were open, it must have hopped in
through the bars. I found it flapping around. And I thought
of you, thinking how much this nuisance would have
excited you. It was as if you’d come back. Of course it flew
away as soon as I walked in.

Being twenty-six feels fine so far. And you, in another
two years, will turn thirty. A new phase of life for us both,
more than halfway now to fifty!
I have already grown quite boring, still teaching,
tutoring students. Let’s hope they’ll go on to accomplish
greater things than I did. The best part of the day is coming
home to Gauri. We read together, we listen to the radio,
and so the evenings pass.
Did you know twenty-six was the age Castro was
imprisoned? By then he’d already led the attack on the
Moncada Barracks. And did you know, his brother was in
jail with him at the same time? They were kept isolated,
forbidden to see one another.
Speaking of communication, I was reading about
Marconi the other day. He was just twenty-seven when he
was sitting in Newfoundland, listening for the letter S from
Cornwall. His wireless station on Cape Cod looks close to
where you are. It’s in a place called Wellfleet. Have you
been there?
The letter consoled Subhash, also confused him. Invoking codes and signals,
games of the past, the singular bond he and Subhash had shared. Invoking
Castro, but describing quiet evenings at home with his wife. He wondered if
Udayan had traded one passion for another, and his commitment was to Gauri
now.
He followed Holly along curving narrow roads, past the enormous salt pond
that bisected the island and the glacial ravines. Past rolling meadows and
turreted properties. The pastures were barren, with boulders here and there,
partially framed by stone walls. He noticed that there were hardly any trees.
Quickly they traveled from one side of the island to the other, only about
three miles across. The kestrels glided over the bluff and out to sea, their wings
motionless, their bodies seeming to drift backward when the wind was strong.
Holly pointed to Montauk, at the tip of Long Island, visible that day across the
water.
In the afternoon they cooled themselves in the ocean, walking down a steep

set of rickety wooden steps, stripping to their bathing suits and swimming in
rough waves. In spite of the warmth, the days were turning brief again. They
rode over to another beach to watch the sun sink like a melting scarlet stain into
the water.
Returning to the town, they saw a box turtle at the edge of the road. They
stopped, and Subhash picked it up, studying its markings, then removing it to the
grass from which it had come.
We’ll have to tell Joshua, Subhash said.
Holly said nothing. She’d turned pensive, the glow of twilight tinting her
face, her mood strange. He wondered if his mentioning Joshua had upset her.
She was quiet at dinner, eating little, saying that their day in the sun had left her
with a bit of a headache.
For the first time they kissed each other good night but nothing more. He lay
beside her, listening to the crash of the sea, watching a waxing moon rise into
the sky. He longed for sleep, but it would not immerse him; that night the waters
he sought for his repose were deep enough to wade in, but not to swim.
In the morning she seemed better, sitting across from him at the breakfast
table, hungry for toast, scrambled eggs. But as they waited for the ferry on the
way back to the mainland, she told him that she had something to say.
I’ve enjoyed getting to know you, Subhash. Spending this time.
The shift he felt was instantaneous. It was as if she’d picked them up and put
them off the precarious path they were on, just as he’d removed the turtle from
the road the day before. Putting their connection to one another out of harm’s
way.
I want us to end this nicely, she continued. I think we can.
He heard her say that she had been speaking with Joshua’s father, and that
they were going to try to work things out between them.
He left you.
He wants to come back. I’ve known him for twelve years, Subhash. He’s
Joshua’s father. I’m thirty-six years old.
Why did we come here together, if you don’t want to see me again?
I thought you might like it. You never expected this to go anywhere, did you?
You and me? With Joshua?
I like Joshua.
You’re young. You’re going to want to have your own children someday. In a
few years you’ll go back to India, live with your family. You’ve said so yourself.
She had caught him in his own web, telling him what he already knew. He

realized he would never visit her cottage again. The gift of the binoculars, so that
they would no longer have to share; he understood the reason for this, too.
He could not blame her; she had done him a favor by ending it. And yet he
was furious with her for being the one to decide.
We can remain friends, Subhash. You could use a friend.
He told her he had heard enough, that he was not interested in remaining
friends. He told her that, when the ferry reached the port in Galilee, he would
wait for a bus to take him home. He told her not to call him.
On the ferry they sat separately. He took out Udayan’s letter, reading it once
again. But when he was finished, standing on the deck, he tore it into pieces, and
let them escape his hands.
He began his third autumn in Rhode Island, 1971.
Once more the leaves of the trees lost their chlorophyll, replaced by the
shades he had left behind: vivid hues of cayenne and turmeric and ginger
pounded fresh every morning in the kitchen, to season the food his mother
prepared.
Once more these colors seemed to have been transported across the world,
appearing in the treetops that lined his path. The colors intensified over a period
of weeks until the leaves began to dwindle, foliage clustered here and there
among the branches, like butterflies feeding at the same source, before falling to
the ground.
He thought of Durga Pujo coming again to Calcutta. As he was first getting to
know America, the absence of the holiday hadn’t mattered to him, but now he
wanted to go home. The past two years, around this time, he’d received a
battered parcel from his parents, containing gifts for him. Kurtas too thin to wear
most of the time in Rhode Island, bars of sandalwood soap, some Darjeeling tea.
He thought of the Mahalaya playing on All India Radio. Throughout
Tollygunge, across Calcutta and the whole of West Bengal, people were waking
up in darkness to listen to the oratorio as light crept into the sky, invoking Durga
as she descended to earth with her four children.
Every year at this time, Hindu Bengalis believed, she came to stay with her
father, Himalaya. For the days of Pujo, she relinquished her husband, Shiva,
before returning once more to married life. The hymns recounted the story of
Durga being formed, and the weapons that were provided for each of her ten
arms: sword and shield, bow and arrow. Axe, mace, conch shell, and discus.
Indra’s thunderbolt, Shiva’s trident. A flaming dart, a garland of snakes.

This year no parcel came from his family. Only a telegram. The message
consisted of two sentences, lifeless, drifting at the top of a sea.
Udayan killed. Come back if you can.

Part III

Chapter 1
He left behind the brief winter days, the obscure place where he’d grieved alone.
Where another Christmas was coming, where in December the doorways and
windows of small shops and homes were decorated with beaded frames of light.
He took a bus to Boston and boarded a night flight to Europe. The second
flight involved a layover in the Middle East. He waited in the terminals, he
walked from gate to gate. At last he landed in Delhi. From there he boarded an
overnight train to Howrah Station.
As he traveled halfway across India, from companions on the train, he heard a
bit about what had been taking place in Calcutta during the time he’d been away.
Information that neither Udayan nor his parents had mentioned in letters. Events
Subhash had not come across in any newspaper in Rhode Island, or heard on the
AM radio in his car.
By 1970, people told him, things had taken a turn. By then the Naxalites were
operating underground. Members surfaced only to carry out dramatic attacks.
They ransacked schools and colleges across the city. In the middle of the
night they burned records and defaced portraits, raising red flags. They plastered
Calcutta with images of Mao.
They intimidated voters, hoping to disrupt the elections. They fired pipe guns
on the streets. They hid bombs in public places, so that people were afraid to sit
in a cinema hall, or stand in line at a bank.
Then the targets turned specific. Unarmed traffic constables at busy
intersections. Wealthy businessmen, certain educators. Members of the rival
party, the CPI(M).
The killings were sadistic, gruesome, intended to shock. The wife of the
French consul was murdered in her sleep. They assassinated Gopal Sen, the vicechancellor of Jadavpur University. They killed him on campus while he was
taking his evening walk. It was the day before he planned to retire. They
bludgeoned him with steel bars, and stabbed him four times.
They took control of certain neighborhoods, calling them Red Zones. They
took control of Tollygunge. They set up makeshift hospitals, safe houses. People
began avoiding these neighborhoods. Policemen started chaining their rifles to
their belts.

But then new legislation was passed, and an old law was renewed. Laws that
authorized the police and the paramilitary to enter homes without a warrant, to
arrest young men without charges. The old law had been created by the British,
to counter Independence, to cut off its legs.
After that, the police started to cordon off and search the neighborhoods of
the city. Sealing exits, knocking on doors, interrogating Calcutta’s young men.
The police had killed Udayan. This much Subhash was able to surmise.
He had forgotten the possibility of so many human beings in one space. The
concentrated stench of so much life. He welcomed the sun on his skin, the
absence of bitter cold. But it was winter in Calcutta. The people filling the
platform, passengers and coolies, and vagrants for whom the station was merely
a shelter, were bundled in woolen caps and shawls.
Only two people had come to receive him. A younger cousin of his father’s,
Biren Kaka, and his wife. They were standing by a fruit vendor, unable to smile
when they spotted him. He understood this diminished welcome, but he could
not understand why, after he’d traveled for more than two days, after he’d been
away for more than two years, his parents were unwilling to come even this far
to acknowledge his return. When he’d left India his mother had promised a
hero’s welcome, a garland of flowers draped around his neck when he stepped
off the train.
It was here, at the station, that Subhash had last seen Udayan. He’d arrived
late on the evening of his departure, not riding with Subhash and his parents and
other relatives who’d formed a small caravan from Tollygunge, but assuring him
that he’d meet up with them on the platform. Subhash was already seated on the
train, he had already said his good-byes, when Udayan put his head up to the
window.
He extended his hand through the bars, reaching for Subhash’s shoulder and
pressing it, then slapping his face lightly. Somehow, at the final moment, they
had found one another in that great crowd.
He pulled some green-skinned oranges from his book bag, giving them to
Subhash to eat on the journey. Try not to forget us completely, he said.
You’ll look after them? Subhash asked, referring to their parents. You’ll let
me know if anything happens?
What’s going to happen?
Well then, if you need anything?
Come back someday, that’s all.

Udayan remained close, leaning forward, his hand on Subhash’s shoulder,
saying nothing else, until the engine sounded. His mother began weeping. Even
his father’s eyes were damp as the train began to pull away. But Udayan stood
smiling between them, his hand raised high, his gaze fixed as Subhash retreated
farther and farther away from them.
As they crossed Howrah Bridge the light was still gray. On the other side, the
markets had just opened. The sidewalks were lined with baskets, displaying the
morning’s vegetables. They traveled through the broad heart of the city, toward
Dalhousie, down Chowringhee. A city with nothing, with everything. By the
time they were approaching Tollygunge, crossing Prince Anwar Shah Road, the
day was bustling and bright.
The streets were as he remembered. Crowded with cycle rickshaws, the
squawking of their horns sounding to his ears like a flock of agitated geese. The
congestion was of a different order, that of a small town as opposed to a city.
The buildings lower, spaced farther apart.
He saw the tram depot come into view, the stalls where people sold biscuits
and crackers in glass jars, and boiled aluminum kettles of tea. The walls of the
film studios, the Tolly Club, were covered with slogans. Make 1970s the decade
of liberation. Rifles bring freedom, and freedom is coming.
As they turned before the small mosque off Baburam Ghosh Road, Subhash
felt his prolonged journey ending too soon. The taxi fit but just barely,
threatening to scrape the walls on either side. He was assaulted by the sour,
septic smell of his neighborhood, of his childhood. The smell of standing water.
The stink of algae, of open drains.
As they approached the two ponds, he saw that the small home he’d left
behind had been replaced by something impressive, ungainly. Some scaffolding
was still in place, but the construction looked complete. He saw palm trees rising
behind the house. But the mango tree that had spread its dark branches and
leaves over the original roof was gone.
He stepped across a slab set over the gutter that separated his family’s
property from the street. A pair of swinging doors led to the courtyard. Mildew
coated the walls. But it was still a welcoming space, with a tube well in one
corner, and terra-cotta pots containing dahlias, and the marigold and basil his
mother used for prayers. A vine with a tangle of yellow branches was in flower
at that time of year.
This was the enclosure where he and Udayan had played as children. Where
they had drawn and practiced sums with bits of coal or broken clay. Where

Udayan had run out the day they’d been told to stay in, falling off the plank
before the concrete had dried.
Subhash saw the footprints and walked past them. He looked at the upper
portion of the house, rising out of what had first been there. Long terraces, like
airy corridors, ran from front to back down one side. They were enclosed by
grilles forged in a trefoil pattern. The emerald paint was glossy and bright.
Through one of the grilles he saw his parents, sitting on the top floor. He
strained to see their expressions but could make out nothing. Now that he was so
close, part of him wanted to return to the taxi, which was backing out slowly. He
wanted to tell the driver to take him somewhere else.
He pressed the buzzer that Udayan had installed. It still worked.
His parents did not stand or say his name. They did not come downstairs to
greet him. Instead his father lowered a key on a string through the ironwork.
Subhash waited to retrieve it, and opened a heavy padlock at the side of the
house. Finally he heard his father clearing his throat, seeming to loosen the
secretions of a long silence.
Lock the gate behind you, he instructed Subhash, before retracting the key.
Subhash climbed a staircase with smooth black banisters, sky-blue walls.
Biren Kaka and his wife followed behind. When he saw his parents, standing
together on the terrace, he bent over to touch their feet. He was an only son, an
experience that had left no impression in the first fifteen months of his life. That
was to begin in earnest now.
At first his parents looked the same to him. The oily sheen to his mother’s
hair, the pallid cast of her skin. The lean, stooping frame of his father, the sheer
cotton of his kurta. The downward turn to his mouth that might have conveyed
disappointment, but suggested a fixed amiability instead. The difference was in
their eyes. Calloused by grief, blunted by what no parent should have seen.
In spite of the picture that hung in his parents’ new room, which they took
him to see, he could not believe that Udayan was nowhere. But here was the
proof. The photo had been taken nearly ten years ago by a relative who owned a
camera, one of the only pictures of the brothers that existed. It was the day they
had gotten the results of their higher secondary exams, the day his father said
had been the proudest of his life.
He and Udayan had posed side by side in the courtyard. Subhash saw an inch
of his own shoulder, pressed up beside Udayan’s. The rest of him, in order to
make the death portrait, had been cut away.
He stood before the image and wept, his head cradled in his arm, in an
awkward embrace of himself. But his parents, beyond the shock of it, observed

him as they might an actor on a stage, waiting for the scene to end.
From the terrace he had an open view of the place where he and Udayan had
been raised. Lower rooftops of tin or tile, with squash vines trailing over them.
The tops of walls, dotted white, splattered with excrement from crows. Two
oblong ponds on the other side of the lane. The lowland, looking to him like a
mudflat after the tide.
He went downstairs, to the ground floor, to the part of the house that was
unchanged, to the room he and Udayan had once shared. He was struck by how
dark the room was, how small. There was the study table beneath the window,
the shelves set into the wall, the simple rack where they’d draped their clothes.
The bed they’d slept on together had been replaced by a cot. Udayan must have
used the room to tutor students. He saw textbooks on the shelves, measuring
instruments and pens. He wondered what had happened to the shortwave. All the
political books were gone.
He unpacked his belongings and bathed with water that the pump released
twice a day from the corporation tank. The water, too rich with iron, had a
metallic smell. It left his hair stiff, his skin tacky to the touch.
He’d been told to go upstairs to eat his lunch. That was where the kitchen was
now. On the floor of his parents’ bedroom, where Udayan’s portrait was, plates
had been set out for his father, for Biren Kaka and his wife, for Subhash. His
mother would eat after serving them, as she always did.
He sat with his back to the portrait. He could not bear to look at it again.
He was ravenous for the simple meal: dal and slices of fried bitter melon, rice
and fish stew. Sweet pabda fish from the river, their cooked eyes like yellow
pebbles.
Again the broad plates of heavy brass. The freedom to eat with his fingers.
Drinking water was poured from a black clay urn in the corner of the room. The
cup heavy in his hand, the rim slightly too wide for his mouth.
Where is she? he asked.
Who?
Gauri.
His mother ladled the dal onto his rice. She takes her meals in the kitchen, she
said.
Why?
She prefers it.
He didn’t believe her. He didn’t say what came to his mind. That Udayan

would have hated them for segregating her, for observing such customs.
Is she there now? I would like to meet her.
She’s resting. She’s not feeling well today.
Have you called a doctor?
His mother looked down, preoccupied with the food she was serving to the
others.
There’s no need for that.
Is it serious?
Finally she explained herself.
She is expecting a child, she said.
After lunch he went out, walking past the two ponds. There were scattered
clumps of water hyacinth in the lowland, and still enough water to form puddles
here and there.
He noticed a small stone marker that had not been there before. He walked
toward it. On it was Udayan’s name. Beneath that, the years of his birth and
death: 1945–1971.
It was a memorial tablet, erected for political martyrs. Here where the water
came and went, where it collected and vanished, was where his brother’s party
comrades had chosen to put it.
Subhash remembered an afternoon playing football with Udayan and a few of
the other neighborhood boys, in the field on the other side of the lowland. He’d
twisted his ankle in the middle of the game. He’d told Udayan to keep playing,
that he’d manage on his own, but Udayan had insisted on accompanying him.
He remembered draping an arm over Udayan’s shoulder, leaning on him as he
limped back, the swollen ankle turning heavy with pain. He remembered Udayan
teasing him even then for the clumsy move that had led to the injury, saying their
side had been winning until then. And at the same time supporting him, guiding
him home.
He returned to the house, intending to rest briefly, but fell into a deep sleep.
When he woke up it was late, past the hour his parents normally ate dinner. He’d
slept through the meal. The fan wasn’t moving; the current had gone. He found a
flashlight under the mattress, switched it on, and went upstairs.
The door to his parents’ bedroom was closed. Going to the kitchen to see if
there was anything left to eat, he saw Gauri sitting on the floor, with a candle lit
beside her.

He recognized her at once, from the snapshot Udayan had sent. But she was
no longer the relaxed college girl who had smiled for his brother. That picture of
her had been in black and white, but now the absence of color, even in the warm
light of the candle, was more profound.
Her long hair was pulled back above her neck. She sat with her head down,
her wrists bare, dressed in a sari of crisp white. She was thin, without a trace of
the life she was carrying. She wore glasses, a detail withheld from the
photograph. When she looked up at him, he saw in spite of the glasses another
thing the photo had not fully conveyed. The frank beauty of her eyes.
He took her in but did not speak to her, watching her eat some dal and rice.
She could have been anyone, a stranger. And yet she was now a part of his
family, the mother of Udayan’s child. She was dragging a few grains of salt with
her index finger from the little pile at the edge of her plate and mixing it into her
food. He saw that the fish he had been served at lunch had not been given to her.
I am Subhash, he said.
I know.
I don’t mean to disturb you.
They tried to wake you for dinner.
I’m wide awake now.
She started to get up. Let me fix a plate for you.
Finish your meal. I can get it myself.
He felt her eyes on him as he scanned the shelves with his flashlight, retrieved
a dish, uncovered the pots and pans that had been left for him.
You sound just like him, she said.
He sat down beside her, the candle between them, facing her. He saw her
hand resting over her plate, the tips of her fingers coated with food.
Is it because of my parents that you’re not eating fish?
She ignored his question. You have the same voice, she said.
Quickly he turned passive, waking up in his box of white mosquito netting.
Waiting for his tea to be handed to him in the morning, waiting for his discarded
clothes to be washed and folded, for his meals to be served. He never rinsed a
plate or cup, knowing the houseboy would come to take them away. Coarse
crystals of sugar studded his breakfast toast, which he washed down with hot
too-sweet tea, tiny ants arriving to haul away the crumbs.
The layout of the house was disorienting. The whitewash was so fresh that it
rubbed off on his hand when he touched the walls. In spite of the new

construction, the house felt unwelcoming. There was more space to withdraw to,
to sleep in, to be alone in. But no place had been designated to gather together,
no furniture to accommodate guests.
The terrace on the top floor was where his parents preferred to sit, the only
part of the house they seemed fully to possess. It was here that, after his father
returned from work, they took their evening tea, on a pair of simple wooden
chairs. At that height the mosquitoes were fewer, and when the current failed
there was still some breeze. His father didn’t bother to unfold the newspaper. His
mother had no sewing in her lap. Until it grew dark, through the pattern of the
trefoil grille, they looked out at the neighborhood; this seemed to be their only
pastime.
If the houseboy was out on an errand, it was Gauri who served tea. But she
never joined them. After helping his mother with the morning chores she kept to
her own room, on the second floor of the house. He noticed that his parents did
not talk to her; that they scarcely acknowledged her presence when she came
into view.
Belatedly he was presented with his gifts for Durga Pujo. There was gray
material for trousers, striped material for shirts. Two sets of each, for he was also
given Udayan’s share. More than once, offering him a biscuit, asking if he
needed more tea, his mother called him Udayan instead of Subhash. And more
than once he answered, not correcting her.
He struggled to interact with them. When he asked his father how his days
were at the office, his father replied that they were as they’d always been. When
he asked his mother if there had been many orders that year, to embroider saris
for the tailor shop, she said her eyes could no longer take the strain.
His parents asked no questions about America. Inches away, they avoided
looking Subhash in the eye. He wondered whether his parents would ask him to
remain in Calcutta, to abandon his life in Rhode Island. But there was no
mention of this.
Nor was there mention of the possibility of their arranging a marriage for
him. They were in no position to plan a wedding, to think about his future. An
hour often passed without their speaking. The shared quiet fell over them,
binding them more tightly than any conversation could.
Again it was assumed that he would ask little of them, that somehow he
would see to his own needs.
In the early evening, always at the same time, his mother gathered a few
flowers from the pots in the courtyard and left the house. From the terrace he
saw her, walking past the ponds.

She stopped at the marker by the edge of the lowland, rinsing the stone clean
with water she drew from a small brass urn, the one she had used to bathe him
and Udayan when they were small, and then she placed the flowers on top.
Without asking, he knew that this was the hour; that this had been the time of
day.
On the family radio they listened to the news of East Pakistan turning into
Bangladesh after thirteen days of war. For Muslim Bengalis it meant liberation,
but for Calcutta the conflict had meant another surge of refugees from across the
border. Charu Majumdar was still in hiding. He was India’s most wanted man, a
bounty of ten thousand rupees on his head.
Silently they listened to the reports, but his father hardly seemed to pay
attention. Though the combing raids had ended, his father still kept the key to the
house under his pillow when he slept. Sometimes, at random, sitting at the top of
the padlocked house, he shone a flashlight through the grille, to see if someone
was there.
They did not talk of Udayan. For days his name did not escape their lips.
Then one evening Subhash asked, How did it happen?
His father’s face was impassive, it was as if he hadn’t heard.
I thought he’d quit the party, Subhash pressed. That he’d drifted away from it.
Had he?
I was at home, his father said, not acknowledging the question.
When were you home?
That day. I opened the gate for them. I let them in.
Who?
The police.
Finally he was getting somewhere. Some explanation, some acknowledgment.
At the same time he felt worse, now that his suspicion had been confirmed.
Why didn’t you tell me he was in danger?
It would not have made a difference.
Well, tell me now. Why did they kill him?
His mother reacted then, glaring at Subhash. She had a small face, with just
enough space for what it contained. Still youthful, her dark hair decorated with
its bright column of vermillion, to signify that she had a husband.
He was your brother, she said. How can you ask such a thing?
The next morning, he sought Gauri out, knocking on the door of her room. Her

hair had just been washed. She was wearing it loose to let it dry.
In his hand was a paperback book he’d bought for her at Udayan’s request.
One-Dimensional Man, by Herbert Marcuse. He gave it to her.
This is for you. From Udayan. He’d asked me.
She looked down at the cover, and then at the back. She opened it and turned
to the beginning. For a moment it seemed she’d begun to read it already, her face
settling into a placid expression of concentration, forgetting that he was there.
Standing at her doorway, he felt that he was trespassing. He turned to leave.
You are kind to bring it, she said.
It was no trouble.
He wanted to talk to her. But there was nowhere in the house where they
might have a conversation alone.
Shall we go for a walk?
Not now.
She stepped to one side and pointed to a chair in the room.
He hesitated, then entered. It was dim, until Gauri pushed open the shutters of
the two windows, admitting a stark white glow. A square of sunlight fell onto the
bed, a calm bright patch containing the vertical shadows of the window bars.
The bed was low to the floor, with slender posts. There was also a short
armoire, and a small dressing table with a bench. Instead of powders and combs
there were notebooks, fountain pens, bottles of ink. The room smelled sharply of
teak, emanating from the furniture. He could smell the fragrance of her freshly
washed hair.
The light is nice, he said.
Only now. In a few minutes the sun will be too high and the angle will be
lost.
He glanced at a set of shelves built into one wall, where she stored her books.
Wedged among them was the shortwave radio. He pulled it out, not bothering to
turn it on, but fiddling instinctively with one of the dials.
We put this together.
He told me.
Do you listen to it?
He was the only one who could get it to work. Would you like it back?
He shook his head, and replaced it on the shelf.
She perched on the edge of the bed. He saw other books spread open,
facedown, covered in smooth brown paper. She had written the titles at the
center, in her own hand. He watched as she retrieved an old section of

newspaper and began to wrap the cover of the book he’d given her. He and
Udayan used to do this together, after buying their new schoolbooks for the year.
No one does that over there.
Why not?
I don’t know. Maybe the covers are more durable. Or maybe they don’t mind
them looking old.
Was it hard to find?
No.
Where did you get it?
In the campus bookstore.
Is it far from where you live?
Just around the corner.
You can walk there?
Yes.
The paper feels different. Smooth.
He nodded.
Do you stay at a hostel?
I have a room in a house.
Is there a mess hall?
No.
Who cooks for you, then?
I do.
Do you like living on your own?
Unexpectedly he thought of Holly, and the dinners at her kitchen table. That
brief turbulence in his life felt trivial now. Like stones he would stop to gather in
Rhode Island, that he would briefly clasp and then toss back into the sea when he
walked along the beach, he’d let her go.
Still, he wondered now what she would have made of this sad and empty
house, this swampy enclave south of Calcutta where he’d been raised. He
wondered what she would have made of Gauri.
He asked Gauri about her studies, and she told him she’d completed her
bachelor’s in philosophy earlier in the year. It had taken longer than it should
have. It had been difficult, because of the unrest. She said that she’d been
considering a master’s program, before Udayan was killed. Before she learned
she was pregnant.
Did Udayan know he was going to be a father?

No.
Her waist was still narrow. But Udayan’s ghost was palpable within her,
preserved in this room where she spent all her time. When she spoke of him it
was an evocation of him. She had not shut down as his parents had.
When will the baby be born?
In summer.
How is it for you here in the house? With my parents?
She said nothing. He waited, then realized he was staring at her, distracted by
a small dark mole on the side of her neck. He looked away.
I can take you somewhere else, he suggested. Would you like to visit your
family for a while? Your aunts and uncles?
She shook her head.
Why not?
For the first time a smile nearly came to her face, the uneven smile he
remembered from the photograph, slightly favoring one side of her mouth.
Because I ran off and married your brother, she said.
Even now they don’t want to see you?
She shrugged. They’re nervous. I don’t blame them. I might compromise
their safety, even your parents’ safety, who knows?
But surely there’s someone?
My brother came to see me after it happened. He came to the funeral. He and
Udayan were friends. But it’s not up to him.
Can you tell me something else?
What do you want to know?
I want to know what happened to my brother, he said.

Chapter 2
It was the week before Durga Pujo. The month of Ashvin, the first phase of the
waxing moon.
At the tram depot, Gauri and her mother-in-law hired a cycle rickshaw to take
them home. They settled themselves on the bench of the rickshaw, packets and
bags on their laps and heaped at their feet. They were returning from a day of
shopping, a little later than they’d intended.
The packets contained gifts for extended family, also for themselves. New
saris for Gauri and her mother-in-law, Punjabis and pajamas for her father-inlaw, shirt and trouser material to clothe Udayan the following year. New sheets
to sleep on, new slippers. Towels to dry their bodies, combs to untangle their
hair.
As they approached the mosque at the corner her mother-in-law told the
driver to slow down and turn left. But the driver stopped pedaling, telling them
that he was unwilling to travel off the main road.
Pointing to all the bags and packets, her mother-in-law offered to pay more.
But still the driver refused. He shook his head, waiting for them to disembark.
So they finished the journey on foot, carrying the things they’d bought.
The lane hooked to the right, past the pandal in their enclave, the deities
adorned but unattended. No families were walking about. Soon the two ponds
across from their house came into view.
On the bank of the first pond Gauri saw a van belonging to the Central
Reserve Police. Policemen and soldiers stood here and there, in their khaki
uniforms and helmets. Not many, but enough of them to form a loose
constellation wherever she looked.
No one stopped them from walking through the swinging wooden doors into
the courtyard. They saw that the iron gate, located at the side of the house, was
open. The key was dangling in the padlock, opened in haste.
They removed their street slippers and set down their bags. They began to
climb the first set of steps. Halfway up, Gauri saw her father-in-law descending,
his hands raised over his head. He hesitated before lowering each foot, as if
afraid of losing his balance. As if he’d never walked down a set of steps before.
An officer followed him. He was pointing a rifle at his back. Gauri and her

mother-in-law were instructed to turn around, to walk back downstairs. So there
was no opportunity to go further into the house, to see the rooms that had been
overturned. Clothes knocked off the lines strung along the terrace where they
had been hung to dry that morning, wardrobe doors flung open. Pillows and
quilts pulled off the beds, coals dumped from the coal basket, lentils and grains
tossed out of Glaxo tins in the kitchen. As if they were looking for a scrap of
paper and not a man.
The three of them—her father-in-law, her mother-in-law and Gauri—were
ordered to exit the house, to walk through the courtyard, to step over the stone
slab and back onto the street. They were told to proceed in single file, past the
two ponds, toward the lowland. The rains had been heavy, and it had flooded
again. Water hyacinth shrouded the surface like a moth-eaten cloak.
Gauri felt people in the surrounding homes taking in what was happening.
Watching through chinks in their shutters, standing still in darkened rooms.
They were arranged in a row. They stood close together, their shoulders
touching. The gun was still trained on her father-in-law.
She heard a conch shell blowing, the ringing of a bell. The sounds carried in
from another neighborhood. Somewhere, in some house or temple, someone was
praying, giving offerings at the end of another day.
We are under orders to locate and arrest Udayan Mitra, said the soldier who
seemed to be commanding the others. He announced this through a megaphone.
If anyone in this locality knows where he is hiding, if anyone is harboring him,
you are required to step forward.
No one said anything.
My son is in America, her mother-in-law said quietly. A lie that was also the
truth.
The officer ignored her. He stepped over to Gauri. His eyes were a lighter
brown than his skin. He studied her, pointing his gun at her, moving it closer
until she was no longer able to see it. She felt the tip, a cold pendant at the base
of her throat.
You are the wife of this family? The wife of Udayan Mitra?
Yes.
Where is your husband?
She had no voice. She was unable to speak.
We know he is here. We have had him followed. We have searched the
house, we have blocked off the means of egress. He is wasting our time.
Gauri was aware of a painful current traveling up and down the backs of her

legs.
Where is he? the officer repeated, pressing the gun against her throat a little
harder.
I don’t know, she managed to say.
I think you are lying. I think you must know where he is.
Behind the water hyacinth, in the floodwater of the lowland: this was where,
if the neighborhood was raided, Udayan had told her he would hide. He told her
that there was a section where the growth was particularly dense. He kept a
kerosene tin behind the house, to help him over the back wall. Even with an
injured hand he could manage it. He’d practiced it, late at night, a few times.
We think he might be hiding in the water, the soldier continued, not removing
his eyes from her.
No, she said to herself. She heard the word in her head. But then she realized
that her mouth was open, like an idiot’s. Had she said something? Whispered it?
She could not be sure.
What did you say?
I said nothing.
The tip of the gun was still steady at her throat. But suddenly it was removed,
the officer tipping his head toward the lowland, stepping away.
He’s there, he told the others.
Again the officer began speaking through a megaphone.
Udayan Mitra, step forward, surrender yourself, he said, the words at once
distorted and piercing, audible throughout the enclave. We are prepared to
eliminate the members of your family if you don’t do as we say.
He paused, then added, One member for each false step.
At first nothing happened. Only the sound of her own breathing. Some of the
soldiers were wading into the water, aiming rifles. One of them fired a shot.
Then, from somewhere in the lowland, she heard the sound of the water’s
surface breaking.
Udayan appeared. Amid the hyacinth, in water up to his waist. Bent over,
coughing, gasping for air.
His right hand was bandaged, concealed by layers of gauze. His hair was
sticking to his scalp, the shirt he was wearing was sticking to his skin. His beard
and moustache needed trimming. He raised his arms over his head.
Good. Walk toward us now.
He stepped through the weeds, out of the water, until he stood only a few feet
away. He was shivering, struggling to regulate his breathing. She saw the lips

that never fully met, leaving the small diamond-shaped gap at the center. The
lips were blue. She saw flecks of algae coating his neck, his forearms. She could
not tell if it was water or perspiration dripping down the sides of his face.
He was told to bend down and touch his parents’ feet. He was told to ask for
their forgiveness. He had to do this with his left hand. He stood before his
mother and bent down. Forgive me, he said.
What are we to forgive? her father-in-law asked, his voice cracking, when
Udayan bent before him. He appealed to the officers. You are making a mistake.
Your son has betrayed his country. It is he who has made the mistake.
The current in Gauri’s legs intensified, radiating all the way to her feet. She
felt a tingling sensation spreading from the base of her neck across her scalp.
She thought that her legs would buckle, there was no strength in them. Nothing
was supporting her. But she continued to stand.
His hands were bound by a rope. She saw him wince when they did this, the
injured hand twitching in pain.
This way, the officer said, pointing with his gun.
Udayan paused, and glanced at her. He looked at her face as he always did,
absorbing its details as if for the first time.
They pushed him into the van and slammed the door shut. Gauri and her inlaws were ordered back into the house. One of the soldiers escorted them. She
wondered which prison they would take him to. What they would do to him
there.
They heard the van starting. But instead of reversing and heading out of the
enclave, toward the main road, it traveled over the damp grass that edged the
lowland, the tires leaving thick tracks. Over toward the empty field that was on
the other side of it.
Inside the house they climbed to the third floor, to the terrace. They could
make out the van, and Udayan standing next to it. It would have been impossible
for anyone else in their neighborhood to witness what was happening. But the
top floor of the house, recently completed, afforded them this view.
They saw one of the soldiers undoing the rope around his wrists. They saw
Udayan walking across the field, away from the paramilitary. He was walking
toward the lowland, back toward the house, arms raised over his head.
Gauri remembered all the times she’d watched him from her grandparents’
balcony in North Calcutta, crossing the busy street, coming to visit her.
For a moment it was as if they were letting him go. But then a gun was fired,
the bullet aimed at his back. The sound of the shot was brief, unambiguous.
There was a second shot, then a third.

She watched his arms flapping, his body leaping forward, seizing up before
falling to the ground. There was the clean sound of the shots, followed by the
sound of crows, coarsely calling, scattering.
It wasn’t possible to see where he’d been wounded, where exactly the bullets
had gone. It was too distant to see how much blood had spilled.
The soldiers dragged his body by the legs, then tossed him into the back of
the van.
They heard the doors slam shut, the engine starting up again. The van
containing the body, driving away.
In their bedroom, under the mattress, forgotten among folded sections of
newspaper they’d not bothered to toss, was a diary the police had discovered. It
contained all the proof they needed. Among the equations and notes on routine
formulas and experiments was a page of instructions for how to put together a
Molotov cocktail, a homemade bomb. Notes on the difference in effect between
methanol and gasoline. Potassium chlorate versus nitric acid. Storm matches
versus a kerosene wick.
In the diary there was also a map Udayan had sketched of the layout of the
Tolly Club. The locations and names of the buildings, the stables, the caretaker’s
cottage. The arrangement of the driveway, the configuration of the walking
paths.
Certain times of day had been jotted down, a schedule of when the guards
moved around, when employees went on and off duty. When the restaurants and
bars opened and closed, when the gardeners clipped and watered the grass.
Various places where a person might enter and exit the premises, targets where
one might throw an explosive, or leave a timed device behind.
A few months ago he’d been brought in for questioning. It had become
routine by then, for the city’s young men. At the time they believed what he’d
told them. That he was a high school teacher, married, living in Tollygunge. No
ties to the CPI(ML).
He was asked if he’d known anything about an incident of vandalism in the
school’s library: who had broken into it one night to slash the portraits of Tagore
and Vidyasagar hanging on the walls. At the time they were satisfied with his
answers. Concluding that he’d had nothing to do with it, they asked him nothing
else.
Then one night, about a month before he was killed, he did not come home.
He returned early the next morning, not entering through the courtyard, not
ringing the bell. He went around to the back, climbing over the wall that was

shoulder high.
He waited in the garden, behind the shed filled with coal and broken wood to
light the stove. He tossed up bits of terra-cotta from a broken flowerpot, until
Gauri opened the shutters to their bedroom and looked down.
His right hand was bandaged, his arm in a sling. He and his squad members
had been trying to assemble a pipe bomb, using a firecracker as an explosive.
Udayan, with the slight tremor that had never fully left his fingers, should not
have been the one to attempt it.
The blast had occurred at a remote location, at a safe house. He’d managed to
get away.
He told his parents it had happened in the course of a routine experiment at
school. That a bit of sodium hydroxide had spilled on his skin. He told them not
to worry, that the hand would heal in a few weeks. But he told Gauri what had
really happened. The two comrades who’d been helping him had stepped away
in time, but not Udayan, and under his bandage there was now a useless paw.
The bandage would come off, but the fingers were gone.
By then, in the course of raids in Tollygunge, the police had discovered
ammunition in the film studios. In makeup rooms, in editing rooms. They were
conducting searches at random, harassing young men on the streets. Arresting
them, torturing them. Filling the morgues, the crematoriums. In the mornings,
dumping corpses on the streets, as a warning.
For two weeks Udayan was gone. He told his parents he was simply taking
precautions, though by then they, too, must have known. And he told Gauri that
he was afraid, that the injury to his hand made him conspicuous, that the police
might put it all together now.
Gauri did not know where he was, whether it was one safe house or several.
Occasionally there was a note, retrieved at the stationer’s on the main road. A
sign that he was still alive, a request for fresh clothes, his thyroid pills. There
was still enough of a network in the neighborhood to arrange for this. At the end
of the two weeks, because there was no other place to shelter him, he returned to
their enclave.
Once he was home again he was unable to leave. His parents, anxious for his
return, preferred him there than anywhere else. They made sure no one saw him.
No neighbor, no workman, no visitor to the house. The houseboy was sworn to
secrecy. They got rid of his things, as if he were already dead. His books hidden,
his clothes stored in a trunk under the bed.
He kept to the back rooms. Never showing his face from a terrace or a
window. Never speaking above a whisper. His only freedom was to go up to the

rooftop in the middle of the night, to sit against the parapet and smoke under the
stars. Because of his hand he needed help dressing and bathing. He was like a
child, needing to be fed.
He had trouble hearing, asking Gauri to repeat herself. There had been
damage to one of his eardrums from the explosion. He complained of dizziness,
a high-pitched sound that would not go away. He said he could not hear the
shortwave, when she could hear it perfectly well.
He worried that he might not be able to hear the buzzer, if it rang, or the
approach of a military jeep. He complained of feeling alone even though they
were together. Feeling isolated in the most basic way.
Nearly a week passed. Perhaps the police had not connected the dots, perhaps
they’d lost track of him. Perhaps they would be diverted by the approaching
festival, he said. He was the one who’d convinced Gauri and his mother to leave
the house for the day, to do what they had put off. To distract themselves, to
appear normal to their neighbors, to do some holiday shopping.
The body was not returned to them. They were never told where it had been
burned. When her father-in-law went to the police station, seeking information,
seeking some explanation, they denied any knowledge of the incident. After
taking him in full view, his captors had left no trace.
For ten days after his death there were rules to follow. She did not wash her
clothes or wear slippers or comb her hair. She shut the door and the shutters to
preserve whatever invisible particles of him floated in the atmosphere. She slept
on the bed, on the pillow Udayan had used and that continued to smell for a few
days of him, until it was replaced by her own odor, her greasy skin and hair.
No one bothered her. She was aware of holding her body very still, as if
posing for a photograph that was never taken. In spite of the stillness, she felt at
times as if she were falling, the bed seeming to give way. She was unable to cry.
There were only the tears disconnected to feeling, that gathered and sometimes
fell from the corners of her eyes in the morning, after sleep.
The days of Pujo arrived and began to pass: Shashthi, Saptami, Ashtami,
Navami. Days of worship and celebration across the city. Of mourning and
seclusion inside the house. The vermillion was washed clean from her hair, the
iron bangle removed from her wrist. The absence of these ornaments marked her
as a widow. She was twenty-three years old.
After eleven days a priest came for the final rites, and a cook to prepare the
ceremonial meal. Inside the house, Udayan’s portrait was propped against the
wall in a frame, behind glass, wreathed with tuberoses. She was unable to look at

his face in the photograph. She sat for the ceremony, her wrists bare.
If anything happens to me, don’t let them waste money on my funeral, he’d
once told her. But a funeral took place, the house filled with people who’d
known him, family members and party members coming to pay their respects.
To eat dishes made in his honor, the particular foods that he had loved.
After the mourning period ended her in-laws began to eat fish and meat again,
but not Gauri. She was given white saris to wear in place of colored ones, so that
she resembled the other widows in the family. Women three times her age.
Dashami came: the end of Pujo, the day of Durga’s return to Shiva. At night
the effigies that had stood in the small pandal in their neighborhood were taken
to the river to be immersed. It was done without fanfare this year, out of respect
for Udayan.
But in North Calcutta, below the balcony where they had first spoken to one
another, the processions would continue throughout the night. People lined up on
the sidewalks for a final glimpse, the noise so great it would have been
impossible to sleep. She will come back, she will return to us, people chanted as
they marched on the street, accompanying the goddess to the river, bidding her
another year’s farewell.
One morning, after the first month had passed, she was unable to go to the
kitchen to help her mother-in-law with the day’s preparations, as she was once
again expected to do. Feeling drained of energy, dizzy when she tried to stand
up, she remained in bed.
Five minutes passed, another ten. Her mother-in-law entered the room and
told her it was late. She opened the shutters and looked down at Gauri’s face.
She held a cup of tea in her hands but did not offer it right away. For a moment
she only stood there, staring at her. Gauri sat up slowly, to take the tea from her
hands.
I’ll be upstairs in a moment.
Don’t bother today, her mother-in-law said.
Why not?
You won’t be of help.
She shook her head, confused.
An intelligent girl. This is what he told us after he married you. And yet,
incapable of understanding simple things.
What haven’t I understood?
Her mother-in-law had already turned to leave the room. At the door she

paused. Careful from now on, not to slip in the bathroom, or on the stairs.
From now on?
You’re going to be a mother, Gauri heard her say.
From the beginning of their marriage he did not touch her for one week out of
every month. He had asked her to keep track of her periods in the pages of her
diary, telling him when it was safe.
After the revolution was successful, he’d told her, they’d bring children into
the world. Only then. But in the final weeks before his death, when he was
hiding at the house, they had both lost track of the days.
She had been born with a map of time in her mind. She pictured other
abstractions as well, numbers and the letters of the alphabet, both in English and
in Bengali. Numbers and letters were like links on a chain. Months were arrayed
as if along an orbit in space.
Each concept existed in its own topography, three-dimensional, physical. So
that ever since she was a child it was impossible for her to calculate a sum, to
spell a word she was unsure of, to access a memory or await something in the
coming months, without retrieving it from a specific location in her mind.
Her strongest image was always of time, both past and future; it was an
immediate horizon, at once orienting and containing her. Across the limitless
spectrum of years, the brief tenancy of her own life was superimposed. To the
right was the recent past: the year she’d met Udayan, and before that, all the
years she’d lived without knowing him. There was the year she was born, 1948,
prefaced by all the years and centuries that came before.
To the left was the future, the place where her death, unknown but certain,
was an end point. In less than nine months a baby would come. But its life had
already started, its heart already beating, represented by a separate line creeping
forward. She saw Udayan’s life, no longer accompanying her own as she’d
assumed it would, but ceasing in October 1971. This formed a grave in her
mind’s eye.
Only the present moment, lacking any perspective, eluded her grasp. It was
like a blind spot, just over her shoulder. A hole in her vision. But the future was
visible, unspooling incrementally.
She wanted to shut her eyes to it. She wished the days and months ahead of
her would end. But the rest of her life continued to present itself, time
ceaselessly proliferating. She was made to anticipate it against her will.
There was the anxiety that one day would not follow the next, combined with

the certainty that it would. It was like holding her breath, as Udayan had tried to
do in the lowland. And yet somehow she was breathing. Just as time stood still
but was also passing, some other part of her body that she was unaware of was
now drawing oxygen, forcing her to stay alive.

Chapter 3
The day after speaking to Gauri, Subhash went out, alone, into the city for the
first time. He took the material his parents had given him, his share and
Udayan’s, to a men’s tailoring shop. He didn’t need new shirts and trousers, and
yet he felt obligated, not wanting the material to go to waste. The news that there
was nowhere to have clothes tailored in Rhode Island, that American clothing
was all ready-made, had come to his parents as a surprise. It was the first detail
of his life there they’d openly reacted to.
He took the tram to Ballygunge, walking past the hawkers who called out to
him. He found the small shop owned by distant relatives, where he and Udayan
always went together, once a year, to be measured. A long counter, a fitting
room in the corner, a rod where the finished clothing was hung. He placed his
order, watching the tailor sketch the designs quickly in a notebook, clipping a
triangle of the material and stapling it to the corner of each receipt.
There was nothing else he needed, nothing from the city he wanted. After
hearing what Gauri had told him, after picturing it, he could focus on little else.
He got on a bus, riding with no destination in mind, getting out close to
Esplanade. He saw foreigners on the streets, Europeans wearing kurtas, beads.
Exploring Calcutta, passing through. Though he looked like any other Bengali
he felt an allegiance with the foreigners now. He shared with them a knowledge
of elsewhere. Another life to go back to. The ability to leave.
There were hotels he might have entered in this part of the city, to have a
whiskey or a beer, to fall into a conversation with strangers. To forget the way
his parents behaved, to forget the things Gauri had said.
He stopped to light a cigarette, Wills, the brand Udayan smoked. Feeling
tired, he stood in front of a store that sold embroidered shawls.
What would you like to see? the owner asked. He was from Kashmir, his face
pale, his eyes light, a cotton cap on his head.
Nothing.
Come have a look. Have a cup of tea.
He had forgotten about such gestures of hospitality from shopkeepers. He
entered and sat on a stool, watching as the woolen shawls were spread out one
by one on a large white cushion on the floor. The generosity of the effort, the

faith implicit in it, touched him. He decided to buy one for his mother, realizing
only now that he’d brought her nothing from America.
I’ll take this, he said, fingering a navy-blue shawl, thinking she would
appreciate the softness of the wool, the intricacy of the stitch.
What else?
That’s all, he said. But then he pictured Gauri. He recalled her profile as she’d
told him about Udayan. The way she’d stared straight ahead at nothing, telling
him what he’d wanted to know.
It was thanks to Gauri that he knew what had happened: that she and his
parents had watched Udayan die. He knew now that his parents had been shamed
before their neighbors. Unable to help Udayan, unable in the end to protect him.
Losing him in an unthinkable way.
He sifted through the choices at his feet. Ivory, gray, a brown that was lighter
than the tea he’d been given to drink. These were considered appropriate for her
now. But a vivid turquoise one with a border of minute embroidery caught his
eye.
He imagined it wrapped around her shoulders, trailing over one side.
Brightening her face.
Also this one, he said.
His parents were on their terrace, waiting. They asked what had taken him so
long. They said it still wasn’t safe, to wander so late on the streets.
Though their concern was reasonable it annoyed him. I’m not Udayan, he was
tempted to say. I would never have put you through that.
He gave his mother the shawl he’d bought for her. Then he showed her the
one for Gauri.
I’d like to give her this.
You should know better, she said. Stop trying to befriend her.
He was silent.
I heard the two of you talking yesterday.
I’m not supposed to talk to her?
What did she tell you?
He didn’t say. Instead he asked, Why don’t you ever talk to her?
Now it was his mother who was silent.
You’ve taken away her colored clothes, the fish and meat from her plate.
These are our customs, his mother said.
It’s demeaning. Udayan would never have wanted her to live this way.

He was not used to quarreling with his mother. But a new energy flowed
through him and he could not restrain himself.
Does it mean nothing, that she’s going to give you a grandchild?
It means everything. It’s the only thing he’s left us, his mother said.
And what about Gauri?
She has a place here if she chooses.
What do you mean, if she chooses?
She could go somewhere to continue her studies. She might prefer it.
What makes you think that?
She’s too withdrawn, too aloof to be a mother.
His temples were throbbing. Have you discussed any of this with her?
There’s no point in worrying her about it now.
He saw that already, coldly, sitting on the terrace, his mother had plotted it
out. But he was just as appalled at his father, for saying nothing, for going along
with it.
You can’t separate them. For Udayan’s sake, accept her.
His mother lost her patience. She was angry with him, too. Shut your mouth,
she said, her tone insulting. Don’t tell me how to honor my own son.
That night, under the mosquito netting, Subhash was unable to sleep.
Perhaps he would never fully know what Udayan had done. Gauri had
conveyed her version to him, and his parents refused to discuss it.
He supposed they’d been lenient regarding Udayan, as they’d always been.
Intuiting that he was in over his head, but never confronting him.
Udayan had given his life to a movement that had been misguided, that had
caused only damage, that had already been dismantled. The only thing he’d
altered was what their family had been.
He had kept Subhash, and probably to a great degree also his parents,
deliberately in the dark. The more his involvement had deepened, the more
evasive he’d turned. Writing letters as if the movement no longer mattered to
him. Hoping to throw Subhash off the trail as he’d put together bombs, as he’d
sketched maps of the Tolly Club. As he’d blown the fingers off his hand.
Gauri was the one he’d trusted. He’d inserted her into their lives, only to
strand her there.
Like the solution to an equation emerging bit by bit, Subhash began to
perceive a turn things might take. He was already eager to leave Calcutta. There
was nothing he could do for his parents. He was unable to console them. Though

he’d returned to stand before them, in the end it had not mattered that he had
come.
But Gauri was different. Around her, he felt a shared awareness of the person
they’d both loved.
He thought of her remaining with his parents, living by their rules. His
mother’s coldness toward Gauri was insulting, but his father’s passivity was just
as cruel.
And it wasn’t simply cruelty. Their treatment of Gauri was deliberate,
intended to drive her out. He thought of her becoming a mother, only to lose
control of the child. He thought of the child being raised in a joyless house.
The only way to prevent it was to take Gauri away. It was all he could do to
help her, the only alternative he could provide. And the only way to take her
away was to marry her. To take his brother’s place, to raise his child, to come to
love Gauri as Udayan had. To follow him in a way that felt perverse, that felt
ordained. That felt both right and wrong.
The date of his departure was approaching; soon enough he would be on the
plane again. There was no one there for him in Rhode Island. He was tired of
being alone.
He had tried to deny the attraction he felt for Gauri. But it was like the light
of the fireflies that swam up to the house at night, random points that surrounded
him, that glowed and then receded without a trail.
He mentioned nothing to his parents, knowing that they would only try to
dissuade him. He knew the solution he’d arrived at would appall them. He went
to her directly. He’d been afraid of how his family might react to Holly. But he
was no longer afraid.
This is for you, he said, standing in her doorway, giving her the shawl.
She lifted the cover of the box and looked at it.
I’d like for you to wear it, he said.
He watched her step into the room and open her wardrobe. She placed the
shawl, still folded in the box, inside.
When she turned to face him again, he observed that a mosquito had landed at
the very edge of her forehead, close to the hairline. He wanted to reach over and
brush it away, but she stood, unbothered, perhaps unaware.
I hate how my parents treat you, he said.
She was silent. She sat down at her desk, in front of the book and the
notebook spread there. She was waiting for him to go.
He lost his nerve. The idea was ridiculous. She would not wear the turquoise

shawl, she would never agree to marry him and go to Rhode Island. She was
mourning for Udayan, carrying his child. Subhash knew he was nothing to her.
The following afternoon, at a time no one was expected, the buzzer rang.
Subhash was sitting on the terrace, reading the papers. His father was at work,
his mother had gone out on an errand. Gauri was in her room.
He went down the staircase to see who it was. He found three men standing
on the other side of the gate. Two policemen carrying guns, and an investigator
from the Intelligence Bureau. The investigator introduced himself. He wanted to
speak to Gauri.
She’s sleeping.
Go wake her.
He unlocked the gate and took them to the second floor. He asked them to
wait on the landing. Then he walked down the corridor to Gauri’s room.
When she opened the door, she was not wearing her glasses. Her eyes looked
tired. Her hair was disheveled, the material of her sari wrinkled. The bed was
unmade.
He told her who had come. I’ll stay with you, he said.
She tied back her hair and put on her glasses. She remade the bed and told
him she was ready. She was composed, betraying none of the nervousness he
felt.
The investigator stepped into the room first. The policemen followed,
standing in the doorway. They were smoking cigarettes, allowing the ashes to
fall onto the floor. One of them had a lazy eye, so that he seemed to be looking
at both Gauri and Subhash at the same time.
The investigator was observing the walls, the ceiling, taking in certain details.
He picked up one of the books on Gauri’s table, thumbing through a few pages.
He took a notepad and pen out of his shirt pocket. He made some notes. The tips
of some of his fingers had lost their pigment, as if spotted with bleach.
You’re the brother? he asked, not bothering to look up at Subhash.
Yes.
The one in America?
He nodded, but the investigator was already focused on Gauri.
You met your husband in what year?
Nineteen sixty-eight.
While you were a student at Presidency?
Yes.

You were sympathetic to his beliefs?
In the beginning.
Are you currently a member of any political organization?
No.
I’d like to go over some photographs. They’re of some people your husband
knew.
All right.
He took an envelope out of his pocket. He began handing her pictures. Small
snapshots Subhash was unable to see.
Do you recognize any of these people?
No.
You’ve never met them? Your husband never introduced you to them?
No.
Look carefully, please.
I have.
The investigator put the snapshots back into the envelope, mindful not to
smudge them.
Did he ever mention someone named Nirmal Dey?
No.
You are certain?
Yes.
Gopal Sinha?
Subhash swallowed, and glanced at her. She was lying. Even he remembered
Sinha, the medical student, from the meeting he’d attended. Surely Udayan had
mentioned him to Gauri.
Or had he? Perhaps, for the sake of protecting her, he’d been dishonest with
her, too. Subhash had no way of knowing. As vivid as her account of Udayan’s
final days and moments had been, certain details remained vague.
The investigator took a few more notes, then wiped his face with a
handkerchief. May I trouble you for some water?
Subhash poured it for him, from the urn in the corner of the room, handing
him the stainless-steel cup that was kept, overturned, beside it. He watched the
investigator drain the cup, then set it down on Gauri’s desk.
We’ll return if we have further questions, the investigator said.
The policemen stepped on their cigarettes to put them out, and then the group
turned back toward the staircase. Subhash followed, seeing them out of the
house, locking the gate behind them.

When do you return to America? the investigator asked.
In a few weeks.
What is your subject?
Chemical oceanography.
You’re nothing like your brother, he remarked, then turned to go.
•••
She was waiting for him on the terrace, sitting on one of the folding chairs.
You’re all right? he asked.
Yes.
How long before they come back?
They won’t come again.
How can you be sure?
She raised her head, then her eyes. Because I have nothing else to tell them,
she said.
You’re certain?
She continued to look at him, her expression neutral, composed. He wanted to
believe her. But even if there was anything else she had to tell, he understood
that there was nothing else she was willing to say.
You’re not safe here, he said. Even if the police leave you alone, my parents
won’t.
What do you mean?
He paused, then told her what he knew.
They want you out of this house, Gauri. They don’t want to take care of you.
They want their grandchild to themselves.
After she had absorbed this, he said the only things he could think of, the
most obvious of facts: that in America no one knew about the movement, no one
would bother her. She could go on with her studies. It would be an opportunity
to begin again.
Because she said nothing to interrupt him, he went on, explaining that the
child needed a father. In America it could be raised without the burden of what
had happened.
He told her he knew she still loved Udayan. He told her not to think about
what people might say, how his parents would react. If she went with him to
America, he promised her, it would all cease to matter.

She’d recognized most of the people in the photographs. They were all Udayan’s
comrades, party members from the neighborhood. She remembered some of
them from a meeting she’d gone to once, before it got too dangerous. She’d
recognized Chandra, a woman who worked at the tailor shop, and also the man
from the stationer’s. She’d pretended not to.
Among the names the investigator had gone over, there was only one that
Udayan had never mentioned. Only one, truthfully, she did not know. Nirmal
Dey. And yet something told her she was not in ignorance of this man.
You don’t have to do this, she said to Subhash the following morning.
It’s not only for you.
He wouldn’t have wanted this.
I understand.
I’m not talking about our getting married.
What, then?
In the end he didn’t want a family. He told me the day before he died. And
yet— She stopped herself.
What?
He once told me, because he got married before you, that he wanted you to be
the first to have a child.

Part IV

Chapter 1
He was there, standing behind a rope at the airport, waiting for her. Her brotherin-law, her husband. The second man she had married in two years.
The same height, a similar build. Counterparts, companions, though she’d
never seen them together. Subhash was a milder version. Compared to Udayan’s,
his face was like the slightly flawed impression the man at Immigration had just
stamped into her passport, indicating her arrival, stamped over a second time for
emphasis.
He was wearing corduroy pants, a checkered shirt, a zippered jacket, athletic
shoes. The eyes that greeted her were kind but weak; the weakness, she
suspected, that had led him to marry her, and to do her the favor he’d done.
Here he was, to receive her, to accompany her from now on. Nothing about
him had changed; at the end of her voyage, there was nothing to greet her but the
reality of the decision she’d made.
But she saw him registering the obvious change in her. Five months pregnant
now, her face and hips fuller, her waist thick, the child’s presence obvious
beneath the turquoise shawl he’d given her, draped around her for warmth.
She entered his car and sat beside him, to his right, her two suitcases stacked
in their canvas slipcovers on the backseat. She waited while he started the engine
and let it run for a bit. He unpeeled a banana and poured himself some tea from a
flask. She put her lips to the other side of the cap when he offered, swallowing a
hot tasteless liquid, like wet wood.
How do you feel?
Tired.
Again the voice, also Udayan’s. Almost the exact pitch and manner of
speaking. This was the deepest and most startling proof of their fraternity. For a
moment she allowed this isolated aspect of Udayan, preserved and replicated in
Subhash’s throat, to travel back to her.
How are my parents?
The same.
The heat’s arrived in Calcutta?
More or less.
And the situation generally?

Some would say better. Others worse.
This was Boston, he told her. Rhode Island was south of here. They emerged
from a tunnel that went below a river, passing by a harbor, and then the city fell
away. He drove more quickly than she was used to, more consistently than cars
could travel on Calcutta streets. The continuous movement sickened her. She
had preferred being on the plane, detached from the earth, the illusion of sitting
still.
Along the side of the road were gray-and white-skinned trees that looked
incapable of ever producing leaf or fruit. Their branches were copious but thin,
dense networks she could see through. On some trees, a few leaves still clung.
She wondered why they had not fallen like the others.
Among the trees, here and there, were patches of snow. She would remember
the smooth pitch of the roads, the flat, squared-off shapes of the cars. And all the
space between and around things—the cars traveling in two directions, the
infrequent buildings. The barren but densely growing trees.
He glanced at her. Is it what you expected?
I didn’t know what to expect.
Again the child was stirring and shifting. It was unaware of its new
surroundings, and of the astonishing distance it had traveled. Gauri’s body
remained its world. She wondered if the new environment would affect it in any
way. If it could sense the cold.
She felt as if she contained a ghost, as Udayan was. The child was a version
of him, in that it was both present and absent. Both within her and remote. She
regarded it with a sort of disbelief, just as she still did not really believe that
Udayan was gone, missing now not only from Calcutta but from every other part
of the earth she’d just flown across.
As the plane was landing in Boston, she’d momentarily feared that their child
would dissolve and abandon her. She’d feared that it would perceive, somehow,
that the wrong father was waiting to receive them. That it would protest and stop
forming.
After entering Rhode Island she expected to see the ocean, but the highway
merely continued. They approached a small city called Providence. She saw
hilly streets, buildings close together, peaked rooftops, an ornate white dome.
She knew that the word providence meant foresight, the future beheld before it
was experienced.
It was the middle of the day, the sun directly overhead. A bright blue sky,
transparent clouds. A time of day lacking mystery, only an assertion of the day
itself. As if the sky were not meant to darken, the day not meant to end.

On the plane time had been irrelevant but also the only thing that mattered; it
was time, not space, she’d been aware of traveling through. She’d sat among so
many passengers, captive, awaiting their destinations. Most of them, like Gauri,
freed in an atmosphere not their own.
For a few minutes Subhash turned on the car radio, listening to a man report
local news, the weather forecast. She’d had an English education, she’d studied
at Presidency, and yet she could barely understand the broadcast.
Eventually she saw horses grazing, cows standing still. Homes with glass
windows shut tight to block out the cold. Walls low enough to step over, forming
boundaries, made of large and small stones.
They reached a traffic light swaying on a wire. While they were stopped, he
pointed left. She saw a wooden tower, rising like an internal staircase to a
nonexistent building. Over the tops of pine trees, in the distance, at last, was a
thin dark line. The sea.
My campus is that way, he said.
She looked at the flat gray road, with two ongoing stripes painted down the
middle. This was the place where she could put things behind her. Where her
child would be born, ignorant and safe.
She thought Subhash would turn left, where he told her his campus was
located. But when the light turned green, and he pushed the gearshift forward,
they turned right.
The apartment was on the ground floor, facing the front: a little grass, a
pathway, then a strip of asphalt. On the other side of the asphalt was a row of
matching apartment buildings, low and long and faced with bricks. The two of
them were posed like barracks. At the end of the road was the lot where Subhash
parked his car and took out the garbage. A smaller building in the lot was where
one did the laundry.
The main doors were almost always left open, held in place by large rocks.
The locks on the apartment doors were flimsy, little buttons on knobs instead of
padlocks and bolts. But she was in a place where no one was afraid to walk
about, where drunken students stumbled laughing down a hill, back to their
dormitories at all hours of the night. At the top of the hill was the campus police
station. But there were no curfews or lockdowns. Students came and went and
did as they pleased.
The neighbors were other graduate student couples, a few families with
young children. They seemed not to notice her. She heard only a door shutting,
or the muffled ring of someone else’s telephone, or footsteps going up the stairs.

Subhash gave her the bedroom and told her he would sleep on the sofa, which
unfolded and became a bed. Through the closed door she listened to his morning
routine. The beeps of his alarm clock, the exhaust fan in the bathroom. When the
fan was switched off she heard a gentle swishing of water, a razor blade scraping
his face.
No one came to prepare the tea, to make the beds, to sweep or dust the rooms.
On the stove he cooked breakfast on a coil that reddened at a button’s touch.
Oatmeal and hot milk.
When it was finished she heard the spoon methodically scraping the bottom
of the pan, then the water he immediately ran to make it easier to clean. The
clink of the spoon against the bowl, and at the same time, in a separate pan, the
rattle of the egg he boiled and took away for his lunch.
She was thankful for his independence, and at the same time she was
bewildered. Udayan had wanted a revolution, but at home he’d expected to be
served; his only contribution to his meals was to sit and wait for Gauri or her
mother-in-law to put a plate before him.
Subhash acknowledged her independence also. He left her with a few dollars,
the telephone number to his department written on a slip of paper. A key to the
mailbox, and a second key to the door. A few minutes later came the sound she
waited for before getting up: the chain on the inside of the apartment, like an
ugly broken bit of a necklace, sliding open, and then the door shutting firmly
behind him.
In a way it had been another flaunting of convention, perhaps something Udayan
might have admired. When she’d eloped with Udayan, she’d felt audacious.
Agreeing to be Subhash’s wife, to flee to America with him, a decision at once
calculated and impulsive, felt even more extreme.
And yet, with Udayan gone, anything seemed possible. The ligaments that
had held her life together were no longer there. Their absence made it possible to
couple herself, however prematurely, however desperately, with Subhash. She’d
wanted to leave Tollygunge. To forget everything her life had been. And he had
handed her the possibility. In the back of her mind she told herself she could
come one day to love him, out of gratitude if nothing else.
Her in-laws had accused Gauri, as she knew they would, of disgracing their
family. Her mother-in-law had lashed out, telling her she’d never been worthy of
Udayan. That perhaps he would still be alive, if he’d married another sort of girl.
They had accused Subhash also, of wrongly taking Udayan’s place. But in the
end, after denouncing both of them, they had not forbidden it. They had not said

no. Perhaps they appreciated, as Gauri did, that they would no longer have to be
responsible for her, that they would be free from one another. And so, though in
one way she’d burrowed even more deeply into their family, in another way
she’d secured her release.
Again it had been a registry wedding, again in winter. Manash had come. Her
in-laws, the rest of the family on her side, had refused. The party had opposed it,
too. Like her in-laws, they expected her to honor Udayan’s memory, his
martyrdom. Not knowing she was carrying Udayan’s child, Gauri not wanting
anyone to know this, they had cut their ties with her. They had deemed her
second marriage unchaste.
She had married Subhash as a means of staying connected to Udayan. But
even as she was going through with it she knew that it was useless, just as it was
useless to save a single earring when the other half of the pair was lost.
She’d worn an ordinary printed silk sari, with only her wristwatch and a
simple chain. Put up her hair by herself. It was the first time she’d left the
neighborhood, the first time since the shopping expedition with her mother-inlaw that she was surrounded, invigorated by the city’s energy.
The second time, there was no lunch afterward. No cotton quilt like the one
under which she and Udayan had first lain as husband and wife, in the house in
Chetla, the coolness of that evening driving them into each other’s arms, the
modesty that had checked her desire quickly giving way.
After the registration Subhash took her to apply for her passport, and then to
the American consulate for her visa. The person in charge of the application
congratulated them, assuming that they were happy.
I spent my summers in Rhode Island when I was a kid, he said, after learning
where Subhash lived. His grandfather had taught literature at Brown University,
which was also in Rhode Island. He talked to Subhash about the beaches.
You’ll love it there, he said to Gauri. He would try to speed up Gauri’s
application. He wished them all the best.
A few days later Subhash was gone. Again she was alone with her in-laws.
Again they lived with her without speaking to her, already acting as if she were
not there.
On the evening of her flight, Manash came to accompany her to the airport
and see her off. She bent down before her in-laws and took the dust from their
feet. They were waiting for her to go. She stepped through the swinging wooden
doors of the courtyard, over the open drain, into a taxi that Manash had called
from the corner.
She left Tollygunge, where she had never felt welcome, where she had gone

only for Udayan. The furniture that belonged to her, the teak bedroom set, would
stand unused in the small square room with strong morning light, the room
where they had unwittingly made their child.
Her final glimpse of Calcutta was of the city late at night. They sped past the
darkened campus where she had studied, the shuttered bookstalls, the families
who slept shrouded during those hours on the streets. She left behind the
deserted intersection below her grandparents’ flat.
As they approached the airport, fog began to accumulate on VIP Road,
turning impenetrable. The driver slowed down, then stopped, unable to continue.
They seemed to be enveloped in the thick smoke of a raging fire, but there was
no heat, only the mist of condensation that trapped them.
This was death, Gauri thought; this vapor, insubstantial but un-yielding,
drawing everything to a halt. She was certain this was what Udayan saw now,
what he experienced.
She began to panic, thinking she would never get out. Inch by inch they
moved on, the driver pressing on his horn to avoid a collision, until finally the
lights of the airport came into view. She hugged Manash and kissed him, saying
she would miss him, only him, and then she gathered together her things and
presented her documents and boarded the plane.
No policeman or soldier stopped her. No one questioned her about Udayan.
No one gave her trouble for having been his wife. The fog lifted, the plane was
cleared for takeoff. No one prevented her from rising above the city, into a black
sky without stars.
The calendar on the kitchen wall showed a photograph of a rocky island, with
space for a lighthouse and nothing more. She saw something called St. Patrick’s
Day. The twentieth of March, what would have been Udayan’s twenty-seventh
birthday, was officially the first day of spring.
But the cold in Rhode Island was still severe in the mornings, the
windowpanes like sheets of ice when she touched them, milky with frost.
One Saturday, Subhash took her shopping. Music played in a large, brightly
lit store. No one offered to help them, or seemed to care if they spent money or
not. He bought her a coat, a pair of boots. Thick socks, a woolen scarf, a cap and
gloves.
But these things were not used. Apart from that one trip to the department
store, she did not venture out. She stayed indoors, resting, reading the campus
paper Subhash brought home with him each day, sometimes turning on the
television to watch its insipid shows. Young women interviewing bachelors who

wanted to date them. A husband and wife, pretending to bicker, then singing
romantic songs.
He suggested things she could do that were nearby: a movie at the campus
film hall, a lecture by a famous anthropologist, an international craft fair at the
student union. He mentioned the better newspapers one could read at the library,
the miscellaneous items the bookstore sold. There were a few more Indians on
campus than when he’d first arrived. Some women, wives of other graduate
students, she might befriend. When you’re ready, he would say.
Unlike Udayan’s, Subhash’s comings and goings were predictable. He came
home every evening at the same time. On the occasions she called him at his lab,
to say that they had run out of milk or bread, he picked up the phone. He had
taught himself to cook dinner so she didn’t interfere. He would leave out the
ingredients in the morning, icy packets from the freezer that slowly melted and
revealed their contents during the course of the day.
The cooking smells no longer bothered her as they did in Calcutta, but she
said they did, because this provided an excuse to remain in the bedroom. For
though she waited all day for Subhash to come back to the apartment, feeling
uneasy when he wasn’t there, once he did, she avoided him. Afraid, now that
they were married, of getting to know him, of their two lives combining, turning
close.
Eventually he would knock, saying her name to summon her to the table. It
would all be ready: two plates, two glasses of water, two mounds of soft rice
accompanied by whatever he had made.
While they ate they watched Walter Cronkite at his desk, reporting the nightly
news. It was always the news of America, of America’s concerns and activities.
The bombs that they were dropping on Hanoi, the shuttle they were hoping to
launch into space. Campaigns for the presidential election that would be held
later in the year.
She learned the names of the candidates: Muskie, McCloskey, McGovern.
The two parties, Democratic and Republican. There was news of Richard Nixon,
who had visited China the month before, shaking hands with Mao for the whole
world to see. There was nothing about Calcutta. What had consumed the city,
what had altered the course of her life and shattered it, was not reported here.
One morning, setting down the book she was reading and turning her head to the
window, she saw the sky, gray and lusterless. It was raining. It fell steadily,
drearily. All day she stayed in, but for the first time she felt confined.
In the afternoon, after the rain ended, she put on her winter coat over her sari,

her boots, her hat and gloves. She walked along the damp sidewalk, up the hill,
turning by the student union. She saw students going in and out, men in jeans
and jackets, women in dark tights and short wool coats, smoking, speaking to
one another.
She crossed the quadrangle, past the lampposts with their rounded white
bulbs on iron poles. It was milder than she expected, the gloves and hat
unnecessary, the air fresh after the rain.
On the other side of the campus she entered a little grocery store next to the
post office. Among the sticks of butter and cartons of eggs she found something
called cream cheese, which came in a silver wrapping, looking like a bar of soap.
She bought it, thinking it might be chocolate, breaking the five-dollar bill
Subhash left for her each day, filling the deep pocket of her coat with the
change.
Inside the wrapper was something dense, cold, slightly sour. She broke it into
pieces and ate it on its own, standing in the parking lot of the grocery. Not
knowing it was intended to be spread on a cracker or bread, savoring the
unexpected taste and texture of it in her mouth, licking the paper clean.
She began to explore other parts of the campus, wandering in and out of various
departmental buildings, grouped around the quadrangle: the school of pharmacy,
foreign languages, political science and history. The buildings had names:
Washburn, Roosevelt, Edwards. Anyone could walk in.
She found classrooms and the offices of professors lining the halls. Bulletin
boards announcing upcoming lectures and conferences, display cases with books
that professors at the university had published. There was no guard preventing
her, questioning her. No armed soldiers sitting on sandbags, as they had for
months outside the main building at Presidency.
The day Robert McNamara had visited Calcutta, a year after the Naxalbari
uprising, communist protesters at the airport forced him to take a helicopter into
the center of the city. They would not let his car pass. She’d been on her campus
that day. As the helicopter was flying over College Street, students had hurled
stones from the roof of one of the campus buildings. They had locked the vicechancellor of Calcutta University into his office. She’d seen trams being burned.
One day she found the philosophy department. She came upon a large lecture
hall with rows of descending seats. The doors were still open as students
continued filing in. She took a seat at the very back, high enough so that she was
looking down at the top of the professor’s head. Close enough to the door so that
she could slip out if she needed to. But after her long walk, feeling heavy, she

was grateful to sit down.
Peering at the syllabus of the student next to her, she saw that it was an
undergraduate course, an introduction to ancient Western philosophy. Heraclitus,
Parmenides, Plato, Aristotle. Though most of the material was familiar, she sat
for the full class period. She listened to a description of Plato’s doctrine of
recollection, in which learning was an act of rediscovery, knowledge a form of
remembering.
The professor was dressed casually, in a sweater and jeans. He smoked
cigarettes as he lectured. He had a thick brown moustache, long hair like many
of the male students. He had not bothered to call the roll.
Students around her were also smoking, or knitting. A few had their eyes
closed. There was a couple at the back, with their legs pressed together, the
boy’s arm draped around the girl’s waist, stroking the material of her sweater.
But Gauri found herself paying attention. Eventually, wanting to take notes, she
searched in her bag for a sheet of paper and a pen. Finding no paper, she wrote
her notes in the margins of the campus newspaper she’d been carrying around.
Later, on a pad she found in the apartment, she copied over what she’d written.
Surreptitiously, twice a week, she began attending the class. She wrote down
the titles of the texts on the reading list and went to the library, borrowing
Subhash’s card to check out a few books.
She’d intended to remain anonymous, to go unnoticed. But one day while she
was immersed in the lecture, her hand shot up. The professor was speaking about
Aristotle’s rules of formal logic, about the syllogisms used to distinguish a valid
thought from an invalid one.
What about dialectical reasoning? One that acknowledged change and
contradiction, as opposed to an established reality? Did Aristotle allow for that?
He did. But no one paid much attention to those concepts until Hegel, the
professor said.
He’d replied as if Gauri were any legitimate member of the class. And
spontaneously he altered the course of the lecture, building on her question,
accommodating the point she’d made.
She made a little routine of it, following the wave of students after the class
let out to eat her lunch at the cafeteria of the student union, ordering French fries
at the grill, bread and butter and tea, sometimes treating herself to a dish of ice
cream.
At one end of the cafeteria, presiding over the space, a giant clock was built
into the brick wall. There were no numbers, no second hand, just pieces of metal
superimposed onto the surface, the giant hour and minute hands joining and

separating throughout the day.
She kept to herself. She was Subhash’s wife instead of Udayan’s. Even in
Rhode Island, even on the campus where no one knew her, she was prepared for
someone to question her, to condemn her for what she’d done.
Still, she liked spending time in the company of people who ignored but
surrounded her. Who went to the terrace to unwind and talk and smoke in the
sun, or who gathered indoors, in the lounges and game rooms, watching
television, or playing pool. It was almost like being in a city again.
The lounge of the women’s bathroom was an oasis: a vast private space
carpeted in white, with mirrored columns, and sofas to sit on, even to lie down
on, with standing ashtrays in between. It was like a waiting room in a train
station, or the reception area of a hotel, larger and more accommodating than the
apartment where she and Subhash lived. Here she sometimes sat, resting, leafing
through the campus newspaper, observing the American women who came to
touch up their lipstick or lean over to draw a brush through their hair.
The paper was dedicated sometimes to special issues, on the subjects of what
it meant to be a black person in America, or a woman, or a homosexual. Long
articles focused on forms of exploitation, individual identities. She wondered if
Udayan would have scorned them for being self-indulgent. For being concerned
less with changing the lives of others than with asserting and improving their
own.
When’s your baby due? a student sitting beside her in the lounge, smoking a
cigarette, asked her one day.
A few more months.
You’re in my ancient philosophy class, right?
She nodded.
I should have dropped it. The stuff’s over my head.
The student seemed so at ease, wearing long silver earrings, a gauzy blouse, a
skirt that stopped at her knees. Her body was unencumbered by the yards of silk
material that Gauri wrapped and pleated and tucked every morning into a
petticoat. These were the saris she’d worn since she stopped wearing frocks, at
fifteen. What she’d worn while married to Udayan, and what she continued to
wear now.
I like your outfit, the girl said, getting up to go.
Thank you.
But watching the girl walk away, Gauri felt ungainly. She began to want to
look like the other women she noticed on the campus, like a woman Udayan had
never seen.

April came, students welcoming the sunshine, gathering on the quadrangle and
along the ledge of the student union, white blossoms filling the trees. On Friday
afternoons she saw undergraduates lined up outside the union, with small
suitcases or backpacks, sacks of dirty laundry. They boarded enormous silver
busses that took them away for the weekend. They went to Boston, or Hartford,
or New York City. She gathered that they went home to see their parents, or to
visit their boyfriends and girlfriends, staying away until Sunday night.
Though she had no one to see off, she liked to observe this ritual egress,
watching the driver place the passengers’ luggage into the belly of the bus,
watching the students settle into their seats. She wondered what the places they
were going to were like.
You getting on? one of them asked her once, offering to help her.
She shook her head, stepping away from the crowd.
The health service at the university referred her to an obstetrician in the town.
Subhash drove her there, sitting in the waiting room while a silver-haired man
named Dr. Flynn examined her. His complexion was pink, looking tender
despite his years. As a nurse stood in the corner of the room he explored tactfully
inside her.
How are you feeling?
Fine.
Sleeping at night?
Yes.
Eating for two? Feeling kicks throughout the day?
She nodded.
That’s only the start of the trouble they’ll give, he said, smiling, telling her to
come back a month later.
What did he say? Subhash asked, when the appointment was over, and they
were in the car again.
She conveyed what Dr. Flynn had said, that the baby was now about a foot
long, that it weighed around two pounds. Its hands were active, its eyes sensitive
to light. The organs would continue to develop: the brain and the heart, the
lungs, preparing for life outside of her.
Subhash drove to the supermarket, telling her they needed a few things. He
asked her to join him, but she told him she’d wait in the car. He left the key in
the ignition, so that she could listen to the radio. She opened up the glove

compartment, wondering what was kept inside.
She found a map of New England, a flashlight, an ice scraper, an instruction
manual to the car. Then something else caught her eye. It was a woman’s hair
elastic, a malleable red ring flecked with gold. One that she did not recognize as
her own.
She understood that there had been someone before her, an American. A
woman who’d once occupied the seat she was in now.
Perhaps it had not worked out for whatever reason. Or perhaps Subhash
continued to see her, to get from her what Gauri did not give.
She left the elastic where she found it. She felt no impulse to ask him about it.
She was relieved that she was not the only woman in his life. That she, too,
was a replacement. Though she was curious, she felt no jealousy. Instead she
was thankful that he was capable of hiding something.
It validated the step she’d taken, in marrying him. It was like a high mark
after a difficult exam. It justified the distance she continued to maintain from her
new husband. It suggested that maybe she didn’t have to love him, after all.
One weekend he took her to the ocean, to show her what had given his life here
its focus. Gray sand, finer than sugar. When she bent over to touch it, it spilled
instantly from her fingers. It was like water, roughly rinsing her skin. Grass grew
sparsely on the dunes. Gray-and-white birds paced stiffly, like old men, along
the shore, or bobbed in the sea.
The waves were low, the water reddish where they broke. She removed her
shoes, as Subhash did, stepping over hard stones, over seaweed. He told her the
tide was coming in. He indicated the rocks, jutting out, that would be submerged
in another hour’s time.
Let’s walk a bit, he suggested.
But the wind picked up and opposed them, and she stopped after a few paces,
feeling too cumbersome to go on, too chilled.
Children were scattered here and there on the beach, bundled in jackets,
climbing the rocks, running on the sand. It was still too cold to swim, but they
dug trenches and craters, lying flat, legs spread. They decorated piles of mud
with stones. Watching them, she wondered if her child would play this way, do
such things.
Have you thought of a name? he asked. It was as if he’d read her mind.
She shook her head.
Do you like Bela?

She was bothered not by the name but by the fact of his suggesting it. But it
was true, she had not thought of one.
Maybe, she said.
I can’t think of any boys’ names.
I don’t think it will be one.
Why not?
I can’t imagine it.
Does it help at all, Gauri?
What?
Being here? Any of this?
At first she didn’t answer. Then she said, Yes, it helps to be away.
Your brother was supposed to be here, she added. This child should have
been his responsibility, whether he wanted it or not.
I’ll make it mine, Gauri. I’ve promised you that.
She was unable to express her gratitude for what he’d undertaken. She was
unable to convey the ways he was a better person than Udayan. She was unable
to tell him that he was protecting her, for reasons that would cause him to regard
her differently.
She looked back at the set of footprints they had made in the damp sand.
Unlike Udayan’s steps from childhood, which endured in the courtyard in
Tollygunge, theirs were already vanishing, washed clean by the encroaching
tide.

Chapter 2
He’d begun the new semester two weeks late, catching up on his classes, moving
into a furnished apartment reserved for married students and their families. He’d
bought sheets to fit the double mattress, and by calling people who advertised
things for sale on bulletin boards he’d set up a household for Gauri. He acquired
a few more dishes and pans, a potted jade plant, a black-and-white television on
a wobbly cart.
All he saw of her body were glimpses when she came out of the bathroom
after a shower. After Richard, he was used to sharing a space with another
person while keeping to himself. In the evenings he removed the clothes he
would wear the next day from the drawers in the bedroom, so that he would not
disturb her in the mornings.
At night he was sometimes aware of her door opening. She went to the
bathroom, she got herself a glass of water. He held his body still as the stream of
her urine fell. In the light of early morning, he saw her hair unsprung from its
customary knot, tensile, suspended like a serpent from the branch of a tree. She
walked through the living room as if it were empty, as if he were not there.
He trusted that things would change, after the baby came. That the child
would bring them together, first as parents, then as husband and wife.
Once, in the middle of the night, he heard her locked inside a nightmare. Her
animal whimpering startled him; it was the sound of a scream stifled by a
clenched jaw, a closed mouth. An articulate but wordless fury. He lay on the
sofa, listening to her suffer, listening to her reliving his brother’s death, perhaps.
Waiting for her terror to pass.
He ran into Narasimhan, and because Narasimhan asked, he told him his news.
That he was nearly finished with his course work, that later in the spring he
would take his qualifying exam. That his brother had died in India. That he had a
wife now, that she was expecting. He did not reveal the connection, that he had
married his brother’s wife.
He was unwell?
He was killed.
How?

The paramilitary shot him. He was a Naxalite.
I’m sorry. It’s a terrible loss to bear. But now you’ll be a father.
Yes.
Listen, it’s been too long. Why don’t you and your wife come to dinner one
day?
He had the directions written on the back of an envelope. He got a little lost on
unfamiliar roads. The house was in the woods, down a shaded dirt path, without
a proper lawn, with no other homes in view.
They were one of a number of Indian couples at the university that
Narasimhan and Kate had invited. A few of them already had children, who
went off to play with Narasimhan’s boys, running along a deck that wrapped
around two sides of the house. Subhash and Gauri were introduced to the other
couples, mostly graduate students in engineering, in mathematics, and their
wives. A number of the women had brought offerings of dishes they’d cooked,
dals and vegetables and samosas, tasty accompaniments to the lasagna and salad
that Kate had served.
The guests filled a large wood-paneled living room, standing and sitting,
talking, holding their plates. Books crowded the shelves, plants hung in woven
slings from the ceiling, record albums were stacked beside the turntable. There
were no curtains in the windows, only views of the trees outside. On the walls
were abstract paintings, bold blots of color that Kate had produced.
He was relieved to see Gauri mixing with the other women. She was wearing
a pretty sari. The child was beginning to overwhelm her. He saw some of the
women putting their hands on her belly. He heard them talking about children,
about recipes, about organizing a Diwali festival on campus the following year.
He was grateful to have arrived with her, and to know that he would be leaving
with her. That they were greeted and regarded as one.
No one questioned that Gauri was his wife, or that he was soon to be the
father of her child. The group wished them well, and they were sent off with an
assortment of objects Narasimhan’s sons had once used, which Kate had set
aside: a folding playpen, towels and blankets, caps and pajamas that seemed
meant for dolls.
In the car again, Gauri was quiet as Subhash retraced the drive. On the way
there she’d read one of her books. But now that it was dark she had nothing to
distract her.
The women seemed friendly. Who were they?

I don’t remember the names, she said.
The enthusiasm she’d mustered in the company of others had been discarded.
She seemed tired, perhaps annoyed. He wondered if she had not really enjoyed
herself, if she’d only been pretending. Still, he persisted.
Should we invite a few of them to our place, sometime?
It’s up to you.
They might be helpful, after the baby comes.
I don’t need their advice.
I meant as companions.
I don’t want to spend my time with them.
Why not, Gauri?
I have nothing in common with them, she said.
A few days later, he came home to the apartment and did not see her sitting in
the living room as she usually was at that time, reading a book on the sofa,
taking notes, drinking a cup of tea.
He knocked on the door to the bedroom, opening it partway when she did not
answer. The room was dark, but he didn’t see her resting on the bed. He called
out her name, wondering if she’d gone for a walk, though it was close to
dinnertime, getting dark, and she’d mentioned nothing about going out when
he’d called a few hours ago, to check in on her.
He went to the stove to put water on for tea. He wondered if she’d left him a
note somewhere. A moment of panic flickered through him, wondering if
something had happened to the baby. He checked the bathroom. He returned to
the bedroom, this time turning on the light.
On the dressing table was a pair of scissors that he normally kept in the
kitchen drawer, along with clumps of her hair. In one corner of the floor, all of
her saris, and her petticoats and blouses, were lying in ribbons and scraps of
various shapes and sizes, as if an animal had shredded the fabric with its teeth
and claws. He opened her drawers and saw they were empty. She had destroyed
everything.
A few minutes later he heard her key in the lock. Her hair hung bluntly along
her jawbone, dramatically altering her face. She was wearing slacks and a gray
sweater. The clothes covered her skin, but they accentuated the contours of her
breasts, the firm swell of her stomach. The shape of her thighs. He drew his eyes
away from her, though already a vision had entered, of her breasts, exposed.
Where were you?

I took a bus from the union, into town. I bought a few things.
Why did you cut off your hair?
I was tired of it.
And your clothes?
I was tired of those, too.
He watched as she went into the bedroom, not apologizing for the spectacular
mess she’d made, just putting away the new clothes she’d bought, then throwing
the old things into garbage bags. For the first time, he was angry at her. But he
didn’t dare tell her that what she’d done was wasteful, or that he found it
disturbing. That such destructive behavior couldn’t have been good for the child.
That night, asleep on the couch, he dreamed of Gauri for the first time. Her
hair was cut short. She wore only a petticoat and a blouse. He was under the
dining table with her. He was astride her, unclothed, making love to her as he
used to make love to Holly. His body combining on the hard tiled floor with
hers.
He woke up, confused, still aroused. He was alone on the couch in the living
room, Gauri asleep behind the bedroom door. They were married, she was his
wife now, and yet he felt guilty.
He knew that it was still too soon. That it was wrong to approach her until
after the baby was born. He had inherited his brother’s wife; in summer he
would inherit his child. But the need for her physically—waking up from the
dream, in the apartment in which they were living both together and separately,
he could no longer deny that he’d inherited that also.

Chapter 3
As summer approached she began spending more time at the library, which was
air-conditioned. A place where she was expected to be anonymous and
industrious, concentrating on the pages before her, nothing more.
At her side was a long rectangular window, from floor to ceiling, looking out
at the campus. Sunlight streamed in over treetops that had turned green and lush
in a matter of weeks. From her desk she could see the surrounding woods and
fields. The quadrangle was demarcated now by lengths of white rope, where
white folding chairs were being arranged in rows for the commencement
ceremony.
In June there was no one. After classes finished and the undergraduates
vanished, hardly a sound. Only the melodic chime of the campus clock in its
stone tower, reminding her that another hour had passed. In the library, the
squeaking rubber wheels of a wooden cart, stopping here and there so that an
absent book could be returned to its place.
Often she had a whole floor of the library to herself. The atmosphere, in its
order and cleanliness, was like that of a hospital, only benign. The stairwell rose
through the center of the building. The shallow steps, coated with rubber, easy to
climb, seemed disconnected from one another, leading all the way to the top.
She sat close to the philosophy section, browsing randomly in the stacks,
reading Hobbes, Hannah Arendt, taking notes, always returning the books to the
spots where they belonged. She was steadied by the quiet buzz of the lights, the
fluorescent panels above her like giant versions of the ice cube trays in the
freezer. Hemmed in from the waist up by the three sides of the carrel, facing the
blank white enclosure, the hard wood of the chair pressing into the small of her
back. The baby nestled inside her, providing company but also leaving her be.
By July, within minutes of stepping outside, for the brief walk back to the
apartment, she was coated in sweat, feeling it traveling down the center of her
back. The air was heavy with humidity, the sky sometimes threatening but
refusing to release rain. The purity of the heat seemed to silence other sounds.
She had grown up in such weather. But here, where just months ago it was
cold enough for her to see her breath when she walked outside, it came as a
shock, as something almost unnatural.

Because the semester had ended, certain campus buildings, certain
dormitories and administrative offices, were closed. Often she was able to walk
through campus, from the library back to the apartment, and not cross paths with
anyone. As if a strike were in effect, or a curfew in place. She heard the
mechanical shriek of the locusts that lived in the trees. Their rising sound was
like an intermittent siren, the only element of distress in that otherwise
uneventful place.
The contractions began in the library, three days before Dr. Flynn had predicted.
A pressure between her legs, the baby’s head like a ball of lead suddenly ten
times its weight. She returned to the apartment and packed her bag. Then she
waited for Subhash, knowing he would be home soon enough.
The cramps caused her to double over, clutching the towel bar in the
bathroom so that it threatened to loosen from the wall. He put his arm around her
when he came, escorting her to the car, standing with her when she was forced to
stop because of a contraction, allowing her to clamp her hand around his wrist.
Grasping the dashboard, as if to push it away; this was the only way she could
bear the ride to the hospital, her body threatening to split apart unless she held
herself in that position.
Now the sky released a hot pouring summer rain. It forced Subhash to slow
down, unable to see more than a few feet in front of him through the window, in
spite of the windshield wipers pumping back and forth. She imagined the car
spinning out of control, skidding into the opposite lane of oncoming cars.
She remembered the fog on the way to the airport, the night she was leaving
Calcutta. That night she had been desperate to move through it, to get out. Now,
in spite of the pain, in spite of the urgency, part of her wanted the car to stop.
Part of her wanted the pregnancy simply to continue, for the pain to subside but
for the baby not to be born. To delay, if only for a little longer, its arrival.
But Subhash leaned forward in his seat and drove on, sending up great sprays
of water from the rolling tires of the car, until the small brick hospital, set on a
hilltop, came into view.
It was a girl, as she was certain it would be. She was relieved that her hope
had been fulfilled, and that a young version of Udayan had not come back to her.
And in a way it was better to give the child a name Subhash had thought of, to
grant him that claim.
As she’d pushed she’d clenched her teeth, her body convulsed, but she had
not screamed. It was eight in the evening, still light outside, no longer raining.
The cord was clipped and suddenly the child was no longer a part of Gauri.

Others were bundling her, cleaning and weighing and warming her. A little later,
when Subhash was called up from the waiting room, Bela was placed in his
arms.
She dreamed of gulls on the beach in Rhode Island, screeching and attacking
one another, blood and feathers, dismembered wings on the sand. Again, as it
was after Udayan’s death, there was an acute awareness of time, of the future
looming, accelerating. The baby’s lifetime, so scant, already outdistancing and
outpacing her own. This was the logic of parenthood.
After bringing her home they tended to her, Subhash in his way, Gauri in
hers. At first a part of her resisted sharing Bela with him, including him in the
experience that had been solely hers. It was one thing for him to be her husband,
another to be Bela’s father. For his name to be on the birth certificate, a
falsehood no one questioned.
Seeking only the milk from her body, Bela rested, burrowed against Gauri’s
breast. Her child’s mind contained nothing. Her heart was simply an instrument
for pumping blood.
She demanded little, and yet she demanded everything. The awareness of her
was all-consuming. It absorbed every particle in Gauri’s body, every nerve. But
the nurse in the hospital had been right, she could not do it all by herself, and
every time Subhash took over, so that she could get some rest or take a shower
or drink a cup of tea before it turned cold, every time he picked Bela up when
she cried so that Gauri did not have to, she could not deny the relief she felt at
being allowed, however briefly, to step aside.
Framed between two pillows arranged on either side of her, Bela slept. When
she was awake, she would slowly twist her neck and her cloudy eyes would
intently search the corners of the room, as if already she knew that something
was missing.
When she was sleeping, she breathed with her whole body, like an animal or
a machine. This fascinated Gauri but also preoccupied her: the grand effort of
each breath, one after the next for as long as she would live, drawn from the air
shared by everyone else in the world.
While pregnant she had felt capable. But now Gauri was aware of how the
slightest oversight on her part could cause Bela to be destroyed. Carrying her out
of the hospital, through the lobby that led to the parking lot, where people
streamed by briskly without a glance, she had felt terrified, aware that America
was just as dangerous a place as any. Aware that there was no one, other than
Subhash, to protect Bela from harm.

She began to imagine scenarios, unbidden but persistent. Grotesque images of
Bela’s head snapping back, her neck breaking. When Bela fell asleep at her
breast, Gauri imagined falling asleep also, forgetting to unlatch her from her
nipple, Bela’s capacity to breathe put to an end. At night, alone with her in the
bedroom, Gauri started to worry that Bela would fall to the floor, or that Gauri
would roll on top of her, crushing her.
The day they took her for a walk through campus, Gauri stood on the terrace
of the student union, with Bela in her arms, waiting for Subhash to buy some
Coca-Colas. At first she stood at the edge of the terrace, but then she backed
away, afraid of losing control of her muscles, afraid of dropping her daughter.
Standing still on a sultry late summer’s day, without a trace of breeze, she was
nevertheless afraid that a sudden wind would pry Bela from her grasp.
Later that evening, in the apartment, knowing she shouldn’t, wanting to see
what would happen, she loosened her grip ever so slightly behind Bela’s neck,
relaxing her own shoulders. But Bela’s instinct for survival was reflexive.
Instantly she stirred from a deep sleep, protesting.
There was only one way for Gauri to minimize these images, to rid her mind
of these impulses. To handle Bela less, to ask Subhash to hold her instead.
She reminded herself that all mothers needed assistance. She reminded herself
that Bela was her child and Udayan’s; that Subhash, for all his helpfulness, for
the role he’d deftly assumed, was simply playing a part. I’m her mother, she told
herself. I don’t have to try as hard.
He entered the bedroom without knocking now, the minute Bela woke up in the
middle of the night and cried. Picking her up, walking her around the apartment.
He was unprepared for how small she was. Her only weight seemed to come
from the blankets wrapped around her, nothing more.
Already, she seemed to be recognizing him. To accept him, and to allow him
to ignore the reality that he was an uncle, an imposter. She reacted to the sound
of his voice as she lay in a flat cradle he formed by crossing one of his legs and
resting his ankle on top of the opposite knee. In that nest of his folded limbs,
cushioned against his thigh, she lay contentedly, seeking him with her eyes. He
felt purposeful as he held her, essential to the life she’d begun.
One night he switched off the television and entered the bedroom with Bela.
Gauri was turned away from him, asleep. He perched on the other side of the
bed, then leaned back, placing Bela’s moist black head on his chest, quieting her.
He extended his legs on the bed so that Bela could stretch out.
He remained on top of the covers, his eyes open in the dark. Though Bela

rested on top of his body, his awareness of Gauri, no longer pregnant, was
greater. His curiosity, his desire for her, had only intensified. For now he
marveled at how she had produced the child that lay against him, trusting,
tranquil, her cheek turned to one side.
When he opened his eyes Bela was no longer on his chest but beside him, in
Gauri’s arms, feeding. The room was dark, the blinds down. Birds were
chirping. His body was warm, still clothed.
What time is it?
Morning.
He had fallen asleep; they had passed the night in the same bed. Lying next to
her on top of a shared sheet, with Bela between them.
When he realized what had happened he sat up, apologizing.
Gauri shook her head. She was looking down at Bela, but then she turned her
face to him. She put out a hand, not using it to touch him, but offering it to him.
Stay.
She told him it had been reassuring, having him with her in the room. She
said that she was ready, that it had been long enough.
Her altered appearance made it easier: her shortened hair, her face that was
turning gaunt again after the baby’s birth, the slacks and tops she now wore
exclusively. Also the effects of Bela’s birth, the shadows that were beneath her
eyes, the smell of milk on her skin, so that her body was marked less by the fact
of Udayan impregnating her, and more by the infant they now shared.
At first she expressed no obvious desire, only a willingness. And yet this
combination of indifference and intent excited him. They set up the playpen for
Bela, and when she was in it, asleep, the bed was theirs.
She lay on her stomach, or on her side. Her back to him, her head turned, her
eyes closed. He pushed the material of her nightgown up to her waist. He saw
the tapering shape of it. The long straight valley bisecting her back.
Inside of her, surrounded by her, he worried that she would never accept him,
that she would never fully belong to him, even as he breathed in the smell of her
hair, and clasped her breast in his hand.
Her skin was uniform, the color even. No tan lines, not a blemish or a fleck of
variation as there had been, everywhere, on Holly’s body. No nicks on her calves
from shaving, not the prickly texture he expected to find on her buttocks and
thighs. It was almost disturbing in its softness, like an underbelly that ought not
to be exposed.

And yet it did not bruise from his weight, did not redden or swell from the
pressure of his teeth or hands. The briny odor between her legs, transferred
temporarily to his fingers when he probed her, was absent the following morning
when he sought it again.
She did not speak to him, but after the first few times she began to take his
hand and put it where she needed it to be. She began turning to him, kneeling up
on the bed, facing him. She reached the moment when her breathing quickened
and was audible, her skin glowing, her body tensely held.
It was the only moment he felt no part of her resisting him. She watched as he
finished up outside her, wiping what spilled on the surface of her abdomen, or
watching as he directed the proof of his desire into his cupped hand. She bore his
weight when he collapsed on top of her, when he had nothing more to give.

Chapter 4
At four Bela was developing a memory. The word yesterday entered her
vocabulary, though its meaning was elastic, synonymous with whatever was no
longer the case. The past collapsed, in no particular order, contained by a single
word.
It was the English word she used. It was in English that the past was
unilateral; in Bengali, the word for yesterday, kal, was also the word for
tomorrow. In Bengali one needed an adjective, or relied on the tense of a verb, to
distinguish what had already happened from what would be.
Time flowed for Bela in the opposite direction. The day after yesterday, she
sometimes said.
Pronounced slightly differently, Bela’s name, the name of a flower, was itself
the word for a span of time, a portion of the day. Shakal bela meant morning;
bikel bela, afternoon. Ratrir bela was night.
Bela’s yesterday was a receptacle for anything her mind stored. Any
experience or impression that had come before. Her memory was brief, its
contents limited. Lacking chronology, randomly rearranged.
So that one day she told Gauri, who was combing a stubborn knot out of
Bela’s thick hair:
I want short hair, like yesterday.
It had been many months ago that Bela’s hair was short. And at first, this was
what Gauri told her. She explained that it took more than a day for hair to grow
long again. She told Bela that her hair had been short perhaps one hundred
yesterdays ago, not one.
But for Bela, three months ago and the day before were the same.
She was frustrated with Gauri for contradicting her. Disappointment traveled
like a dark cloud across her face. There was no obvious trace in it of Gauri or of
Udayan. How was it that her forehead was faintly convex, that the inner corners
of her eyes dipped down? The placement of the eyes was distinctive. Gauri was
aware of the contrast of her own toffee skin to Bela’s lighter complexion, a
creamy fairness she had received from Gauri’s mother-in-law.
Where is my other jacket? Bela asked another day, as Gauri handed her a new
one. They were on their way to school.

Which?
The yellow one from yesterday.
It was true, there had been a yellow one the previous spring, with a hood
trimmed in fur. Too small for her now, given away to a church on campus that
took in used clothes.
That was last year’s jacket. It fit you when you were three.
Yesterday I was three.
She was waiting for Bela to stop marching this way and that in the corridor.
To stand still so that Gauri could put her arms into the sleeves of the jacket, so
that they could be on their way. When Bela resisted, she gripped her by the
shoulders.
That hurt. You hurt me.
Bela, we’re in a hurry.
The jacket was on now, unfastened. Bela wanted to pull up the zipper. Her
fumbling attempt to do this was delaying them further, and after a moment Gauri
could not bear it, she pried Bela’s fingers away.
Baba lets me do it myself.
Your father’s not here.
She tugged the zipper shut at the base of Bela’s throat, perhaps a bit harder
than she should have, almost catching the skin. She chided herself for being
impatient. She wondered when her daughter would know the full meaning of
what Gauri had just said.
After dropping off Bela she bought a cup of coffee at the student union. Every
summer and again every winter, at the start of each term, hundreds of students
stood in long lines, registering for classes. From time to time Gauri would pick
up a catalogue abandoned on the floor. She looked at the offerings in the
philosophy department, circling classes that appealed to her. She remembered
sitting in on the ancient philosophy class, secretly, after she’d first arrived in
Rhode Island.
There were no classes that term during the time Bela was at school. Instead
Gauri walked over to the library, to sit and read. The effort of concentration
eliminated, if only for an hour or two, the obligation of anything else. It
eliminated her awareness of those hours passing.
She saw time; now she sought to understand it. She filled notebooks with her
questions, observations. Did it exist independently, in the physical world, or in
the mind’s apprehension? Was it perceived only by humans? What caused

certain moments to swell up like hours, certain years to dwindle to a number of
days? Did animals have a sense of it passing, when they lost a mate, or killed
their prey?
In Hindu philosophy the three tenses—past, present, future—were said to
exist simultaneously in God. God was timeless, but time was personified as the
god of death.
Descartes, in his Third Meditation, said that God re-created the body at each
successive moment. So that time was a form of sustenance.
On earth time was marked by the sun and moon, by rotations that
distinguished day from night, that had led to clocks and calendars. The present
was a speck that kept blinking, brightening and diminishing, something neither
alive nor dead. How long did it last? One second? Less? It was always in flux; in
the time it took to consider it, it slipped away.
In one of her notebooks from Calcutta were jottings in Udayan’s hand, on the
laws of classical physics. Newton’s theory that time was an absolute entity, a
stream flowing at a uniform rate of its own accord. Einstein’s contribution, that
time and space were intertwined.
He’d described it in terms of particles, velocities. A system of relations
among instantaneous events. Something called time reversal invariance, in
which there was no fundamental distinction between forward and backward,
when the motions of particles were precisely defined.
The future haunted but kept her alive; it remained her sustenance and also her
predator. Each year began with an unmarked diary. A version of a clock, printed
and bound. She never recorded her impressions in them. Instead she used them
to write rough drafts of compositions, or work out sums. Even when she was a
child, each page of a diary she had yet to turn, containing events yet to be
experienced, filled her with apprehension. Like walking up a staircase in
darkness. What proof was there that another December would come?
Most people trusted in the future, assuming that their preferred version of it
would unfold. Blindly planning for it, envisioning things that weren’t the case.
This was the working of the will. This was what gave the world purpose and
direction. Not what was there but what was not.
The Greeks had had no clear notion of it. For them the future had been
indeterminable. In Aristotle’s teaching, a man could never say for certain if there
would be a sea battle tomorrow.
Willfully anticipating, in ignorance and in hope—this was how most people
lived. Her in-laws had expected Subhash and Udayan to grow old in the house
they had built for them. They had wanted Subhash to return to Tollygunge and

marry someone else. Udayan had given his life for the future, expecting society
itself to change. Gauri had expected to stay married to him, not for less than two
years but always. In Rhode Island, Subhash was expecting him and Gauri and
Bela to carry on as a family. For Gauri to be a mother to Bela, and to remain a
wife to him.
At times Gauri derived comfort from Bela’s version of history. According to
Bela, Udayan might still have been living the day before, and Gauri might still
be married to him, when really almost five years had passed since he was killed.
Almost five years, she’d been married to Subhash.
What she’d seen from the terrace, the evening the police came for Udayan,
now formed a hole in her vision. Space shielded her more effectively than time:
the great distance between Rhode Island and Tollygunge. As if her gaze had to
span an ocean and continents to see. It had caused those moments to recede, to
turn less and less visible, then invisible. But she knew they were there. What was
stored in memory was distinct from what was deliberately remembered,
Augustine said.
Bela’s birth, on the other hand, remained its own yesterday for Gauri. That
summer evening formed a vivid tableau that seemed just to have occurred. She
recalled the rain on the way to the hospital, the face of the nurse who’d stood at
her side, the view of the marina out the window. The feel of the hospital gown
against her skin, a needle inserted into the top of her hand. Just yesterday, it
seemed, she had held Bela and looked at her for the first time. She remembered
the ballast of pregnancy, suddenly missing. She remembered astonishment that
such a specific-looking being, contained for so long within her, had emerged.
At noon she went back to the nursery school to fetch Bela, a duty that was
always hers, never Subhash’s. He had a postdoc in New Bedford, nearly fifty
miles away. It was understood that he left the house at a certain hour, and
returned at a certain hour, and that Gauri was responsible for Bela all the hours
in between.
She would find Bela sitting in her cubby, an enclosure that looked to Gauri
like a tiny upright coffin. Her jacket on, waiting, lined up with her classmates.
She did not rush into Gauri’s arms like some of the other children, seeking praise
for the crinkled paintings they’d made, the leaves they’d gathered and glued onto
sheets of paper. She walked over, her pace measured, asking what Gauri would
make her for lunch, sometimes asking why Subhash hadn’t come. Reports of her
activities at school, details that overflowed from the mouths of her classmates as
soon as they saw their parents, were kept to herself.
Together they returned to their apartment building. In the lobby Gauri

unlocked the mailbox labeled Mitra that she and Subhash shared.
In Calcutta the names were painted onto wooden boxes with the careful
strokes of a fine brush. But here they were hastily scribbled, one or two of the
scuffed metal doors left blank. She pulled out the bills, an issue of a scientific
journal that Subhash subscribed to. Coupons from a grocery store.
There was seldom anything addressed to her. Only an occasional letter from
Manash. She resisted reading them, given what they reminded her of. Manash
and Udayan, studying together in her grandparents’ flat, and Udayan and Gauri,
getting to know one another as a result. A time she’d crushed between her
fingertips, leaving no substance, only a protective residue on the skin.
From Manash, also from international papers that came to the library, she
received some news. At first she tried to picture what might be happening. But
the pieces were too fragmentary. The blood of too many, dissolving the very
stain.
Kanu Sanyal was alive but in prison. Charu Majumdar had been arrested in
his hideout, put into the lockup at Lal Bazar. He had died in police custody in
Calcutta, the same summer Bela was born.
So many of Udayan’s comrades were still being tortured in prisons.
Siddhartha Shankar Ray, the current chief minister in Calcutta, was backed by
Congress. He was refusing to hold enquiries on those who had died.
News of the movement had by now attracted the attention of some prominent
intellectuals in the West. Simone de Beauvoir and Noam Chomsky had sent a
letter to Nehru’s daughter, demanding the prisoners’ release. But in the face of
rising protest, against corruption, against failed government policies, Indira
Gandhi had declared the Emergency. Censoring the press, so that what was
happening was not being told.
Even now, part of Gauri continued to expect some news from Udayan. For
him to acknowledge Bela, and the family they might have been. At the very least
to acknowledge that their lives, aware of him, unaware of him, had gone on.

Chapter 5
It had been two years since he’d written and defended his thesis, an analysis of
eutrophication in the Narrow River. Nineteen seventy-six, the year of America’s
bicentennial. Seven years since he’d first arrived.
In almost five years he had not returned to Calcutta. Though his parents wrote
now of wanting to meet Bela, Subhash told them that she was too young to make
such a long journey, and that the pressures of his work were too great. He sent
pictures from time to time, and he still sent his parents money, now that his
father had retired. He sensed that they had softened, but he was not ready to face
them again. In this matter, he and Gauri were allied.
But his motivation was his own. He didn’t want to be around the only other
people in the world who knew that he was not Bela’s father. They would remind
him of his place, they would regard him as her uncle, they would never
acknowledge that he was anything more.
He was finishing up his postdoc in New Bedford. He’d been invited to
participate in an environmental inventory. In the evenings, to earn some extra
money, he taught a chemistry class at a community college in Providence.
He’d considered moving to southern Massachusetts to be closer to his work.
But his fellowship would end soon, and he’d already found a larger apartment in
Rhode Island, one that was still walking distance from the main campus. There
was the possibility of a lab in Narragansett hiring him. Now that Bela was
attending the university nursery school, now that life there had become familiar
to him, it felt simpler to stay.
It took him about an hour to return, driving past the mills and factories in Fall
River, past Tiverton, crossing the series of bridges over the bay. He crossed to
the mainland, then another ten minutes or so to the quiet leafy complex, behind a
row of fraternities, where they lived. Each evening when he saw Bela, she
seemed slightly altered—her bones and teeth more solid, her husky voice having
turned more emphatic in the hours that he’d been away.
She’d begun to write her name, to spread the butter on her toast. Her legs
were growing long, though her belly was still rounded. Her back was soft with
hair, an elegant line of it running along the length of her spine. There was a
perfect loop of it at the center, like the whorls of her fingertips, or in the bark of

a tree. Whenever he traced it, as he washed Bela in the soapy tub before bed, the
hairs rearranged themselves, and the pattern dissolved.
Though she’d learned to tie her laces she could not tell her left foot from her
right. Other gestures of her infancy lingered—the way she reached out and
opened and closed her fist when she wanted something. A glass of water, for
example, that was out of reach.
She was afraid of thunder, and even when there was none, sometimes woke
up in the middle of the night, calling out for him, or simply walking into the
room he shared with Gauri and tucking herself beside him in bed. In the
mornings, on the verge of waking, she would lie on her stomach, legs tucked in,
crouched over like a little frog.
Every night, at Bela’s insistence, he lay with her until she fell asleep. It was a
reminder of their connection to each other, a connection at once false and true.
And so night after night, after helping her brush her teeth and changing her into
her pajamas, he switched off the light and lay beside her. Bela instructed him to
turn and face her, to lock eyes with her so that their breath mingled. Look at me,
Baba, she whispered, with an intensity, an innocence, that overwhelmed him.
Sometimes she held his face in her hands.
Do you love me?
Yes, Bela.
I love you more.
More than what?
I love you more than you love me.
That’s impossible. That’s my job.
But I love you more than anybody loves anybody.
He wondered how such powerful emotions, such superlative devotion, could
exist in such a small child. Patiently he waited until she lowered her eyelids and
became still. Her body always twitching a little; this was the sign that deep sleep,
within seconds, was near.
Every night, though the same thing happened, it came as a shock. A few
minutes ago Bela would have been leaping off the bed, her laughter filling up the
room. But when she closed her eyes that cessation of activity felt as unsettling,
as final, as death.
Some nights he, too, fell asleep briefly beside Bela. Carefully he removed her
hands from the collar of his shirt, and adjusted the blanket on top of her. Her
head was thrust back on the pillow, in a combined posture of pride and
surrender. He’d experienced such closeness with only one other person. With
Udayan. Each night, extracting himself from her, for a moment his heart

stopped, wondering what she would say, the day she learned the truth about him.
On Saturdays he and Bela went to the supermarket; this was their time alone
together outside the apartment, a time he looked forward to more than any other
in the course of the week. She no longer fit into the seat at the front of the cart,
and now she hung on to the back as he steered, hopping off to help him choose
the apples, a box of cereal, a jar of jam.
Faster, she would insist, and sometimes, if the aisle was empty, he obliged,
sprinting forward, playing along. In this sense Udayan had marked her, leaving
behind an exuberant replica of himself. And Subhash loved this about her; that
there was such a liberal outpouring of who she was.
Standing with him at the deli, she ate little cubes of cheese speared onto
toothpicks, the spoons of potato salad set out on trays, pink wedges of ham.
There was a cafeteria at the back of the supermarket, and here he treated her to a
hot dog and a cup of punch, a plate of onion rings to share.
One day, crossing the parking lot after they’d finished shopping, pushing the
cart filled with brown paper bags, he saw Holly.
Bela was still clinging to the back of the cart, facing him. It was a cold
autumn day, the sky bright, the wind off the ocean strong.
For so many years he had been careful to avoid places where he might run
into her, no longer visiting the salt pond that was closest to her house, making
sure her car was not parked at the beach where they’d first met.
But now he saw her, in a place he came every week without fail. She was
accompanied not by Joshua but by a man. He had his arm around Holly’s waist.
The man was her husband, the same face in the photograph in Joshua’s room.
Older now, going gray, his hairline receding.
She appeared relaxed with this man who had once forsaken her, who had
betrayed her. She was unaware of Subhash. He heard her laughter as they
crossed the parking lot, and saw her tossing back her head. He’d been in his
twenties when he knew her. She would be over forty now; Joshua would be
fourteen, old enough to stay at home by himself while his mother and father
went shopping.
The years between them hadn’t mattered to Subhash. But he wondered if
she’d broken it off because of this; because he’d been immature, in no position
to replace the man now once more at her side.
They began walking together toward the supermarket, Holly slowing down,
seeing him, waving now in recognition, still approaching. Her blond hair was cut

differently, in layers around her face. Wearing clogs, flared trousers, a cowlnecked sweater, clothing for colder weather. Otherwise she was unchanged.
What are you looking at, Baba?
Nothing.
Let’s go, then.
He was unable to move forward. And it was too late to avoid her now.
Bela stepped off the back of the cart and stood next to him. He felt her
leaning against his hip. He smoothed her hair, and sought the warmth at the base
of her throat. Her face was still small enough for him to cup most of it in his
hand.
Subhash, Holly said. You have a little girl.
Yes.
I had no idea. This is Keith.
This is Bela.
They shook hands. Subhash wondered if Keith knew about the time he and
Holly had spent together. Holly was taking Bela in, admiring her.
How long have you been married?
About five years.
You decided to stay here, after all.
I did. Joshua is well?
Up to here on me, she said, indicating his height with her hand.
She reached out, touching his arm for an instant. She looked genuinely
pleased to see him, to have met Bela. He remembered how much she’d loved
listening to him talk about his childhood, about Calcutta. What had she
remembered? He’d never told her that Udayan was dead.
Good to run into you, Subhash. Take care.
Though jealousy should not have flared, he felt its hold as they walked past
him, as he pushed the cart loaded with groceries toward his car. He saw that it
had not simply been for Joshua that she’d forgiven her husband. That they loved
one another still.
Subhash and Gauri shared a bed at night, they had a child in common. Almost
five years ago they had begun their journey as husband and wife, but he was still
waiting to arrive somewhere with her. A place where he would no longer
question the result of what they’d done.
She never expressed any unhappiness, she did not complain. But the smiling,
carefree girl in the photograph Udayan had sent, that had been Subhash’s first
impression of her, that he had also hoped to draw out—that part of her he’d

never seen.
And another thing was missing, something that troubled him even more to
admit. He hated thinking about it. He hated remembering the terrible prediction
his mother had made.
But somehow his mother had known. For the tenderness Subhash felt for
Bela, that was impossible for him to ration or restrict, was not the same on
Gauri’s end.
Though she cared for Bela capably, though she kept her clean and combed
and fed, she seemed distracted. Rarely did Subhash see her smiling when she
looked into Bela’s face. Rarely did he see Gauri kissing Bela spontaneously.
Instead, from the beginning, it was as if she’d reversed their roles, as if Bela
were a relative’s child and not her own.
On the beach with Bela, he was aware of families who traveled to Rhode
Island to reinforce their closeness. For so many it seemed a sacred rite.
Subhash and Gauri had never gone on vacation together, with Bela. Subhash
had never suggested it, perhaps because he knew that the idea wouldn’t appeal to
Gauri. He spent his time off with Bela, driving with her here and there for the
day. He couldn’t imagine the three of them exploring a new place together, or
renting a cottage with another family, as some of his colleagues did.
He’d hoped that by now Gauri would be ready to have a child with him, and
to give Bela a companion. He’d gone so far as to suggest it one day, saying he
did not want to deny Bela a sibling. He believed it would correct the imbalance,
if they were four instead of three. That it would close up the distance.
She told him she would think about it in another year or two; that she was not
yet thirty, that there was still time to have a child.
And so he continued hoping, though every month, in the medicine cabinet,
was a new packet of birth-control pills.
At times he feared that his one act of rebellion, marrying her, had already
failed. He’d expected more resistance from her then, not now. He wondered
sometimes if she regretted it. If the decision had been made in error, in haste.
She’s Udayan’s wife, she’ll never love you, his mother had told him,
attempting to dissuade him. At the time he’d stood up to her, convinced it could
be otherwise, and that he could make Gauri happy. He’d been determined to
prove his mother wrong.
In order to marry Gauri he’d compromised his ties to his parents, perhaps
permanently, he did not know. But he was a father now. He could no longer
imagine a life in which he had not taken that step.

Chapter 6
Play with me, Bela would say.
If Subhash was not there she sought out Gauri’s companionship, instructing
her to sit on the floor in Bela’s room. She wanted her to move pieces along a
board, or help to dress and undress her dolls, tugging the clothes on and off their
unyielding plastic limbs. She spread dozens of identical cards facedown, a
memory game in which they were supposed to locate matching pairs.
At times Gauri capitulated, holding on to a book she was reading, stealing
glances while it was Bela’s turn. She played, but it was never enough.
You’re not paying attention, Bela protested, when Gauri’s mind strayed.
She sat on the carpet, conscious of Bela’s reproach. She knew that a sibling
might relieve her of the responsibility to entertain Bela this way. She knew that
this was partly what motivated people to have more than one child.
She did not tell Subhash, when he brought it up with her, what she already
knew: that though she had become a wife a second time, becoming a mother
again was the one thing in her life she was determined to prevent from
happening.
She slept with him because it had become more of an effort not to. She
wanted to terminate the expectation she’d begun to sense from him. Also to
extinguish Udayan’s ghost. To smother what haunted her.
Nothing in their lovemaking had reminded her of Udayan, so that, in the end,
the fact that they had been brothers was not so strange. There was the focus of
seeking pleasure, and the numbing effect, once they were finished, removing all
specific thoughts from her brain. It ushered in the solid, dreamless sleep that
otherwise eluded her.
His body was a different body, more hesitant but also more attentive. In time
she came to respond to it, even to crave it, as she had craved odd combinations
of food when she was pregnant. With Subhash she learned that an act intended to
express love could have nothing to do with it. That her heart and her body were
different things.
She’d seen signs in the student union advertising babysitters, services provided
by students and professors’ wives. She began writing down some names and

phone numbers.
She asked Subhash if they could hire somebody, to give her time to take a
survey of German philosophy that met twice a week. Though Bela was five now,
in kindergarten, she still attended school for only half the day. Gauri said that
this was a reasonable solution, given that Subhash was busy, given that they
knew no one else who could help.
He told her no. Not for the money it would cost but on principle, not wanting
to pay a stranger to care for Bela.
It’s common here, she said.
You’re home with her, Gauri.
Though he had encouraged her to visit the library in her spare time, to attend
lectures now and again, she realized that he didn’t consider this her work.
Though he’d told her, when he asked her to marry him, that she could go on with
her studies in America, now he told her that her priority should be Bela.
She’s not your child, she wanted to say. To remind him of the truth.
But of course it was not the truth. At Bela’s ballet recital a few weeks before,
Gauri saw the change in her as soon as Subhash, arriving a few minutes late, had
taken his place and waved; Bela filling with the awareness of him, her chin
tucked into her shoulder, bashfully performing only for him.
A few days later she brought it up again.
This is important to me, she said.
Willing to compromise, he told her he would try to rearrange his schedule. He
began to leave earlier on certain mornings, and return, a few days a week, by late
afternoon. She registered for the class and went to the bookstore, filling a basket
with books. On the Genealogy of Morals. The Phenomenology of Mind. The
World as Will and Idea. She bought a packet of pens and a dictionary. A wirebound notebook bearing the university’s seal.
•••
With Bela, she was aware of time not passing; of the sky nevertheless darkening
at the end of another day. She was aware of the perfect silence in the apartment,
replete with the isolation she and Bela shared. When she was with Bela, even if
they were not interacting, it was as if they were one person, bound fast by a
dependence that restricted her mentally, physically. At times it terrified her that
she felt so entwined and also so alone.
On weekdays, as soon as she picked up Bela from the bus stop and brought
her home, she went straight to the kitchen, washing up the morning dishes she’d

ignored, then getting dinner started. She measured out the nightly cup of rice,
letting it soak in a pan on the counter. She peeled onions and potatoes and picked
through lentils and prepared another night’s dinner, then fed Bela. She was never
able to understand why this relatively unchallenging set of chores felt so
relentless. When she was finished, she did not understand why they had depleted
her.
She waited for Subhash to take over, to allow her to leave, to attend her class
or to study at the library. For there was no place to work in the apartment, no
door she could shut, no desk where she could keep her things.
She begrudged Subhash’s absence when he was at work, his ability to come
and go and nothing more. She resented the few moments of the morning he
enjoyed with Bela, before leaving for his lab.
She resented him for going away for two or three days, to attend
oceanography conferences or to conduct research at sea. Due to no fault of his
own, when he did appear, sometimes she was barely able to stand the sight of
him, or to tolerate the sound of the voice that, in the beginning, had drawn her to
him.
She began to eat dinner early, with Bela, leaving Subhash’s portion on the
stove. So that almost as soon as he was there, Gauri was able to pack up her tote
bag and go. She felt the fresh air of early evening on her face. Bright in
springtime, dark and cold in fall.
At first it was just the evenings she had class, but then it was every evening of
the week that she spent at the library, away from them. Happy to spend time
with Bela, Subhash let her go. And so she felt antagonized by a man who did
nothing to antagonize her, and by Bela, who did not even know the meaning of
the word.
But her worst nemesis resided within her. She was not only ashamed of her
feelings but also frightened that the final task Udayan had left her with, the long
task of raising Bela, was not bringing meaning to her life.
In the beginning she’d told herself that it was like a thing misplaced: a
favorite pen that would turn up a few weeks later, wedged between the sofa
cushions, or discreetly sitting behind a sheaf of papers. Once found, it would
never be lost sight of again. To look for such a misplaced item only made it
worse. If she waited long enough, she told herself, there it would be.
But it was not turning up; after five years, in spite of all the time, all the hours
she and Bela spent together, the love she’d once felt for Udayan refused to
reconstitute itself. Instead there was a growing numbness that inhibited her, that
impaired her.

She was failing at something every other woman on earth did without trying.
That should not have proved a struggle. Even her own mother, who had not fully
raised her, had loved her; of that there had been no doubt. But Gauri feared she
had already descended to a place where it was no longer possible to swim up to
Bela, to hold on to her.
Nor was her love for Udayan recognizable or intact. Anger was always
mounted to it, zigzagging through her like some helplessly mating pair of
insects. Anger at him for dying when he might have lived. For bringing her
happiness, and then taking it away. For trusting her, only to betray her. For
believing in sacrifice, only to be so selfish in the end.
She no longer searched for signs of him. The fleeting awareness that he might
be in a room, looking over her shoulder as she worked at her desk, was no longer
a comfort. Certain days it was possible not to think of him, to remember him. No
aspect of him had traveled to America. Apart from Bela, he’d refused to join her
here.
The women in the philosophy department were secretaries. The professor, and
the other students in her class, were men. It was a small group, seven people
including the professor. Quickly they grew to know one another by name. They
liked to argue about antipositivism, about praxis. About immanence and the
absolute. They never solicited Gauri’s opinion, but as she began to contribute to
the discussion they listened, surprised that she knew enough, at times, to prove
them wrong.
Her professor, Otto Weiss, was a short man with a thick accent, a slow
manner of speaking, wire spectacles, rust-colored curls on his head. He dressed
more formally than the other professors. Always with polished leather shoes, a
jacket, a little pin securing his tie. He’d been born in Germany, put into one of
the camps when he was a boy.
I never think of it, he told the class, speaking briefly of this experience, after
one of the students asked him when he had left Europe. As if to say, Do not pity
me, though the rest of his family had perished before the camp was liberated;
though there was an identification number on his lower arm, the tattoo concealed
beneath his clothing.
He was perhaps only a decade older than Gauri but seemed of another
sensibility, another generation. He had lived in England before coming to the
United States. He’d done his doctorate at Chicago. He would never return to
Germany, he said. Reading the attendance list on the first day of class, he had
called out her name without hesitation. She had not had to correct his

pronunciation, to tolerate the way most Americans uttered her married name.
He referred to no notes when he lectured. Though he guided them carefully
through the texts he’d assigned, he seemed more interested in what the students
had to say, taking a few notes on blank sheets of white paper as they spoke. He’d
read the Upanishads, talked about their influence on Schopenhauer. She felt a
kinship with this man. She wanted to please him, to salute him somehow.
At the end of the semester, after writing a comparison of Nietzsche’s and
Schopenhauer’s concepts of circular time, she was asked to come to his office
after class. She’d worked on the essay for weeks, writing it out by hand, then
typing up the fair copy on Subhash’s typewriter, at the kitchen table. Surrounded
by the appliances, the cord of the fluorescent fixture overhead. The task had kept
her awake until dawn.
She saw crowded notations in the margins, slanting comments that virtually
formed a frame.
This is ambitious material. One might say presumptuous.
She did not know how to respond.
Do you think you have succeeded?
Still she did not know what to say.
I asked for an essay of ten pages. You have written close to forty. And yet
you have still failed utterly to prove your point.
I’m sorry.
Don’t apologize. I am always grateful to have an intellectual in the room.
Such a grasp of Hegel I have not encountered among my students here.
He scanned certain portions of the essay, a finger trailing below the words. It
needs revising, he said.
I can prepare it for next week?
He shook his head, brushing his hands against one another. I have finished
with this class. And I suggest you put this paper in a drawer and not look at it for
a few years.
She thought he was brushing his hands of her also. She thanked him for the
class. She stood up to go.
What brings you to Rhode Island from India?
My husband.
What does he do?
He studied here also.
You met in America?
She turned her face away.

I’ve asked something I should not have?
He was patient, steadily gazing up at her from his chair. He did not press. But
he seemed to sense that she had more to say.
She turned to him again. She looked at the books behind him, the papers piled
on his desk. She looked at the crisp material of his shirt, the cuffs covering his
wrists where the sleeves of the jacket ended. She thought of what he’d
experienced, at less than Bela’s age.
My first husband was killed, she said. I watched it happen. I married his
brother, to get away.
Weiss continued to look at her. His expression had not changed. After a
moment he nodded. She knew she’d told him enough.
He stood up, and walked over to the window in his office. He lifted it open a
crack.
Do you read French or German?
No. But I’ve studied Sanskrit.
You will need both languages to go on, but they will be simple for you.
Go on?
You belong in a doctoral program, Mrs. Mitra. They don’t offer one here.
She shook her head. I have a young daughter, she said.
Ah, I did not realize you were a mother. You must bring her to see me.
He turned around a framed picture that was on his desk, and showed her his
family. They were standing with their backs to a valley in autumn, flaming
leaves. A wife, a daughter, two sons.
With children the clock is reset. We forget what came before.
He returned to the desk and wrote down the names of a few books he
recommended, telling her which chapters were most important. From the shelves
he lent her his own copies of Adorno and McTaggart, with his annotations. He
gave her copies of New German Critique, indicating some articles she should
read.
He told her to continue taking upper-level courses at the university, saying
that they would count toward a master’s. After that he could make some phone
calls, to doctoral programs that would suit her, universities to which she could
commute. He would see to it that she was admitted. It would mean traveling a
few times a week for some years, but she could write her dissertation from
anywhere. He would be willing to serve on her committee, when the time came.
He handed the paper back to her, and stood up to shake her hand.

Chapter 7
At the front of the apartment complex there was a broad sloping lawn. The
school bus stopped on the other side of it. For the first few days of first grade,
Gauri walked Bela across the lawn, waiting with her for the bus, seeing her off,
then going back in the afternoons, to receive her.
The following week, Bela wanted to walk to the bus stop on her own, as the
other young children in the complex did. There were one or two mothers who
always went, and they told Gauri they were happy to make sure that everyone
got safely onto the bus.
Still, Gauri would keep an eye on Bela as she walked down the pathway at
the foot of their building, across the grass. She moved the dining table she
worked at over to the window. The bus always came at the same time, the wait
only five minutes or so. Lunch boxes arranged on the sidewalk marked the
children’s places in the line.
She was grateful for this slight change in the morning routine. It made a
difference that she did not have to get dressed, did not have to step outside the
apartment and make small talk with other mothers, before sitting down to study.
She was taking an independent course with Professor Weiss, reading Kant,
beginning to grasp it for the first time.
One morning, after a night of downpours, a light rain still falling, she handed
Bela her lunch box and sent her off. She was still in her nightgown, her robe.
The day was her own until three, when Bela’s school ended, when the bus would
drop her off and she would return across the sloping lawn.
But today, a minute later, there was a knock on the door. Bela was back.
Did you forget something? Do you want your rain hat?
No.
What is it, then?
Come see.
I’m in the middle of something.
Bela tugged at her hand. Ma, you have to come see.
Gauri took off her robe and slippers, putting on a raincoat and a pair of boots.
She stepped outside, opening an umbrella.
Outside, the air was humid, saturated with a deep, fishy stench. Bela pointed

to the pathway. It was covered by a carnage of earthworms; they’d emerged
from the wet soil to die. Not two or three but hundreds. Some were tightly
curled, others flattened. Their rosy bodies, their five hearts, sliced apart.
Bela shut her eyes tightly. She recoiled at the image, complained of the smell.
She said she didn’t want to step on them. And she was afraid to walk across the
lawn from which they’d come.
Why are there so many?
It happens sometimes. They come out to breathe when the ground is too wet.
Will you carry me?
You’re too big.
Can I stay home, then?
Gauri looked up to where the other children stood, under hoods and
umbrellas. They seem to have managed, she said.
Please? Bela’s voice was small. Tears formed, then slid down her face.
Another mother might have indulged her. Another mother might have brought
her back, let her stay home, skip a day of school. Another mother, spending the
time with her, might not have considered it a waste.
Gauri remembered how happy Subhash had been, those days last winter when
it had snowed so heavily, and most everything was shut down. For a whole week
he’d stayed home with Bela, making a holiday of it. Playing games, reading
stories, taking her out to play on campus, in the snow.
Then she remembered another thing. How, at the height of the crackdown, the
bodies of party members were left in streams, in fields close to Tollygunge.
They were left by the police, to shock people, to revolt them. To make clear that
the party would not survive.
The school bus was approaching.
Come.
But Bela shook her head. No.
If you don’t get on the bus we’re going to walk to school. Over more worms
than this.
When Bela still refused to move, Gauri grasped her tightly by the hand,
causing her to trip, dragging her across. Bela was sobbing audibly, miserably
now.
The other mothers and children, gathered at the bus stop, had turned their
heads. The bus came to a stop, the door opening, the rest of the children getting
on. The driver was waiting for them.
Don’t make a scene, Bela. Don’t be a coward.

I watched your father killed before my eyes, she might have said.
I don’t like you, Bela cried out, shaking herself free. I’ll never like you, for
the rest of my life.
She ran ahead. Abandoning her mother on the heels of summoning her. Not
wanting Gauri to accompany her the rest of the way.
It had been a child’s temper, posturing, grandiose. By the afternoon, when Bela
came home, the incident was forgotten. But Bela’s words had pervaded Gauri
like a prophecy.
I want her to know, she told Subhash that evening, taking a break from typing
a paper, after Bela was in bed. Subhash was sitting at the kitchen table,
balancing the checkbook, paying bills.
Know what?
I want to tell her about Udayan.
Subhash stared at her. She saw fear in his eyes. She remembered when
Udayan was hidden behind the water hyacinth, and the gun was at her throat.
She realized the weapon was in her hands now. Everything that mattered to him,
she could take away.
It’s the truth, she continued.
He shook his head. His expression had changed. He stood up to face her.
She deserves to know, Subhash.
She’s too young. She’s only six.
When, then?
When she’s ready. Now it would only do more harm than good.
She had been prepared to insist on it, to peel the false coating of their lives
away, but she knew he was right. It was too much for Bela to absorb. And
perhaps it would compromise the alliance between Subhash and Bela she’d
come to depend on. It would cause Bela to regard Subhash in a different way.
All right, then. She turned to go.
Wait.
What?
You agree with me?
I said yes.
Then promise me something.
What’s that?
Promise you won’t tell her on your own. That we’ll do that together someday.

She promised, but she felt the weight of it, sinking down inside her. It was the
weight of maintaining the illusion that he was Bela’s father. A weight always
settling instead of surfacing.
She realized it was the only thing he continued to need from her. That he was
beginning to give up on the rest.
She became aware of a man who looked at her, turning his head slightly as she
passed by. His glance shifting, though he never stopped to introduce himself—
there was no reason for him to. She knew there weren’t too many women who
looked like her on the campus. Most of the other Indian women wore saris. But
in spite of her jeans and boots and belted cardigan, or perhaps because of them,
Gauri knew she stood out.
At first she found him unappealing, physically. A man in his fifties, she
guessed, a little thickset at the waist. The eyes were small, inscrutable. Pale hair
that stuck up a little. A thin mouth, the skin of his face creased, seeming dry.
He wore a brown corduroy jacket, a sweater underneath. He carried a battered
leather briefcase in his hand. Though they crossed paths with comic
predictability, mutely acknowledging one another, she never saw him smile.
She assumed he was a professor. She had no idea what department he was in.
One day she noticed a wedding band on his finger. She would see him on the
way to her German class, always along the same section of the path.
One day she looked back at him. Staring at him, challenging him to stop, to
say something. She had no idea what she would do, but she began to want this to
happen, to will it. She felt her body reacting when she saw him, the acceleration
of her heart, the tautness of her limbs, a damp release between her legs.
Seeking out Subhash in bed, she pretended she was with this man, in a hotel
room, or in his home. Feeling his mouth, his sex against her own.
On Wednesdays, the days she saw him, she began to prepare herself for the
encounter. The class met in the morning, which meant there would be time. A
little over an hour, to go with him and come back, before she had to get Bela. On
Tuesdays she prepared more than she needed for dinner the next day, to
accommodate the potential lapse in her schedule.
But the next time she saw him was a Monday afternoon, in a different part of
campus. She recognized him from behind. She needed to pick up Bela in half an
hour, she’d been on her way to the library to get a book, but she changed course
and began to follow him, racing to keep up while at the same time leaving a
space.
She followed him into the student union. She felt her inhibitions dissolving.

She would go up to him, look at him. Please, she would say.
She walked behind him into the double-chambered room lined with sofas,
televisions in the corners. He stopped to pick up a copy of the campus
newspaper, glancing at it for a moment. Then she saw him walk to one of the
sofas, lean over to kiss a woman who was waiting. Touch her knee.
She escaped to the only place she could think of, the enormous women’s
room, pushing against the heavy door, crossing the thick carpet of the lounge,
locking herself into a stall. She was alone, there was no one in the neighboring
stalls, and she could not help herself, she pushed her hand up her shirt, to her
breast, caressing it, another hand unzipping her jeans, hooking her fingers over
the ridge of bone, her forehead against the cold metal of the door.
It took only a moment to calm herself, to put an end to it. She washed her
hands at the sink, smoothed her hair, saw the color that had risen to her face. She
strode past the lounge, not checking to see if the man and his companion were
sitting there.
The following Wednesday, she took an alternate route to her class. She made
sure she never ran into him again, walking in the opposite direction if she did.
One afternoon Bela was occupied with a pair of scissors, a book of paper dolls.
It was July, Bela’s school closed for the long vacation; the campus was at rest.
Subhash was teaching summer courses in Providence, spending the rest of his
time in a lab in Narragansett. Gauri spent her days with Bela, without a car in
which they might go anywhere, without a break.
Gauri sat with her own book beside her, Spinoza’s Ethics, trying to read a
section to its end. But something was beginning to change: it was becoming
possible to read a book and to be with Bela at the same time. Possible to be
together, engaged in separate ways.
The television was turned off, the apartment quiet apart from the intermittent
sound of Bela’s scissors, slowly slicing through thick pieces of paper.
Going to the kitchen to make tea, Gauri saw that they were out of milk. She
returned to the living room. She saw the back of Bela’s neck, bent over her task.
She was talking to herself, carrying on a dialogue in different voices between the
paper dolls.
Put on your shoes, Bela.
Why?
Let’s go out.
I’m busy, she said, sounding suddenly like a girl of twelve instead of six. As

if, with a snip of her scissors, she had sliced away the need for Gauri,
eliminating her.
The idea presented itself. The store was just behind the apartment complex, a
two-minute walk. She could see it through the kitchen window, past the
Dumpster and the soda machine and the cars parked in back.
I’m just going down to get the mail.
Without stopping to think things through, she went out, locking the door.
Down the steps, cutting across the parking lot, into the hot leafy day.
She was running more than walking. Her feet were light. In the store she felt
like a criminal, worried that the elderly man standing behind the register, always
kind to Bela, thought Gauri was stealing the milk she’d come to buy.
Where’s your daughter today?
With a friend.
He smiled and handed her a piece of peppermint candy from the little bowl by
the register. Tell her it’s from me.
Quickly but carefully she counted out her change. The transaction
overwhelmed her, as it used to when she’d first come here. She remembered to
say thank you. She threw out the candy before she got to the apartment building,
hiding the milk in her tote bag.
The following day she set Bela up at the coffee table in front of the television.
She considered every detail: a glass of water in case she was thirsty, a generous
plate of biscuits and grapes. Extra pencils, in case the tip of the one she was
drawing with happened to snap. Half an hour’s careful preparation, to allow for
five minutes away.
The five minutes doubled to ten, sometimes a bit more. Fifteen minutes to be
alone, to clear her head. It was time to run across the quadrangle to the library to
return a book, a simple errand she could have done at any time but that she was
determined to accomplish at that moment. Time to go to the post office and send
a letter, requesting an application for one of the doctoral programs Otto Weiss
had suggested she look into. Time to speculate that, without Bela or Subhash,
her life might be a different thing.
It turned into a dare, a puzzle to solve, to keep herself sharp. A private race
she felt compelled to run again and again, convinced, if she stopped, that her
ability to perform the feat would be lost. Before stepping out she checked that
the stove was turned off, the windows shut, the knives placed out of reach. Not
that Bela was that sort of child.
So it began in the afternoons. Not every afternoon but often enough, too
often. Disoriented by the sense of freedom, devouring the sensation as a beggar

devours food.
Sometimes she simply walked to the store and back, without buying anything.
Sometimes she really did get the mail, and sat on a bench on campus and sorted
through it. Or she went over to the student union to get a copy of the campus
paper. Then back inside, rushing up the flight of stairs, at once triumphant and
appalled at herself. She unlocked the door, where Bela would be, just as she’d
left her. Never suspecting, never asking where she’d been.
Then one day that summer Subhash came home earlier than usual, intending
to take advantage of the last of the warm weather, and take Bela to the beach.
He found Bela concealed beneath one of the tents she sometimes made by
removing the blankets from her bed, draping them over the sofa and the coffee
table in the living room. She was content within this structure, playing on her
own.
She told him that her mother had gone to get the mail. But Gauri wasn’t at the
bottom of the stairs. Subhash knew that, having just retrieved the mail and come
up the stairs himself.
Ten minutes later Gauri returned with a newspaper. She hadn’t noticed
Subhash’s car in the parking lot. Because he hadn’t called to say he was leaving
early, there was no reason to think he was already home.
There she is, Bela said when she walked through the door. See, I told you she
always comes back.
But it took Subhash, who was standing at the window, his back to the room,
several minutes before he turned around.
At first he had said nothing to reproach her. For a week his only punishment was
in refusing to speak, refusing to acknowledge her, just as her in-laws had ignored
her after Udayan was killed. Living with her in the apartment as if she were
invisible, as if only Bela were there, his fury contained. The day he broke his
silence he said,
My mother was right. You don’t deserve to be a parent. The privilege was
wasted on you.
She apologized, she told him it would never happen again. Though she hated
him for insulting her, she knew that his reaction was justified, and that he would
never forgive her for what she’d done.
While continuing to live in the same house he turned away from her, just as
she had turned away from him. The wide berth for herself that she had been
seeking in their marriage, he now willingly gave. He no longer wanted to touch

her in bed, he no longer brought up the possibility of a second child.
When she was admitted the following spring to a doctoral program in Boston,
when they offered to pay her way, he did not object. He said nothing when she
started taking the bus there two days a week, or when she arranged for
undergraduates to look after Bela the days she was gone. He didn’t fault her for
creating a disruption, or for wanting to spend that time away.
Because of Bela, the possibility of separating was not discussed. The point of
their marriage was Bela, and in spite of the damage Gauri had wrought, in spite
of her new schedule, her coming and going, the fact of Bela remained.
Besides, she was a student, without an income. Like Bela, Gauri wouldn’t
survive without him.

Part V

Chapter 1
Each day it diminishes: a little less water to see through the terrace grille. Bijoli
watches as the two ponds in front of the house, and the tract of lowland behind
them, are clogged with waste. Old clothes, rags, newspapers. Empty packets of
Mother Dairy. Jars of Horlicks, tins of Bournvita and talcum powder. Purple foil
from Cadbury chocolate. Broken clay cups in which roadside tea and sweetened
yogurt were once served.
The heap forms a thickening bank around the water’s edge. Whitish from a
distance, colorful up close. Even her own garbage has ended up there: wrappers
from packets of biscuits or blocks of butter. Another flattened tube of Boroline.
The brittle clumps of hair her scalp sheds, pulled from the teeth of her comb.
People have always tossed refuse into these bodies of water. But now the
accumulation is deliberate. An illegal practice taking place in ponds, in paddy
fields, all over Calcutta. They are being plugged up by promoters so that the
city’s swampy land turns solid, so that new sectors can be established, new
homes built. New generations bred.
It had happened on a massive scale in the north, in Bidhannagar. She had read
about it in the papers, the Dutch engineers laying down pipes to bring in silt
from the Hooghly, closing up the lakes, turning water into land. They’d
established a planned city, Salt Lake, in its place.
Long ago, when they had first come to Tollygunge, the water had been clean.
Subhash and Udayan had cooled off in the ponds on hot days. Poor people had
bathed. After the rains the floodwater turned the lowland into a pretty place
filled with wading birds, clear enough to reflect moonlight.
The water that remains has been reduced to a green well in the center, a dull
green that reminds her of military vehicles. Winter days, when the sun’s heat is
strong, when most of the lowland has turned back to mud, she sees water from
certain puddles evaporating before her eyes, rising up like steam from the
ground.
In spite of the garbage the water hyacinth still grows, stubbornly rooted. The
promoters who want this land will have to burn it to eradicate it, or remove it
with machines.
At a certain hour she gets up from her chair. She goes down to the courtyard

to pick a few marigold tops and jasmine, enclosing them in her hand. Her
husband’s dahlias are still in bloom this winter, people peering over the wall to
admire them.
She walks past the ponds to the edge of the lowland. Her gait has changed.
She has lost the coordination required to place one foot directly in front of the
other. Instead she moves by shifting her body from side to side, leaning in with
one shoulder, her feet feeling for the ground.
That evening was long enough ago now for stories to be told. The
neighborhood children, born after Udayan’s death, go quiet when they see her
with the flowers and small brass urn.
She washes the memorial tablet and replaces the flowers, brushing away
those that have dried out from the day before. This past October was the twelfth
anniversary. She puts her hand into a puddle, sprinkling the flowers with the
water that clings to her fingers, to keep them moist through the night.
Bijoli understands that she scares these children; that to them she, too, is a
kind of ghostly presence in the neighborhood, a specter watching over them
from the terrace, always emerging at the same time every day. She is tempted to
tell them that they are right, and that Udayan’s ghost does lurk, inside the house
and around it, in and around the enclave.
Some days, she would tell them if they asked, she sees him coming into view,
approaching the house after a long day at college. He walks through the
swinging doors into the courtyard, a book bag over his shoulder. Still cleanshaven, focused on his studies, eager to settle down at his desk. Telling her he’s
hungry, thirsty for tea, asking why she hasn’t already put the kettle on.
She hears his footsteps on the stairs, the fan in his bedroom spinning. Static
on the shortwave that stopped working years ago. The brief sound his match
makes, the flame raging, then ebbing, when it strikes the edge of the box.
As a final disgrace to their family, his body was never returned. They were
denied even the comfort of honoring his bullet-ridden corpse. They had been
unable to anoint it, to drape it with flowers. It had not been carried out of the
enclave, hoisted on the shoulders of his comrades, carried into the next world to
shouts of hari bol.
After his death there was no recourse to the law. It was the law, at the time,
that had made it possible for the police to kill him. For a while she and her
husband had looked for his name in the papers. Needing proof even after what
they’d seen. But no notice was printed. No admission of what had been done.
The small stone tablet that his party comrades thought to put up is the only
acknowledgment.

They had named him after the sun. The giver of life, receiving nothing in
return.
The year after Udayan’s death, the year Subhash took Gauri to America, Bijoli’s
husband had retired. He woke before dawn and took the first tram north, to Babu
Ghat, where he bathed in the Ganges. For the rest of the day, after his breakfast,
he sequestered himself in his room and read. He refused rice for lunch, telling
her to cut up fruit, to warm a bowl of milk instead.
This routine, these small deprivations, structured his days. He’d stopped
reading the papers. He’d stopped sitting with Bijoli on the terrace, complaining
that the breeze was too damp, that it settled in his chest. He read the
Mahabharata in Bengali translation, a few pages at a time. Losing himself in
familiar tales, in ancient conflicts that had not afflicted them. When his eyes
began to give him trouble, cloudy with cataracts, he did not bother getting them
checked. Instead he used a magnifying glass.
At a certain point he suggested selling the house and moving away from
Tollygunge, leaving Calcutta altogether. Perhaps moving to another part of
India, to some restful mountain town. Or perhaps applying for visas, and going
to America to stay with Subhash and Gauri. Nothing, he said, bound them to this
place. The house stood practically empty. A mockery of the future they’d
assumed would unfold.
Briefly she’d considered it. Traveling, making amends with Subhash,
accepting Gauri, getting to know Udayan’s child.
But it wasn’t possible for Bijoli to abandon the house where Udayan had
lived since birth, the neighborhood where he died. The terrace from which she’d
last seen him, at a distance. The field past the lowland, where they’d taken him.
The field is no longer empty. A block of new houses sits on it now, their
rooftops crowded with television antennas. In the mornings, close by, a new
market sets up, where Deepa says the prices for vegetables are better.
A month ago, before going to bed, her husband tied his mosquito netting to the
nails in the wall and wound his watch to mark the hours of the following day. In
the morning Bijoli noticed that the door to his room, next to hers, was still shut.
That he had not gone for his bath.
She didn’t knock on his door. She went to the terrace, to sit and view the sky
and sip her tea. There were a few clouds in the sky but no rain. She told Deepa to
bring her husband his tea, to rouse him.

A few minutes later, after Deepa entered the room, Bijoli heard the cup and
saucer break into pieces against the floor. Before Deepa came to find her on the
terrace, to tell her he’d died in his sleep, Bijoli already knew.
She became a widow, as Gauri had become. Bijoli now wears white saris,
without a pattern or a border. She’s removed her bangles, and stopped eating
fish. Vermillion no longer marks the parting of her hair.
But Gauri is married again, to Subhash, a turn of events that still stupefies
her. In some ways it was less expected, more shocking, than Udayan’s death. In
some ways, just as devastating.
Deepa does everything now. A capable teenaged girl whose family lives outside
the city, who has five siblings to help support. Bijoli has given Deepa her
costume jewelry and colorful things, the keys to her house. Deepa washes and
combs Bijoli’s hair, arranging it so that the thinning parts are less obvious. She
sleeps in the house with Bijoli at night, in the prayer room where Bijoli no
longer prays.
She handles the money, goes to the market, cooks the meals, fetches the mail.
In the mornings she draws the drinking water from the tube well. At night, she
makes sure that the gate is locked.
If something needs to be hemmed she operates the sewing machine that
Udayan used to oil, that he would repair with his tools so that Bijoli never had to
take it into a shop. Bijoli tells Deepa to use the sewing machine as often as she
likes, and by now it has become a source of extra income for her, as it used to be
for Bijoli, hemming frocks and trousers, taking in or letting out blouses for
women in the neighborhood.
In the afternoons, on the terrace, Deepa reads Bijoli articles from the
newspaper. Never the whole story, just a few lines, skipping over the difficult
words. She tells her that a film star is the president of America. That the CPI(M)
has been running West Bengal again. That Jyoti Basu, whom Udayan used to
revile, is the chief minister.
Deepa has replaced everyone: Bijoli’s husband, her daughter-in-law, her sons.
She believes Udayan arranged for this.
She remembers him sitting with a piece of chalk in the courtyard, teaching the
boys and girls who used to work for them, who’d not gone to school, to write
and read. He befriended these children, eating beside them, involving them in his
games, giving them the meat from his own plate if Bijoli hadn’t set enough
aside. He would come to their defense, if she happened to scold them.
When he was older he collected worn-out items, old bedding and pots and

pans, to distribute to families living in colonies, in slums. He would accompany
a maid to her home, into the poorest sections of the city, to bring medicine. To
summon a doctor if a member of her family was ill, to see to a funeral if
someone died.
But the police had called him a miscreant, an extremist. A member of an
illegal political party. A boy who did not know right from wrong.
She lives on her husband’s pension, and the income from the downstairs rooms
that they began to rent to another family after Gauri moved away. Once in a
while a check written out in dollars arrives from Subhash, something that takes
months to cash. She does not ask for his help, but she is in no position to refuse
it.
In all it is enough to buy her food and to pay Deepa, even to have a small
refrigerator, to install a telephone line. The lines are unpredictable, but on the
first try she had picked up the phone and dialed Subhash’s number and
transmitted her voice to America, conveying the news of her husband’s death. It
was a few days after the fact. It came as a surprise, yes, but how deeply had it
affected her?
For over a decade they’d lived in separate rooms. For over a decade her
husband had not spoken of what had happened to Udayan. He refused to talk
about it with Bijoli, with anyone. Every morning, after his bath in the river, he
picked up fruit at the market, stopping on his way home to chat with neighbors
about this and that. Together, never speaking, the two of them had taken their
evening meals, sitting on the floor under Udayan’s death portrait, never
acknowledging it.
They had loved this house; in a sense it had been their first child. They’d been
proud of each detail, caring for it together, excited by every change.
When it was first built, when it had been only two rooms, electricity was just
coming to the area, lanterns lit to prepare the evening meal. The iron streetlamp
outside their house, an elegant example of British city planning, had not yet been
converted. Someone from the Corporation came each day before sunset, and
again at daybreak, climbing a ladder, switching the gas on and off by hand.
The plot was twenty-five feet wide, sixty feet deep. The house itself was
narrow, sixteen feet across. There was a mandatory passageway of four feet on
either side of the building, then the boundary wall.
Bijoli had contributed her only resource. She’d sold off the gold she’d been
given when she became a wife. For her husband had insisted, even before having

children, that building a home for their family, owning however ordinary a
property in Calcutta, was more important. He’d believed no security was greater.
The roof was originally covered with tiles of dried clay, replaced later by
corrugated asbestos. For a time Subhash and Udayan slept in a room without any
bars on the windows. Burlap was tacked up at night because the shutters had not
been installed. Rain blew in at times.
She remembers her husband polishing hinges and latches with pieces of her
old saris. Beating mattresses to release dust. Once a week, after a private
bathroom was built, he’d clean it before he cleaned himself, pouring phenyle
into the corners and eliminating cobwebs as soon as they formed.
Within the rooms, each day, Bijoli had taken a meticulous inventory of their
possessions. Lifting, dusting, replacing. Precisely aware of where everything
was. Under her watch, the bedsheets had been tautly spread. The mirror free
from smudges. The interiors of teacups unmarred by rings.
Water was pumped manually from the tube well, a series of buckets filled up
for the day’s use, drinking water stored in urns. Sometime in the fifties they’d
gotten a septic tank. Before that there had been an outhouse by the entrance, and
a man had come to carry their daily waste away on his head.
Mejo Sahib, the second of three Nawab brothers, had owned the parcel that
formed their enclave, and had sold them their plot. He was a descendant of Tipu
Sultan, whom the British had killed, whose kingdom was divided, whose
offspring were sequestered for a time in the Tolly Club. A visitor to England,
Bijoli had once heard, could see Tipu’s sword and slippers, pieces of his tent and
throne, displayed as trophies of conquest in one of Queen Elizabeth’s homes.
During the first years of Subhash’s and Udayan’s lifetimes, when it was still
unclear whether Calcutta would belong to India or Pakistan, these royal-blooded
families had lived among them. They had been kind to Bijoli, inviting her to step
off the street into their pillared homes, offering her sherbet to drink. Subhash and
Udayan had stroked the rabbits they’d kept as pets, in cages in their courtyards.
Together they’d swung on a wooden plank, beneath a bower of bougainvillea.
In 1946 she and her husband had worried that the violence would spread to
Tollygunge, and that perhaps their Muslim neighbors would turn against them.
They had considered packing up the house, living for a while in another part of
the city, where Hindus were the majority. But a nephew of Mejo Sahib’s had
been outspoken. He had gone out of his way to protect them. Anyone who enters
this enclave to threaten a Hindu will have to kill me first, he’d said.
But after Partition, Mejo Sahib’s family, along with so many, had fled. Their
native soil turning corrosive, like salt water invading the roots of a plant. Their

gracious homes abandoned, most of them occupied or razed.
Bijoli’s home feels just as forsaken, its course just as diverted. Udayan has
not lived to inherit it, and Subhash refuses to come back. He should have been a
comfort; the one son remaining when the other was taken away. But she was
unable to love one without the other. He had only added to the loss.
The moment he returned to them after Udayan’s death, the moment he stood
before them, she’d felt only rage. Rage at Subhash for reminding her so strongly
of Udayan, for sounding like him, for remaining a spare version of him. She’d
overheard him talking with Gauri, paying attention to her, being kind.
She’d told him, when he announced that he was going to marry Gauri, that
the decision was not his to make. When he insisted, she told him that he was
risking everything, and that they were never to enter the house as husband and
wife.
She’d said it to hurt them. She’d said it because a girl she did not like to begin
with, did not want in her family, was going to become her daughter-in-law twice
over. She’d said it because it was Gauri, not Bijoli, who contained a piece of
Udayan in her womb.
She’d not fully meant what she said. But for twelve years both Subhash and
Gauri have held up their end of the bargain. They have not returned, either
together or separately, to Tollygunge; they have stayed far from it, away. So that
she feels the deepest shame a mother can feel, of not only surviving one child
but losing another, still living.
Forty-one years ago Bijoli had longed to conceive Subhash, more than she’d
longed for anything in her life. She had been married for almost five years when
it happened, already in her mid-twenties, beginning to think that perhaps she was
unable to bear children, that perhaps she and her husband were not meant to
have a family. That they had invested in the property and built their home in
vain.
But at the end of 1943 he was born. Tollygunge had been a separate
municipality back then. The new Howrah Bridge had opened to traffic, but
horse-drawn carts were still taking people to the train station. Gandhi had fasted
against the British, and the British were fighting the Axis powers, so that the
trees of Tollygunge were filled with foreign soldiers prepared to shoot down
Japanese planes.
The summer she was pregnant, villagers began spilling out at Ballygunge
Station. They were skeletal, half-crazed. They were farmers, fishermen. People
who had once produced and procured food for others, now dying from the lack

of it. They lay on the streets of South Calcutta, beneath the shade of the trees.
A cyclone the year before had destroyed paddy crops along the coast. But
everyone knew that the famine that followed was a man-made calamity. The
government distracted by military concerns, distribution compromised, the cost
of war turning rice unaffordable.
She remembers dead bodies turning fetid under the sun, covered with flies,
rotting on the road until they were carted away. She remembers some women’s
arms so thin that their wedding bangles, their only adornment, were pushed up
past the elbow to prevent them from sliding off.
Those with energy accosted people on the street, tapping strangers on the
shoulder as they begged for the clouded starchy water that trickled out of a
strained pot of rice and was normally thrown away. Phen.
Bijoli used to save this water, giving it to groups of delirious people who
gathered at mealtimes outside the swinging doors of her house. Heavy with
Subhash, she had gone to volunteer kitchens to serve bowls of gruel. The sound
of their begging could be heard at night, like an animal’s intermittent bleating.
Like the jackals in the Tolly Club, startling her in the same way.
In the ponds across from their house, and in the flooded water of the lowland,
she saw people searching for nourishment. Eating insects, eating soil, eating
grubs that crawled in the ground. In that year of ubiquitous suffering, she had
first brought life into the world.
Fifteen months later, not long before the war ended and Japan surrendered,
Udayan arrived. In her memory it had been one long pregnancy. They had
occupied Bijoli’s body one after the other, Udayan’s cells beginning to divide
and multiply before Subhash had taken his first step, before he had been given a
proper name. In essence it was the three months between their birthdays that
seemed to separate them, not the fifteen that had elapsed in real time.
She’d fed them by hand, rice and dal mixed together on the same plate. She’d
extracted the bones from a single piece of fish, lining them up at the side of the
plate like a set of her sewing needles.
From the beginning Udayan was more demanding. For some reason he had
not been secure in her love for him. Crying out, protesting, from the very instant
he was born. Crying out if she happened to hand him to someone else, or left the
room for a moment. The effort to reassure him had bonded them. Though he’d
exasperated her, his need for her was plain.
Perhaps for this reason she still feels closer to Udayan than to Subhash. Both
had defied her, running off and marrying Gauri. In Udayan’s case, at first, she’d
tried to be accepting. She’d hoped having a wife would settle him, that it would

distract him from his politics. She’ll go on with her studies, he’d told them.
Don’t turn her into a housewife. Don’t stand in her way.
He came home with gifts for Gauri, he took her to restaurants and films, to
visit his friends. When Bijoli and her husband heard about what the students
were doing after Naxalbari, what they were destroying, whom they were killing,
they told themselves Udayan was married. That he had a future to consider, a
family one day to raise. That he wouldn’t be mixed up with them.
Without discussing it they’d been prepared to hide him, to lie to the police if
they came. They’d assumed it was simply a matter of protecting him.
Without asking where he went in the evenings, without knowing whom he
went to meet, they’d been prepared to forgive him. They were his parents.
They’d not been prepared, that evening, not to be his parents anymore.
She can no longer picture it. Nor can she picture the life Subhash and Gauri
lead in America, in the place called Rhode Island. The child, named Bela, whom
they are raising as husband and wife. But now Subhash has lost his father. For
the second time since he left India, for the sake of a second death, he is obliged
to face her.
One morning, watching from the terrace, Bijoli has an idea. She goes down the
staircase and walks through the swinging doors of the courtyard, into the
enclave, and then out onto the street. Schoolchildren in uniforms are walking
past, in white socks and black shoes, satchels heavy with their books. Skycolored skirts for the girls, shorts and ties for the boys.
They laugh until they see her, stepping out of her way. Her sari is stained and
her bones have turned soft, her teeth no longer firm in her gums. She has
forgotten how old she is, but she knows without having to stop to think that
Udayan would have turned thirty-nine this spring.
She carries a large shallow basket meant to store extra coal. She walks over to
the lowland, hoisting up her sari so that her calves are revealed, speckled like
some eggshells with a fine brown spray. She wades into a puddle and bends
over, stirring things around with a stick. Then, using her hands, she starts
picking items out of the murky green water. A little bit, a few minutes each day;
this is her plan, to keep the area by Udayan’s stone uncluttered.
She piles refuse into the basket, empties the basket a little ways off, and then
begins to fill it again. With bare hands she sorts through the empty bottles of
Dettol, Sunsilk shampoo. Things rats don’t eat, that crows don’t bother to carry
away. Cigarette packets tossed in by passing strangers. A bloodied sanitary pad.
She knows she will never remove it all. But each day she goes out and fills up

her basket, once, then a few times more. She does not care when some people
tell her, when they stop to notice what she’s doing, that it is pointless. That it is
disgusting and beneath her dignity. That it could cause her to contract some sort
of disease. She’s used to neighbors not knowing what to make of her. She’s used
to ignoring them.
Each day she removes a small portion of the unwanted things in people’s
lives, though all of it, she thinks, was previously wanted, once useful. She feels
the sun scorching the back of her neck. The heat is at its worst now, the rains
still a few months away. The task satisfies her. It passes the time.
One day there are some unexpected items piled up by Udayan’s memorial stone.
Heaps of dirtied banana leaves, stained with food. Soiled paper napkins bearing
a caterer’s name, and broken vessels from which guests have sipped their filtered
water and tea. Garlands of dead flowers, used for decorating the entryway of a
house.
They are remnants of a marriage somewhere in the neighborhood. Evidence
of an auspicious union, a celebration. A mess that repels her, that she refuses to
touch or to clean.
Neither of her sons was married this way. They had not celebrated, guests had
not feasted. It was not until Udayan’s funeral that they had fed people at the
house, banana leaves with heaps of salt and wedges of lemon lined on the
rooftop, relatives and comrades waiting single file on the landing for their turn to
climb the steps and eat the meal.
She wonders which family it is, whose child has been married off. The
neighborhood’s boundaries have been expanding; she no longer has a sense of
where things begin and end. Once she could have knocked on their doors and
been recognized, welcomed, treated to a cup of tea. She would have been handed
an invitation to the wedding, beseeched to attend. But there are new homes now,
new people who prefer their televisions, who never talk to her.
She wants to know who has done this. Who has desecrated this place? Who
has insulted Udayan’s memory this way?
She calls out to the neighbors. Who was responsible? Why did they not come
forward? Had they already forgotten what happened? Or were they unaware that
it was here that her son had once hidden? Just beyond, in what used to be an
empty field, where he’d been killed?
She begs, cupping her hands, just as starving people used to, entering the
enclave, seeking food. For those people she had done what she could. She had
collected the starch in her rice pot and given it to them. But no one pays

attention to Bijoli.
Come forward, she calls out to those who are watching from their windows,
their rooftops. She remembers the voice of the paramilitary, speaking through
the megaphone. Walk slowly. Show your face to me.
She waits for Udayan to appear amid the water hyacinth and walk toward her.
It is safe now, she tells him. The police have gone. No one will take you away.
Come quickly to the house. You must be hungry. Dinner is ready. Soon it will be
dark. Your brother married Gauri. I am alone now. You have a daughter in
America. Your father has died.
She waits, certain that he is there, that he hears what she tells him. She talks
to herself, to no one. Tired of waiting, she waits some more. But the only person
who appears is Deepa. She rinses Bijoli’s soiled hands and muddied feet with
fresh water. She puts a shawl over her shoulders, and places an arm around her
waist.
Come have your tea, Deepa says, coaxing her away, taking her indoors.
On the terrace, along with her plate of biscuits, her cup of tea, Deepa hands
her something else.
What’s this?
A letter, Mamoni. It was in the box today.
It is from America, from Subhash. In it he confirms his plans to visit this
summer, informing her of the date of his arrival. By then nearly three months
will have passed since his father’s death.
He tells her it’s not feasible to come any sooner. He tells her that he will bring
Udayan’s daughter with him, but that Gauri is unable to come. He mentions
some lectures he intends to give in Calcutta. He tells her they will be there for
six weeks. She regards me as her father, he writes in reference to the girl
they’ve named Bela. She knows nothing else.
The air is still. Government quarters, built recently behind their house,
obstruct the southern breeze that used to course the length of the terrace. She
returns the letter to Deepa. Like a spare packet of tea she doesn’t need at the
moment, she stores away the information, and turns her mind to other things.

Chapter 2
They arrived at the start of the monsoon season. In Bengali it was called barsha
kal. Each year around this time, her father said, the direction of the wind
changed, blowing from sea to land instead of from land out to sea. On a map he
showed her how the clouds traveled from the Bay of Bengal, over the warming
landmass, toward the mountains in the north. Rising and cooling, unable to
retain their moisture, trapped over India by the Himalayas’ height.
When the rain came, he told Bela, tributaries in the delta would change their
course. Rivers and city streets would flood; crops would thrive or fail. Pointing
from the terrace of her grandmother’s house, he told her that the two ponds
across the lane would overflow and become one. Behind the ponds, excess rain
would collect in the lowland, the water rising for a time as high as Bela’s
shoulders.
In the afternoons, following mornings of bright sun, came the rumble of
thunder, like great sheets of rippling tin. The approach of dark-rimmed clouds.
Bela saw them lowering swiftly like a vast gray curtain, obscuring the day’s
light. At times, defiantly, the sun’s glow persisted, a pale disc, its burning
contours contained so as to appear solid, resembling a full moon instead.
The rooms grew dark and then the clouds began to burst. Water came in, over
the windowsills, through the iron bars, rags wedged beneath shutters that had to
be quickly closed. A maid named Deepa rushed in to dry what leaked onto the
floor.
From the terrace Bela watched the thin trunks of palm trees bending but not
breaking in the maritime wind. The pointed foliage flapped like the feathers of
giant birds, like battered windmills that churned the sky.
Her grandmother had not been at the airport to welcome them. In Tollygunge, on
the terrace where she sat, on the top floor of the house where her father had been
raised, Bela was presented with a short necklace. The tiny gold balls, like
decorations meant for holiday cookies, were strung tightly together. Her
grandmother leaned in close. Saying nothing, she fastened the necklace at the
base of Bela’s throat, then arranged it so that the clasp was at the back.
Though her grandmother’s hair was gray, the skin of her hands was smooth,

unmarked. The sari wrapped around her body, made of white cotton, was plain
as a sheet. Her pupils were milky, navy instead of black. Taking in Bela, her
grandmother’s eyes traveled between Bela and her father, as if following a
filament that connected them.
Watching them unpack their suitcases, her grandmother was disappointed that
they had not brought special gifts for Deepa. Deepa wore a sari, and a gem in her
nostril, and she called Bela Memsahib. Her face was shaped like a heart. She was
strong enough, in spite of her lean frame, her wiry arms, to help Bela’s father
carry their heavy suitcases up the stairs.
Deepa slept in the room next to her grandmother’s. A room that was like a
large cupboard, up a half flight of steps, with a ceiling so low it was not possible
to stand. This was where Deepa unrolled a narrow cushion at the end of the day.
Her grandmother gave away the American soaps and lotions Bela’s mother
had picked out, the flowered pillowcase and sheet. She told Deepa to use them.
She set aside the colorful spools of thread, the embroidery hoop, the tomato
pincushion, saying Deepa did the sewing now. The black leather purse shaped
like a large envelope, fastened by a single snap, which Bela had helped her
mother choose in Rhode Island, at the Warwick Mall, went to Deepa also.
The day after they arrived her father sat for a ceremony to honor her
grandfather, who had died a few months before. A priest tended a small fire that
burned in the center of the room. Fruit was heaped beside it on brass plates and
trays.
On the floor, propped against the wall, was a large photo of her grandfather’s
face, and beside it, a photo of an older boy, a smiling teenager, in a dirty frame
of pale wood. Incense burned in front of these pictures, fragrant white flowers
draped like thick necklaces in front of the glass.
Before the ceremony a barber came to the house and shaved her father’s head
and face in the courtyard, turning his face strange and small. Bela was told to put
out her hands, and without warning, the nails of her fingers, then her toes, were
pared off with a blade.
At dusk Deepa lit coils to ward off the mosquitoes. Celery-skinned geckoes
appeared indoors, hovering close to the seam where wall and ceiling met. At
night she and her father slept in the same room, on the same bed. A thick bolster
was placed between them. The pillow beneath her head was like a sack of flour.
The mesh of the mosquito netting was blue.
Every night, when the flimsy barricade was adjusted around them, when no
other living thing could enter, she felt relief. When he had his back to her in

sleep, hairless, shirtless, her father almost looked like another person. He was
awake before she was, the mosquito netting balled up like an enormous bird’s
nest suspended from one corner of the room. Her father was already bathed and
dressed and eating a mango, scraping out the flesh with his teeth. None of it was
unfamiliar to him.
For breakfast she was given bread toasted over an open flame, sweetened
yogurt, a small banana with green skin. Her grandmother reminded Deepa,
before she set out for the market, not to buy a certain type of fish, saying that the
bones would be too troublesome.
Watching Bela try to pick up rice and lentils with her fingers, her
grandmother told Deepa to fetch a spoon. When Deepa poured Bela some water
from the urn that stood on a little stool, in the corner of the room, her
grandmother reproached her.
Not that water. Give her the boiled water. She’s not made to survive here.
After the first week her father began to go out during the day. He explained that
he would be giving a few lectures at nearby universities, and also meeting with
scientists who were helping him with a project. Initially it upset her, being left in
the house with her grandmother and Deepa. She watched him leave through the
terrace grille, carrying a folding umbrella to shield his shaved head from the
sun’s glare.
She was nervous until he returned, until he pressed the doorbell and a key was
lowered and he unlocked the gate and stood before her again. She worried for
him, swallowed up by the city, at once ramshackle and grand, which she’d seen
from the taxi that had brought them to Tollygunge. She didn’t like to imagine
him having to negotiate it, being prey to it somehow.
One day Deepa invited Bela to accompany her to the market, and then to
wander a bit through the narrow lanes of the neighborhood. They walked past
small windows with vertical bars. Scraps of fabric, strung through wires, served
as curtains. They walked past the ponds, rimmed with trash, choked with bright
green leaves.
On the quiet walled streets, every few paces, people stopped them, asking
Deepa to explain who Bela was, why she was there.
The granddaughter of the Mitra house.
The older brother’s girl?
Yes.
The mother came?

No.
Do you understand what we’re saying? Do you speak Bengali? a woman
asked Bela. She peered at her. Her eyes were unkind, her stained teeth uneven.
A little.
Liking it here?
Bela had been eager to go out of the house that day, to accompany Deepa to
the market, to explore the place she’d traveled so far to see. But now she wanted
to return inside. Not liking, as they retraced their steps, the way some of the
neighbors were pulling back their curtains to look at her.
In addition to the water that was boiled and cooled for her to drink, water was
warmed every morning for her bath. Her grandmother said Bela would catch a
cold otherwise, even though the weather was so hot. The warmed bathwater was
combined with fresh water that traveled at limited times of day through a thin
rubber hose, released by a pump, filling a tank on the patio next to the kitchen.
Deepa took her to the patio, handing her a tin cup, telling her what to do. She
was told to pour the warmed water, cooled to her liking with water from the
hose, over her body, then lather herself with a bar of dark soap, then rinse. The
running water was not to be wasted. It was collected in a bucket, and whatever
was left was stored in the tank.
Bela had wanted to stand inside the tank, which was like a high-sided bathtub,
but this was not permitted. And so she bathed in the open air instead of in the
privacy of a bathroom, or even the protection of a tub, among the plates and pans
that also needed washing. Supervised by Deepa, surrounded by palm trees and
banana trees, regarded by crows.
You should have come later, not now, Deepa said, drying off Bela’s legs with
a thin checkered towel. It was coarse, like a dishcloth.
Why?
That’s when Durga Pujo comes. Now it only rains.
I’m here for my birthday, Bela said.
Deepa said she was sixteen or seventeen. When Bela asked Deepa when her
birthday was, she said she wasn’t sure.
You don’t know when you were born?
Basanta Kal.
When is that?
When the kokil starts singing.
But what day do you celebrate?

I never have.
In a patch of sunlight on the terrace, her grandmother rubbed Bela’s arms and
legs and scalp with sweet-smelling oil from a glass bottle. Bela stood in her
underpants, as if she were still a young child. Arms limp, legs parted.
Her grandmother combed out Bela’s hair, sometimes using her fingers when
the knots were stubborn. She held it in her hands and examined it.
Your mother hasn’t taught you to keep it tied?
She shook her head.
There isn’t a rule about it at your school?
No.
You must keep it braided. At night, especially. Two on either side for now,
one at the center when you are older.
Her mother had never told her this. Her mother wore her hair as short as a
man’s.
Your father’s hair was the same. Never behaving in this weather. He never let
me touch it. Even in the picture you can see what a mess it is.
In the room where her grandmother slept Bela ate her lunch. She was used to
eating rice, but here the smell was pungent, the grains not as white. Sometimes
she bit down on a tiny pebble that Deepa hadn’t picked out, the sound of it,
crushing against her molars, seeming to explode in her ear.
There was no dining table. On the floor was a piece of embroidered fabric,
like a large place mat, for her to sit on. Her grandmother squatted on the flats of
her feet, her shoulders hunched, arms folded across her knees, observing her.
High on the wall hung the two photographs her father had sat in front of
during the ceremony. The pictures of her dead grandfather and the teenaged boy
her grandmother told her was her father, smiling, his face slightly tilted to one
side. Bela had never seen a version of her father so young. He was young
enough, in the picture, to be an older brother to her. She had never seen proof of
him from the time before she was born.
Below these images, always slightly rustling in the fan’s breeze, was a sheaf
of household receipts and ration slips, punctured and held in place by a nail.
Over the impaled slips of paper the teenaged face of her father watched her eat
her rice with a spoon, amused, whereas her grandfather, his tired gaze fixed
before him, his eyebrows sparse, seemed not to notice that she was there.
Apart from the two photographs, the stack of receipts, there was nothing to look

at on the walls. No books, no souvenirs from past journeys, nothing to indicate
how her grandmother liked to pass the time. For hours she sat on the terrace, her
back to the rest of the house, staring through the grille.
Every day, at a certain point, Deepa took her grandmother down to the
courtyard, where she snapped off the heads of a few of the flowers that grew
there in pots, and along the vines that trailed up the wall, gathering them inside a
little brass urn.
She left the house, accompanied by Deepa, walking past the ponds to the edge
of the flooded lowland. She went to a certain spot, and stood, and after a few
minutes she came back. When her grandmother returned to the courtyard, the urn
that had held the flowers was empty.
What do you do there? Bela asked her one day.
Her grandmother was sitting in her folding chair, her hands curled inward,
like fists that did not close, inspecting the ridged surface of her fingernails.
Without looking up she said, I talk to your father for a bit.
My father is inside.
She looked up, her navy eyes widening. Is he?
He came home a little while ago.
Where?
He’s in our room, Dida.
What is he doing?
He’s lying down. He said he was tired after going to the American Express
office.
Oh. Her grandmother looked away.
The light dimmed. It was going to rain again. Deepa hurried up to the roof, to
remove the clothes from the line. Bela followed, wanting to help her.
Do you have rain like this in Rhode Island? Deepa asked.
It was too much to explain in Bengali. But a hurricane in Rhode Island was
among her earliest memories. She didn’t remember the storm itself, only the
preparation, the aftermath. She remembered the bathtub filled with water. The
crowded supermarket, empty shelves. She’d helped her father crisscross masking
tape on the windows, the traces remaining long after the tape was pulled away.
The following day she’d walked with her father to campus to see torn
branches scattered on the quadrangle, streets green with leaves. They found a
thick tree that had fallen, the tangled roots exposed. They saw the drenched
ground that had given way. The tree seemed more overwhelming when it lay on
the ground. Its proportions frightening, once it no longer lived.

Her father had brought photographs to show her grandmother. Most of them
were of the house where Bela and her parents now lived. They’d moved there
two summers ago, the summer Bela turned ten. It was closer to the bay, not far
from where her father had once studied at the oceanography school. It was
convenient to the lab where her father went to work. But it was farther from the
bigger campus where Bela had grown up, where her mother went now, two
evenings a week, to teach a philosophy class.
Bela had been disappointed that though the house was hardly a mile from the
sea, there was no view of the water through the windows. Only, every so often,
when she was standing outside, a stray whiff of it, the concentration of salt
discernable in the air.
There were pictures of the dining table, the fireplace, the view off the
sundeck. All the things she knew. The large rocks forming a barrier with the
property behind theirs, that Bela sometimes climbed. Pictures of the front of the
house in autumn, when the leaves were red and gold, and pictures in winter, of
bare branches coated with ice. A picture of Bela next to a tiny Japanese maple
that her father had planted in spring.
She saw herself standing on the little crescent-shaped beach in Jamestown
where they liked to go Sunday mornings, her father bringing donuts and coffee.
It was where the two lobes of the island met, where he had taught her to swim,
where she could see sheep grazing in a meadow as she floated in the water.
She watched her grandmother studying the pictures as if each one showed the
same thing.
Where is Gauri?
She doesn’t like to pose for the camera, her father said. She’s been busy,
teaching her first class. And she’s finishing her dissertation. She’s about to hand
it in.
Her mother spent her days, even Saturdays and Sundays, in the spare
bedroom that served as her study, working behind a closed door. It was her
office, her mother told her, and when she was in it Bela was to behave as if her
mother were not home.
Bela didn’t mind. She was happy to have her mother at home instead of in
Boston for part of the week. For three years her mother had gone to a university
there, to take classes for her degree. Leaving early in the morning, not getting
back until Bela was asleep.
But now, other than the evenings she taught her class, her mother almost
never left the house. Hours would pass, the door not opening, her mother not
emerging. Occasionally the sound of a cough, the creak of a chair, a book

dropping to the floor.
Sometimes her mother asked if Bela could hear the typewriter at night, if the
noise of it bothered her, and Bela said no, though she could hear it perfectly
well. Sometimes Bela played a game with herself as she lay in bed, trying to
anticipate when the silence would be disrupted again by the clattering of keys.
It was with her mother that she spent most of her time during the week, but
there was no picture of Bela’s time alone with her. No evidence of Bela
watching television in the afternoons, or working on a school project at the
kitchen table, as her mother prepared dinner or read through a pile of exam
booklets with a pen in her hand. No proof of them going to the big library at the
university now and again, to drop borrowed books into bins.
There was nothing to document the trips to Boston she and her mother had
made once in a while, during her school vacations. They’d taken the bus there
together, then a trolley, to a campus in the middle of the city, sandwiched
between the Charles River and a long busy road. No proof of the days Bela had
spent trailing behind her mother through various buildings as her mother met
with professors, or of the time Bela was taken to Quincy Market as a treat.
Here she is, Bela said as her grandmother came to the next picture.
Her mother appeared in it inadvertently. The picture was of Bela from several
years ago, posing for the camera in their old apartment, with the linoleum floors.
She was dressed up as Red Riding Hood for Halloween, holding a bowl heaped
with candy to give away.
But there in the background was her mother, leaning slightly over the kitchen
table, in the process of clearing the dinner plates, wearing slacks and a maroon
tunic.
So stylish, Deepa said, looking over her grandmother’s shoulder.
Her grandmother handed the pictures to her father.
Keep them, Ma. I made them for you.
But her grandmother gave them back, loosening her grip so that a few of the
pictures fell to the floor.
I’ve seen them already, she said.
For the past few years Bela had heard the word dissertation and not had any idea
what it meant. Then one day, in their new house, her mother told her, I am
writing a report. Like the ones you write for school, only longer. It might be a
book one day.
The reality had disappointed Bela. She’d thought until then that it was some

sort of secret, an experiment her mother was conducting while Bela slept, like
the experiments her father monitored in the salt marshes. Where he took her
sometimes to see the horseshoe crabs scuttling across the mud, disappearing into
holes, releasing their eggs into the tide. Instead she realized that her mother, who
spent her days sequestered in a room full of books, was only writing another one.
Sometimes, when she knew her mother was out, or when she was taking a
shower, Bela stepped into the study to look around. A pair of her mother’s
glasses sat discarded on the desk. The smeared lenses turned things indistinct
when Bela raised them to her face.
Cups containing cold puddles of tea or coffee, some of them sprouting
delicate patterns of mold, sat forgotten here and there on the shelves. She found
crumpled sheets of paper in the wastebasket, covered with nothing but p’s and
q’s. All the books had brown paper covers, with titles that her mother had
rewritten on the spines so that she could identify them: The Nature of Existence.
Eclipse of Reason. On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal
Time.
Recently her mother had started referring to the dissertation as a manuscript.
She spoke of it as she might speak of an infant, telling her father one night at
dinner that she worried about the pages being blown out an open window, or
being destroyed by a fire. She said it worried her, sometimes, to leave them
unattended in the house.
One weekend, stopping at a yard sale, Bela and her father found a brown
metal file cabinet among the odds and ends for sale. Her father made sure the
drawers opened and closed easily, then bought it. He carried it from the trunk of
the car into her mother’s study, knocking on her door, surprising her with this
gift.
They found her at her typewriter, holding her head the way she always did
when she concentrated, staring up at them. Her elbows on the desk, the last two
of her fingers pressed against her cheekbone, making a V, creating a partial
triangle that framed her eye.
Her father handed her a tiny key that dangled like an earring from a hoop. I
thought you could use this, he said.
Her mother stood up, clearing things off the floor so that Bela and her father
could enter the room more easily. Where would you like it? her father asked, and
her mother said that the corner was best.
To Bela’s surprise her mother wasn’t angry, that day, that they’d interrupted.
She asked them if they were hungry, and emerged from her study, and prepared
them lunch.

Every day Bela heard the drawers opening and closing, containing the pages
her mother typed. She had a dream one night, of returning home from school and
finding their house burned down to a skeletal frame, like the houses she would
construct out of Popsicle sticks when she was younger, with only the file
cabinet, intact, on the grass.
One day in Tollygunge, pacing up and down the stairs, she noticed small rings
bolted to either side of the landing. Black iron hoops. Deepa was wiping down
the staircase. She was twisting a rag into a bucket of water, working on her
hands and knees.
What are these? Bela asked, tugging at one of the rings with her fingers.
They’re to make sure she doesn’t go out if I’m not here.
Who?
Your grandmother.
How does it work?
I put a chain across.
Why?
She might get lost otherwise.
Like her grandmother, Bela was not able to leave the house in Tollygunge on
her own. She was not permitted even to move through it freely, to go down to
the courtyard or to visit the roof without permission.
She was not able to join the children she sometimes saw playing in the street,
or to enter the kitchen to help herself to a snack. If she was thirsty for a glass of
the cooled boiled water in her water bottle, she had to ask.
But in Rhode Island, since third grade, her mother had let Bela wander
through the campus in the afternoons. She’d done this with Alice, another girl
around her age, who had lived in their apartment complex. They were told to
remain on the campus, this was all. But the campus was enormous to her, with
streets to cross, cars to be mindful of. Easily she and Alice might have lost their
way.
She and Alice had played on the campus as other children might have visited
a park, amusing themselves by climbing up and down steps, racing across the
plaza in front of the fine arts building, chasing each other on the quadrangle.
They stopped in at the library, where Alice’s mother worked.
They would go to her desk, sit at empty cubicles. Swiveling on chairs, eating
snacks that Alice’s mother kept in her desk drawer. They would drink cold water
at the fountain, and hide among the shelves of books.

A few minutes later they’d be outdoors again. They liked to go to the
greenhouse that flanked the botany building, surrounded by a flower garden
filled with butterflies. They played in the student union on rainy days.
Bela had prided herself on being unsupervised, finding the way home without
having to ask. They were to listen to the clock chiming, to head back in winter
by half past four.
She’d mentioned nothing of these occasions to her father. Knowing he would
have worried, she’d kept them a secret from him. And so, until they moved away
from campus, these afternoons remained a bond between Bela and her mother, a
closeness based on the fact that they spent that time apart. She’d given her
mother those hours to herself, not wanting to fail at this, not wanting to threaten
this link.
By now Bela was old enough to wake up on her own, to retrieve the box of
cereal left on the counter in the mornings, her hands steady enough to pour milk.
When she was ready to leave the house, she walked unaccompanied down the
street to the bus stop. Her father left the house early. Her mother, after staying up
in her study at night, liked to sleep late.
There was no one to observe whether she had toast or cereal, whether or not
she finished, though she always did, spooning up the last of the sweetened milk,
putting the dirty bowl into the sink, running a little water in it so that it would be
easier to rinse clean. After school, if her mother was out at the university, she
was now old enough to retrieve a key her father kept in an empty bird feeder and
let herself in.
Every morning she went upstairs, down the short hallway, and knocked on
her parents’ door to tell her mother she was leaving, not wanting to disturb her
mother but also hoping she’d been heard.
Then one morning, needing a paper clip to keep two pages of a book report
together, she went into her mother’s study. She found her mother with her back
turned away from the door, asleep on the sofa, one arm flung over her head. She
began to understand that the room her mother referred to as a study also served
as her bedroom. And that her father slept in the other bedroom, alone.
How old were you in that picture? she asked her father as they lay together in
bed, under the mosquito netting, before beginning another day.
Which picture?
In Dida’s room, where we eat. The picture next to Dadu’s that she stares at all
the time.
Her father was lying on his back. She saw him close his eyes. That was my

brother, he said.
You have a brother?
I used to. He died.
When?
Before you were born.
Why?
He had an illness.
What kind?
An infection. Something the doctors were unable to cure.
He was my uncle?
Yes, Bela.
Do you remember him?
He turned to face her. He stroked her head with his hand. He’s a part of me. I
grew up with him, he said.
Do you miss him?
I do.
Dida says it’s a picture of you.
She’s getting old, Bela. She confuses things, sometimes.
He began to take her out during the days. They walked to the mosque at the
corner to get a taxi or a rickshaw. Sometimes they walked to the tram depot and
took a tram. He took her with him if he had a meeting with a colleague, leaving
her to sit in a chair in a high-ceilinged corridor, giving her Indian comic books to
read.
He took her to darkened Chinese restaurants for lunch, for plates of chow
mein. To stalls so that she could buy colored glass bracelets and drawing paper,
ribbons for her hair. Pretty notebooks to write and draw in, translucent erasers
that smelled of fruit.
He took her to the zoo garden to visit white tigers that napped on rocks. On
the busy sidewalks he stopped in front of beggars who pointed to their stomachs,
and tossed coins onto their plates.
One day they went into a sari store to buy saris for her grandmother and
Deepa. White ones for her grandmother, colored ones for Deepa. They were
made of cotton, rolled up on the shelves like fat starchy scrolls that the salesman
would shake out for them. In the window of the shop were fancier ones made of
silk, draped on mannequins.
Can we buy one for Ma? Bela asked.

She never wears them, Bela.
But she might.
The salesman began to shake out the fancier material, but her father shook his
head. We’ll find something else for your mother, he said.
He took her to a jewelry store, where Bela chose a necklace of tiger’s-eye
beads. And they bought the one thing her mother had requested, a pair of
slippers made of pale reddish leather, her father telling the salesman, at the last
minute, that they’d take two pairs instead of one.
In the taxis they sat in traffic, pollution filling her chest, coating the skin of
her arms with a fine dark grit. She heard the clanging of trams and the beeping
of car horns, the bells of colorful rickshaws pulled by hand. Rumbling busses
with conductors thumping their sides, reciting their routes, hollering for
passengers to get on.
Sometimes she and her father sat for what felt like an hour on the congested
roads. Her father would get frustrated, tempted to stop the meter, to get out and
walk. But Bela preferred it to being stuck in her grandmother’s house.
Passing a street lined with bookstalls, her father mentioned that it was where
her mother had gone to college. Bela wondered if she used to resemble the
female students she saw on the sidewalk, going in and out of the gate. Young
women wearing saris, their long hair braided, pressing handkerchiefs to their
faces, carrying cotton satchels of books.
On the streets she noticed certain buildings decorated, standing out from the
rest. Though it was August they were draped with Christmas lights, their facades
disguised behind colorful cloths. In the taxi one day they were stopped close to
one of these buildings, behind a row of cars. A thin red carpet was spread over
the entrance, ushering in guests. Music was playing, people in fancy clothes
were walking in.
What’s happening there?
A wedding. See the car up ahead, covered with flowers?
Yes.
The groom is about to step out of it.
And the bride?
She’s waiting for him inside.
Did you and Ma get married like that?
No, Bela.
Why not?
I had to get back to Rhode Island. There wasn’t time for a big celebration.

I don’t want a big celebration, either.
You have a while to think about that.
Ma told me once that you were strangers when you were married.
This couple may not know each other very well, either.
What if they don’t like each other?
They’ll try.
Who decides how people get married?
Sometimes parents arrange it. Sometimes the bride and groom decide for
themselves.
Did you and Ma decide for yourselves?
We did. We decided for ourselves.
They spent the afternoon of her twelfth birthday at a club not far from her
grandparents’ house. An acquaintance of her father’s, an old college friend, was
a member, and he had invited them to be his guests.
There was a pool for her to swim in. A bathing suit magically produced,
because her mother had not packed one. Tables to eat and drink at, overlooking
the grounds.
There were other children for her to play with in the pool and on the
playground, to speak to in English. They were a mix of Indians, most of them
visiting, like Bela, from other countries, and some Europeans. She felt
emboldened to speak with them, telling them her name. She was given a pony
ride. There were cheese and cucumber sandwiches for her to eat afterward, a
bowl of spicy tomato soup. A slab of melting ice cream on a plate.
Her father and his friend sat talking to one another, drinking tea at one of the
outdoor tables, followed by a beer, and then she and her father walked along
paths that covered their shoes with red dust, along the edges of a golf course,
past potted flowers, among trees filled with songbirds.
Her father paused to watch the golfers. They stopped under an enormous
banyan. Her father explained that it was a tree that began life attached to another,
sprouting from its crown. The mass of twisted strands, hanging down like ropes,
were aerial roots surrounding the host. Over time they coalesced, forming
additional trunks, encircling a hollow core if the host happened to die.
Posing her before the tree, her father took her picture. As they were sitting
together on a bench, he produced a small packet wrapped in newspaper from his
shirt pocket. It was a pair of mirrored bangles she’d admired one day in the
market, that he’d gone back to buy.

You’re enjoying yourself?
She nodded. She felt him lean toward her and kiss the top of her head.
I’m glad we came today. The rain’s held off. Not like the day you were born.
They continued on, walking farther away from the clubhouse, past clearings
where packs of jackals were resting. She felt mosquitoes beginning to sting her
ankles, her calves.
Where are we going?
There was an area back this way, where my brother and I used to play.
You came here when you were growing up?
He hesitated, then admitted that once or twice, at the very back of the
property, he and his brother had snuck in.
Why did you have to sneak in?
It wasn’t our place.
Why not?
Things were different back then.
He noticed something a little ways off, on the grass, and walked over to pick
it up. It was a golf ball. They kept walking.
Whose idea was it to sneak in?
Udayan’s. He was the brave one.
Did you get caught?
Eventually.
Her father stopped. He tossed the golf ball away. He was looking to either
side of him, then up at the trees. He seemed confused.
Should we turn back, Baba?
Yes, I think we should.
She wanted to remain at the club, to run on the lawn and catch the fireflies
that the other children who were there said came out at night. She wanted to
sleep in one of the guest rooms, to take a hot bath in a tub, and spend the
following day as she’d spent this one, swimming in the pool and visiting the
reading room filled with English books and magazines.
But her father said it was time to go. The bathing suit was returned, a cycle
rickshaw with a tin carriage and a sapphire-blue bench summoned to take them
back to her grandmother’s house.
She could not picture her grandmother at the club where they’d just been,
among the people who sat at tables, laughing, with cigarettes and glasses of beer.
Men asking for cocktails, their wives prettily dressed. She could not picture her
grandmother anywhere but on the terrace of the house in Tollygunge, with

chains put across the staircase when Deepa was not there, or taking her brief
walk to the edge of the lowland, where there was only dirty water and garbage to
see.
Bela missed her mother suddenly. She’d never spent a birthday without her.
In the morning she’d hoped for a phone call, but her father told her the line was
out of order.
Can we try her now?
The line’s still down, Bela. You’ll see her soon.
Bela pictured her mother lying on the sofa in her study. Books and papers
strewn across the carpet, the hum of a box fan in the window. The day’s light,
starting to creep in.
In Rhode Island, on her birthdays, Bela would wake to the fragrance of milk
warming slowly on the stove. There, undisturbed, it thickened. Her mother
stepped out of her study to monitor it, to add the sugar, the rice.
Later in the day, in the afternoon, once it had been poured and slightly cooled,
her mother would call Bela to have her first taste of the peach-colored pudding.
She would let her scrape off the tastiest bit, the congealed milk that coated the
pan.
Baba?
Yes, Bela?
Can we go back to the club another day?
Perhaps the next time we visit, her father said.
He told her he wanted her to rest, that it was a long journey back to Rhode
Island. Five of the six weeks in India had passed. Already her father’s hair was
beginning to grow back.
The rickshaw sped forward, past the huts and stalls that lined the road, selling
flowers, selling sweets, selling cigarettes and sodas. When they approached the
mosque on the corner, the rickshaw slowed down. A conch shell was being
blown, to signal the start of the evening.
Stop here, her father told the driver, reaching for his wallet, saying that they
would walk the rest of the way.

Chapter 3
They took a bus from Logan Airport to Providence, then a taxi to the house.
Bela was wearing the mirrored bangles around her wrist. Her face and arms were
tanned. The braids her grandmother had tightly woven the evening of their
departure reached the middle of her back.
Everything was just as they’d left it. The bright blue of the sky, the roads and
homes. The bay in the distance, filled with sailboats. The beaches filled with
people. The sound of a lawn mower. The salty air, the leaves on the trees.
As they approached the house she saw that the grass had grown nearly to her
shoulders. The different varieties sprouted like wheat, like straw. It was tall
enough to reach the mailbox, to conceal the shrubs on either side of the door. No
longer green at that height, some sections reddish for lack of water. The pale
specks at their tips seemed attached to nothing. Like clusters of tiny insects that
didn’t move.
Looks like you’ve been away awhile, the taxi driver said.
He pulled into the driveway, helping her father to unload the suitcases from
the trunk, bringing them up to the house.
Bela plunged into the grass as if it were the sea, her body briefly
disappearing. Pushing her way through it, her arms spread wide. The feathery
ends shimmered in the sunlight. Softly they scraped her face, the backs of her
legs. She rang the doorbell, waiting for her mother to open the door.
When the door did not open, her father had to unlock it with his key. Inside
the house they called out. There was no food in the refrigerator. Though the day
was warm, the windows were shut and locked. The rooms dark, the curtains
drawn, the soil of the houseplants dry.
At first Bela reacted as if to a challenge, a game. For it was the one game her
mother had liked playing with her when she was little. Hiding behind the shower
curtain, crouching in a closet, wedged behind a door. Never breaking down,
never coughing after a few minutes elapsed and Bela could not find her, never
once giving her a clue.
She walked like a detective through the house. Down the set of half steps to
the living room and kitchen, up the half steps to where the bedrooms were,
where the hall was carpeted in the same tightly woven olive shade, unifying the

rooms like a moss that spread from one doorway to the next.
She opened the doors and found certain things: bobby pins in the bathroom, a
stapler on the dusty surface of her mother’s desk, a pair of scuffed sandals in the
closet. A few books on the shelves.
Her father was sitting on the sofa, not seeing Bela as she approached, not
even though she stood a few feet away. His face looked different, as if the bones
had shifted. As if some of them weren’t there.
Baba?
On the table beside him was a sheet of paper. A letter.
He put out his hand, seeking hers.

I have not made this decision in haste. If anything, I have
been thinking about it for too many years. You tried your
best. I tried, too, but not as well. We tried to believe we
would be companions to one another.
Around Bela I am only reminded of all the ways I’ve
failed her. In a way I wish she were young enough simply
to forget me. Now she will come to hate me. Should she
want to speak to me, or eventually to see me, I will do my
best to arrange this.
Tell her whatever you think will be least painful for her
to hear, but I hope you will tell her the truth. That I have
not died or disappeared but that I have moved to
California, because a college has hired me to teach.
Though it will be of no comfort to her, tell her that I will
miss her.
As for Udayan, as you know, for many years I
wondered how and when we might tell her, what would be
the right age, but it no longer matters. You are her father.
As you pointed out long ago, and as I have long come to
accept, you have proven yourself to be a better parent than
I. I believe you are a better father than Udayan would have
been. Given what I’m doing, it makes no sense for her
connection with you to undergo any change.

My address is uncertain, but you can reach me care of
the university. I will not ask anything else of you; the
money they offer will be enough. You are no doubt furious
with me. I will understand if you do not wish to
communicate. I hope that in time my absence will make
things easier, not harder, for you and for Bela. I think it
will. Good luck, Subhash, and good-bye. In exchange for
all you have done for me, I leave Bela to you.
The letter had been composed in Bengali, so there was no danger of Bela
deciphering its contents. He conveyed a version of what it said, somehow
managing to look into her confused face.
She was old enough to know how far away California was. When she asked
when Gauri was coming back, he said he didn’t know.
He was prepared to calm her, to quell her shock. But it was she who
comforted him in that moment, putting her arms around him, her strong slim
body exuding its concern. Holding him tightly, as if he would float away from
her otherwise. I’ll never go away from you, Baba, she said.
He knew the marriage, which had been their own choice, had become a
forced arrangement day after day. But there had never been a conversation in
which she expressed a wish to leave.
He’d sometimes thought, in the back of his mind, that after Bela went off to
college, after she moved away from them, he and Gauri might begin to live
apart. That a new phase could begin when Bela was more independent, when she
needed them less.
He’d assumed, because of Bela, that Gauri would tolerate their marriage for
now, as he’d been tolerating it. He never thought she would lack the patience to
wait.
Of the three women in Subhash’s life—his mother, Gauri, Bela—there
remained only one. His mother’s mind was now a wilderness. There was no
shape to it any longer, no clearing. It had been overtaken, overgrown. She’d
been converted permanently by Udayan’s death.
That wilderness was her only freedom. She was locked inside her home,
taken out once each day. Deepa would prevent her from endangering herself,
from embarrassing herself, from making further scenes.
But Gauri’s mind had saved her. It had enabled her to stand upright. It had

cleared a path for her. It had prepared her to walk away.
What else had her mother left behind? On Bela’s right arm, just above the
elbow, in a spot she had to twist her arm to see, a freckled constellation of her
mother’s darker pigment, an almost solid patch at once discreet and conspicuous.
A trace of the alternative complexion she might have had. On the ring finger of
her right hand, just below the knuckle, was a single spot of this same shade.
In the house in Rhode Island, in her room, another remnant of her mother
began to reveal itself: a shadow that briefly occupied a section of her wall, in one
corner, reminding Bela of her mother’s profile. It was an association she noticed
only after her mother was gone, and was unable thereafter to dispel.
In this shadow she saw the impression of her mother’s forehead, the slope of
her nose. Her mouth and chin. Its source was unknown. Some section of branch,
some overhang of the roof that refracted the light, she could not be sure.
Each day the image disappeared as the sun traveled around the house; each
morning it returned to the place her mother had fled. She never saw it form or
fade.
In this apparition, every morning, Bela recognized her mother, and felt visited
by her. It was the sort of spontaneous association one might make while looking
up at a passing cloud. But in this case never breaking apart, never changing into
anything else.

Chapter 4
The effort of being with her was gone. In its place was a fatherhood that was
exclusive, a bond that would not have to be unraveled or revised. He had his
daughter; alone he maintained the knowledge that she was not his. The reduced
elements of his life sat uneasily, one beside the other. It was neither victory nor
defeat.
She entered the seventh grade. She was learning Spanish, ecology, algebra.
He hoped the new building, the new teachers and courses, the routine of moving
from class to class, would distract her. Initially this seemed to be the case. He
saw her organizing a three-ring binder, writing in the names of her subjects on
the tabbed dividers, taping her schedule inside.
He rearranged his hours at work, no longer going in as early, making sure he
was there in the mornings to fix her breakfast and see her off. He watched her
setting out each day for the bus stop, a backpack strapped to her shoulders,
heavy with textbooks.
One day he noticed that beneath her T-shirts, her sweaters, her chest was no
longer flat. She’d shed some part of herself in Tollygunge. She was on the verge
of a new type of prettiness. Blossoming, in spite of having been crushed.
She became thinner, quieter, keeping to herself on weekends. Behaving as
Gauri used to do. She no longer sought him out, wanting to take walks together
on Sundays. She said she had homework to do. This new mood settled upon her
swiftly, without warning, like an autumn sky from which the light suddenly
drained. He did not ask what was wrong, knowing what the answer would be.
She was establishing her existence apart from him. This was the real shock.
He thought he would be the one to protect her, to reassure her. But he felt cast
aside, indicted along with Gauri. He was afraid to exert his authority, his
confidence as a father shaken now that he was alone.
She asked if she could change her bedroom and move into Gauri’s study.
Though this rattled him, he allowed it, telling himself that the impulse was
natural. He helped her to set up the room, spending a day moving her things into
it, hanging her clothes in the closet, retaping her posters to the walls. He put her
lamp on Gauri’s desk, her books on Gauri’s shelves. But within a week she
decided she preferred her old room and said she wanted to move back into it

again.
She spoke to him only when necessary. Certain days, she did not speak to him
at all. He wondered if she’d told her friends what had happened. But she did not
seek his permission to see them, and none visited her at the house. He wondered
if it would have been easier if they still lived close to campus, in an apartment
complex that was filled with professors and graduate students and their families,
and not in this isolated part of the town. He blamed himself for taking her to
Tollygunge, for giving Gauri the opportunity to escape. He wondered what Bela
had made of his mother, of the things she’d heard about Udayan. Though she
never mentioned either of them, he wondered what she’d gleaned.
In December he turned forty-one. Normally Bela liked to celebrate his
birthday. She’d get Gauri to give her a little money so that she could buy him
some Old Spice from the drugstore, or a new pair of socks. Last year, she’d even
baked and frosted a simple cake. This year, when he returned from work, he
found her in her room as usual. After they finished eating dinner, there was no
card, no small surprise. Her retreat from him, her new indifference, was too
deep.
One day when he was at work, Bela’s guidance counselor called. Bela’s
performance in middle school was concerning. According to her teachers she
was unprepared, distracted. On the recommendation of her sixth-grade teacher
she’d been placed in upper-level classes, but they were proving to be too great a
challenge.
Put her in different classes, then.
But it wasn’t just that. She no longer seemed connected to the other students,
the counselor said. In the cafeteria, at the lunch table, she sat alone. She hadn’t
signed up for any clubs. After school she had been seen walking by herself.
She takes the bus home from school. She lets herself in and does her
homework. She is always there when I return.
But he was told that she’d been seen, more than once, wandering through
various parts of the town.
Bela has always liked going on walks with me. Perhaps it relaxes her, to get
some fresh air.
There were roads where cars traveled quickly, the counselor said. A small
highway not meant for pedestrians. Not the interstate, but a highway all the
same. This was where Bela had last been spotted. Balancing on the guardrail
beside the shoulder lane, her arms raised.
She’d accepted a ride home from a stranger who’d stopped to ask if she was
all right. Fortunately, it had turned out to be a responsible person. Another parent

at the school.
The counselor requested a meeting. She asked both Subhash and Gauri to
attend.
He felt his stomach turning over on itself. Her mother no longer lives with us,
he managed to say.
Since when?
Since summer.
You should have notified us, Mr. Mitra. You and your wife sat down with
Bela before you separated? You prepared her?
He got off the phone. He wanted to call Gauri and scream at her. But he had
no phone number, only the address at the university where she taught. He
refused to write to her. Stubbornly, he wanted to keep the knowledge of Bela, of
how Gauri’s absence was affecting her, to himself. You have left her with me
and yet you have taken her away, he wanted to say.
He began to drive Bela, the same evening every week, to see a psychologist the
guidance counselor had suggested, in the same suite of offices where his
optometrist was. He’d resisted at first, saying he would talk to Bela, that there
was no need. But the counselor had been firm.
She said that she had already spoken to Bela about it and that Bela had not
objected. She told him that Bela needed a form of help he could not provide. It
was as if a bone had broken in her body, the counselor explained. It was not
simply a matter of time before it mended, nor was it possible for him to set it
right.
Again he thought of Gauri. Though he’d tried to help her he’d failed. He was
terrified now that Bela would shut down permanently, and that she would reject
him in the same way.
And so he wrote out a check in the psychologist’s name, Dr. Emily Grant, and
placed it in an envelope, as he might another bill. The bills were typed on small
sheets of paper, mailed to him at the end of the month. The dates of the
individual sessions, separated by commas, were written in by hand. He threw out
the bills after he paid them. In the ledger of his checkbook, he hated writing Dr.
Grant’s name.
Bela attended the appointments alone. He wondered what she said to Dr.
Grant, if she told a stranger the things she no longer told him. He wondered
whether or not the woman was kind.
He remembered first learning that Udayan had married Gauri, and feeling

replaced by her. He felt replaced now, a second time.
It had been impossible, the one occasion he’d seen Dr. Grant in person, to get
a sense of her. A door opened, and he stood up to shake a woman’s hand. She
was younger than he expected, short, with a mop of unruly brown hair. A pale
steady face, sheer black tights, plump calves, flat leather shoes. Like a teenager
dressed up in her mother’s clothes, the jacket a little too big for her, a little long,
though through the open door of her office he saw the progression of framed
degrees on her wall. How could a woman with such a confused appearance help
Bela?
Dr. Grant had expressed no interest in him. She’d locked eyes with him for an
instant, a firm but impenetrable look. She’d ushered Bela through the door to her
office, then shut it in his face.
That look, knowing, withholding, unnerved him. She was like any other
intelligent doctor, examining the patient and already knowing the underlying
disease. In the course of their sessions, had she intuited the secret he kept from
Bela? Did she know that he was not her real father? That he lied to her about
this, day after day?
He was never invited into the room. For some months he received no
indication of Bela’s progress. Sitting in the waiting area, with a view of the door
Bela and Dr. Grant were on the other side of, made him feel worse. He used the
hour to buy groceries for the week. He timed the appointments, and waited for
her in the parking lot, in the car. When it was over she sat beside him, shutting
the door.
How did it go today, Bela?
Fine.
It’s still a help to you?
She shrugged.
Would you like to go to a restaurant for dinner?
I’m not hungry.
She was deflecting him, as Gauri would. Her mind elsewhere, her face turned
away. Punishing him, because Gauri was not there to be punished.
Would you like to write her a letter? Try to speak to her on the phone?
She shook her head. It was lowered, her brow furrowed. Her shoulders were
hunched, pressed toward one another, as tears fell.
Standing in her doorway at night, watching her as she slept, he remembered the
young girl she’d been. On the beach with her when she was six or seven. The

beach nearly empty, his favorite hour. The descending sun pours a shaft of light
over the water, wider at the horizon, tapering toward land.
Bela’s limbs are pink, glowing. She never seems as alive as when he brings
her here, her solitary body bravely poised against the sea’s immensity.
He is teaching her to identify things, they are playing a game: one point for a
mussel shell, two for scallop, three for crab. The plovers, darting singlemindedly from the dunes toward the waves, get five. The first one to call out
gets the point.
She trails at a distance behind him, stopping every few paces to finger
something on the ground. Over rocky sections she treads carefully. She is
humming a little tune, a section of her hair tucked behind one ear. They call to
one another, revising the score.
He stops to wait for her, but she has a sudden burst of energy, passing him.
On and on she sprints, unobstructed, kicking up her heels at the water’s edge.
Dark hair to her chin, rearranged by the wind, obscuring her face. Just when he
thinks she will have the energy to run forever, to escape his sight, she pauses.
Turning back, breathing hard, her hand on her hip, making sure he is there.
•••
The following year, slowly, a release from what had happened. A new clarity in
her eyes, a calmness in her face. She turned outward, toward others. She carried
herself differently, the wind no longer opposing her but at her back, thrusting her
into the world.
Instead of always being at home she was never there now. By eighth grade
the phone was ringing throughout the evening, different people, male and
female, wanting to talk to her. Behind a closed door, for hours at a time, she
conversed with her peers.
Her grades improved, her appetite returned. She no longer set down her fork
after two bites saying that she was full. She’d joined the marching band, learning
to play patriotic songs on the clarinet, fitting together the parts of the instrument
after dinner and practicing scales.
On Veterans Day he stood on a sidewalk in the center of town and watched
her filing past. Dressed in uniform, bearing the autumn chill, focused on the
sheet music hooked around her neck. Another day, emptying the dustbin in the
bathroom, he saw the discarded wrapper from a sanitary pad and realized she’d
begun menstruating. She had mentioned nothing to him. She had bought the
supplies, kept them hidden, maturing on her own.

In high school she joined the nature studies club, assisting the biology teacher
in the tagging of turtles and the dissection of birds, going to beaches to clean up
nesting grounds. She went to Maine to study harbor seals, and to Cape May for
the monarch butterflies. She began to occupy herself with other pursuits he could
not object to: going from door to door with another student, seeking signatures
for petitions to recycle bottles, or to raise the minimum wage.
When she received her learner’s permit she began driving to local restaurants,
collecting discarded food and contributing it to shelters. In summers she got jobs
that kept her out of doors, watering plants at a nursery or assisting at children’s
camps. She was uncovetous, uninterested in buying things.
The summer after she graduated from high school she didn’t travel with him
when news came from Deepa, saying his mother had suffered a stroke. She told
him she wanted to stay in Rhode Island, to spend time with the friends from
whom she’d soon be separated. He arranged for her to stay with one of them.
And though he didn’t like the idea of being so far away from Bela for a few
weeks, in a way it was a relief, not to have to take her back to Tollygunge again.
It was unclear to Subhash, the degree to which his mother recognized him.
She spoke to him in fragments, sometimes as if he were Udayan, or as if they
were boys. She told him not to muddy his shoes in the lowland, not to stay out
late playing games.
He saw that his mother was dwelling in an alternate time, a more bearable
reality. The coordination of her legs was gone, so there was no longer the need
to place a chain across the stairwell. She was bound to the terrace, on the top
floor of the house, for good.
He understood that perhaps he no longer existed in his mother’s mind, that
she’d already let go of him. He’d defied her by marrying Gauri; for years he’d
avoided her, leading his life in a place she’d never seen. And yet, as a child, he’d
spent so many hours sitting by her side.
But now the distance between them was not merely physical, or even
emotional. It was intractable. It triggered a delayed burst of responsibility in
Subhash. An attempt, once it no longer mattered, to be present. Every year for
the following three years he traveled back to Calcutta in winter, to see her. He
sat beside her, reading newspapers, drinking tea with her. Feeling as cut off as
Bela must have felt, from Gauri.
He stayed in Tollygunge as if he were a young boy again, never straying
farther than the mosque at the corner. Only walking through the enclave now and
again, always stopping at Udayan’s memorial, then turning back. The rest of the
city, alive, importunate, held no meaning for him. It was simply a passageway

from the airport and back. He had walked away from Calcutta just as Gauri had
walked away from Bela. And by now he had neglected it for too long.
In the course of his last visit his mother had needed to be hospitalized. Her
heart was too weak, she’d needed oxygen. He’d spent all day at her side, arriving
early each morning at the hospital to hold her hand. The end was coming, and
the doctors told him his visit had been well timed. But the attack happened late
at night.
Bijoli did not die in Tollygunge, in the house to which she’d clung. And
though Subhash had returned to be close to her, from so far, he’d arrived, that
final morning at the hospital, too late. She’d died on her own, in a room with
strangers, denying him the opportunity to watch her pass.
For college Bela chose a small liberal arts school in the Midwest. He drove her
there, crossing Pennsylvania, Ohio and Indiana, occasionally letting her take the
wheel. He met her roommate, her roommate’s mother and father, and then he left
her there. The college had an alternative curriculum, without exams or letter
grades. The atypical method suited her. According to the lengthy evaluation
letters her professors wrote at the end of the year, she did well. She majored in
environmental science. For her senior thesis she studied the adverse effects of
pesticide runoff in a local river.
But graduate school, which he hoped would be the next step, was of no
interest to her. She told him she did not want to spend her life inside a university,
researching things. She had learned enough from books and labs. She didn’t
want to cut herself off that way.
She said this to him not without some disdain. It was the closest she came to
rejecting how both he and Gauri lived. And he remembered Udayan, suddenly
turning cold to his education, just as Bela had.
She talked at times about the Peace Corps, wanting to travel to other parts of
the world. He wondered if she would join, if maybe she would want to go back
to India. She was twenty-one, old enough to make such decisions. Instead, after
graduating, she moved not terribly far away from him, to Western
Massachusetts, where she got a job on a farm.
He thought at first it was in a research capacity that she was there, to test the
soil or help cultivate a new crop breed. But no, she was there to work as an
agricultural apprentice, in the field. Putting in irrigation lines, weeding and
harvesting, cleaning out animal pens. Packing crates to sell vegetables, weighing
them for customers on the side of the road.
When she came home on weekends he saw that the shape and texture of her

hands were being altered by the demands of her labor. He noticed calluses on her
palms, dirt beneath her nails. Her skin smelled of soil. The back of her neck and
her shoulders, her face, turned a deeper brown.
She wore denim coveralls, heavy soiled boots, a cotton kerchief tied over her
hair. She woke at four in the morning. A man’s undershirt with the sleeves
pushed up to her shoulders, dark strips of leather knotted around her wrist in
place of bangles.
Each time there was something new to take in. A tattoo that was like an open
cuff above her ankle. A bleached section of her hair. A silver hoop in her nose.
It became her life: a series of jobs on farms across the country, some close by,
others far. Washington State, Arizona, Kentucky, Missouri. Rural towns he had
to look up on a map, towns where she said sometimes there were no stoplights
for miles. She traveled for the growing season or the breeding season, to plant
peach trees or maintain beehives, to raise chickens or goats.
She told him she lived in close quarters, often not paid in wages but simply
by the food and shelter that were provided. She’d lived with groups who pooled
their income. She’d lived for a few months in Montana, in a tent. She found odd
jobs when she needed to, spraying orchards, doing landscape work. She lived
without insurance, without heed for her future. Without a fixed address.
Sometimes she sent him a postcard to tell him where she’d gone, or sent a
cardboard box containing softening bunches of broccoli, or some pears wrapped
in newspaper. Dried red chilies, fashioned into a wreath. He wondered if her
work ever took her to California, where Gauri still lived, or if this was a place
she avoided.
He’d had no contact with Gauri. Only a post office box to which, for the first
few years, he’d directed their tax returns, until they started filing separately.
Apart from this official correspondence he had not sought her out.
On either side of the enormous country they lived apart, Bela roaming
between them. They had not bothered to obtain a divorce. Gauri had not asked
for one, and Subhash had not cared. Staying married was better than having to
negotiate with her again. It appalled him that she had never contacted Bela,
never sent a note. That her heart could be so cold. At the same time he was
grateful that the break was clean.
Now and again, at a dinner he attended at the home of an American
colleague, or one of the local Indian families with whom he kept cordial ties,
there would be someone, a widow or a woman who’d never married. Once or
twice he’d called these women, or they would call him, inviting him to attend a
classical music concert in Providence, or a play.

Though he had little interest in such entertainments, he’d gone; on a handful
of occasions, craving company, he had spent a few nights in a woman’s bed. But
he had no interest in a relationship. He was in his fifties, it was too late to start
another family. He had overstepped with Gauri. He couldn’t imagine ever
wanting to take that step again.
The only company he longed for was Bela’s. But she was skittish, and he
could never be certain of when he would see her again. She tended to return in
the summer, taking off a week or two around the time of her birthday, to visit the
beaches and swim in the sea, in the place where he’d raised her. Now and then
she came during Christmas. Once or twice, promising to be there, then telling
him something had come up at the last minute, she did not show up in the end.
When she was there she slept in her old bed. She rubbed camphoraceous
salves onto her arms and legs, and soaked herself in the bathtub. She allowed
him to cook for her, to take care of her, briefly, in this simple way. She watched
old movies on television with him, and they went on walks around Ninigret
Pond, or through the groves of rhododendrons in Hope Valley, as they used to do
when she was small.
Still, she required a certain amount of time to herself, so that even during the
course of her visits she would stay up late after he’d gone to bed, baking loaves
of zucchini bread, or she would borrow his car and go for a drive, not inviting
him to go with her. He knew, even when she returned, that part of her was closed
off from him. That her sense of limits was fierce. And though she seemed to
have found herself, he feared that she was still lost.
At the end of each visit she zipped her bag and left him, never saying when
she’d be back. She disappeared, as Gauri had disappeared, her vocation taking
precedence. Defining her, directing her course.
•••
Over the years her work started merging with a certain ideology. He saw that
there was a spirit of opposition to the things she did.
She was spending time in cities, in blighted sections of Baltimore and Detroit.
She helped to convert abandoned properties into community gardens. She taught
low-income families to grow vegetables in their backyards, so that they wouldn’t
have to depend entirely on food banks. She dismissed Subhash when he praised
her for these efforts. It was necessary, she said.
In Rhode Island, she went through his refrigerator, chiding him for the apples
he continued to buy from supermarkets. She was opposed to eating food that had

to be transported long distances. To the patenting of seeds. She talked to him
about why people still died from famines, why farmers still went hungry. She
blamed the unequal distribution of wealth.
She reproached Subhash for throwing out his vegetable scraps instead of
composting them. Once, during a visit, she went to a hardware store to buy
plywood and nails, building a bin in his backyard, showing him how to turn the
pile as it cooled.
What we consume is what we support, she said, telling him he needed to do
his part. She could be self-righteous, as Udayan had been.
He worried at times about her having such passionate ideals. Nevertheless,
when she was gone, even though it was quicker and cheaper simply to go to the
supermarket, he began to drive out to a farm stand on Saturday mornings, to get
his fruits and vegetables, his eggs for the week.
The people who worked there, who weighed his items and placed them in his
canvas bag, who added up what he owed with the stub of a pencil instead of at a
cash register, reminded him of Bela. They brought back to mind her pragmatic
simplicity. Thanks to Bela he grew conscious of eating according to what was in
season, according to what was available. Things he’d taken for granted when he
was a child.
Her dedication to bettering the world was something that would fulfill her, he
imagined, for the rest of her life. Still, he was unable to set aside his concern.
She had eschewed the stability he had worked to provide. She’d forged a rootless
path, one which seemed precarious to him. One which excluded him. But, as
with Gauri, he’d let her go.
A loose confederation of friends, people she spoke of fondly but never
introduced him to, provided her with an alternate form of family. She spoke of
attending these friends’ weddings. She knitted sweaters for their children, or
sewed them cloth dolls, mailing them off as surprises. If there was any other
partner in her life, a romantic interest, he was unaware of it. It was always just
the two of them, whenever she came.
He learned to accept her for who she was, to embrace the turn she’d taken. At
times Bela’s second birth felt more miraculous than the first. It was a miracle to
him that she had discovered meaning in her life. That she could be resilient, in
the face of what Gauri had done. That in time she had renewed, if not fully
restored, her affection for him.
And yet sometimes he felt threatened, convinced that it was Udayan’s
inspiration; that Udayan’s influence was greater. Gauri had left them, and by
now Subhash trusted her to stay away. But there were times Subhash believed

that Udayan would come back, claiming his place, claiming Bela from the grave
as his own.

Part VI

Chapter 1
In their bedroom, in Tollygunge, she combs out her hair before bed. The door
bolt is fastened, the shutters closed. Udayan lies inside the mosquito netting,
holding the shortwave on his chest. One leg folded, the ankle resting on the other
knee. On the bedcover, beside him, he keeps a small metal ashtray, a box of
matches, a packet of Wills.
It is 1971, the second year of their marriage. Almost two years since the
party’s declaration. A year since the offices of Deshabrati and Liberation were
raided. The issues Udayan continues to read are secretly published and
circulated. He hides them under the mattress. Their content has been deemed
seditious, and possessing them might now be used as evidence of a crime.
Ranjit Gupta is the new police commissioner, and the prisons are swelling.
The police seize comrades from their homes, from their campuses, from safe
houses. They confine them in lockups throughout the city, extracting
confessions. Some emerge after a few days. Others are detained indefinitely.
Cigarette butts are pressed into their backs, hot wax is poured into their ears.
Metal rods pushed into their rectums. People who live near Calcutta’s prisons
cannot sleep.
One day, within a few hours, four students are shot dead near College Street.
One of them had nothing to do with the party. He’d been passing through the
gates of the university, to attend a class.
Udayan turns off the radio. Do you regret your decision? he asks.
Which decision?
Becoming a wife?
She holds the comb still for a moment, glancing at his reflection in the mirror,
unable to see his face clearly through the mosquito netting. No.
Becoming my wife?
She gets up and lifts the netting, sitting on the edge of the bed. She stretches
out beside him.
No, she says once more.
They’ve arrested Sinha.
When?
A few days ago.

He says this without discouragement. As if it has nothing to do with him.
What does it mean?
It means either they’ll get him to talk, or they’ll kill him.
She sits up again. She starts braiding her hair for sleep.
But he draws her fingers away. He undrapes her sari, letting the material fall
from her breasts, revealing the skin between her blouse and petticoat. He drapes
her hair around her shoulders.
Leave it like this tonight.
The hair sheds into his hands, strands of it scattering onto the bed. Then the
weight is gone, it turns short again, of a coarser texture, streaked with gray.
But in the dream Udayan remains a boy in his twenties. Three decades
younger than Gauri is now, almost a decade younger than Bela. His wavy hair is
swept back from his forehead, his waist narrow compared to his shoulders. But
she is a woman of fifty-six, the years made present by virtue of the resilience
they have taken away.
Udayan is blind to this disjuncture. He pulls her to him, unhooking her
blouse, seeking pleasure from her dormant body, her neglected breasts. She tries
to resist, telling him that he should have nothing to do with her. She tells him
that she has married Subhash.
The information has no effect. He removes the rest of her clothes, the touch
of her husband feeling forbidden. For she is coupled naked with a boy who
appears as youthful as a son.
When she was married to Udayan, her recurring nightmare was that they had
not met, that he had not come into her life. In those moments returned the
conviction she’d had before knowing him, that she would live her life alone. She
had hated those first disorienting moments after waking up in their bed in
Tollygunge, inches away from him, still cloistered in an alternate world in which
they had nothing to do with one another, even as he held her in his arms.
She’d known him only a few years. Only beginning to discover who he was.
But in another way she had known him practically all her life. After his death
began the internal knowledge that came from remembering him, still trying to
make sense of him. Of both missing and resenting him. Without that there would
be nothing to haunt her. No grief.
She wonders what he might have looked like now. How he would have aged,
the illnesses he might have suffered, the diseases to which he might have
succumbed. She tries to imagine the flat stomach softening. Gray hairs on his
chest.
In all her life, apart from when Subhash asked, and the day she told Otto

Weiss, she has not spoken to a single person about what had happened to him.
No one else knows to ask. What had happened in Calcutta in the last years of his
life. What she’d seen from the terrace in Tollygunge. What she’d done for him,
because he’d asked.
In California, in the beginning, it was the living that haunted her, not the dead.
She used to fear that Bela or Subhash would materialize, sitting in a lecture hall,
or walking into a meeting. She used to look up from the podium to scan the
room on the first day of a new class, half expecting one of them to be occupying
a chair.
She used to fear that they would find her on the sunny campus, on one of the
sidewalks that led from one building to another. Confronting her, exposing her.
Apprehending her, the way the police had apprehended Udayan.
But in twenty years no one had come. She had not been summoned back. She
had been given what she’d demanded, granted exactly the freedom she had
sought.
By the time Bela was ten, Gauri had been able, somehow, to imagine her
doubled, at twenty. By then Bela had spent most of her time at school, she’d
spent weekends sometimes at the home of a friend. She’d had no trouble
spending two weeks at overnight Girl Scout camp in summer. She’d sat between
Gauri and Subhash at dinner, put her plate into the sink when finished and then
drifted upstairs.
Still, Gauri had waited until she’d been offered a job, until the occasion of
Subhash’s return to Calcutta. She knew that the errors she’d made during the
first years of Bela’s life were not things she could go back and fix. Her attempts
kept collapsing, because the foundation was not there. Over time this feeling ate
away at her, exposing only her self-interest, her ineptitude. Her inability to abide
herself.
She’d convinced herself that Subhash was her rival, and that she was in
competition with him for Bela, a competition that felt insulting, unjust. But of
course it had not been a competition, it had been her own squandering. Her own
withdrawal, covert, ineluctable. With her own hand she’d painted herself into a
corner, and then out of the picture altogether.
During that first flight across the country the plane was so bright she’d put on
sunglasses. For much of it she had been able to see the ground, her forehead
pressed against the oval window. Below her a river glinted like a crudely bent
wire. Brown and gold earth was veined with crevasses. Precipices rose like
islands, cracked from the sun’s heat.

There were black mountains on which nothing, no grass or trees, seemed to
grow. Thin lines that twisted unpredictably, with tributaries arriving nowhere.
Not rivers, but roads.
There was a geometric section, like a patterned carpet in shades of pink and
green and tan. Composed of circular shapes in various sizes, close together,
some slightly overlapping, some with a slice neatly missing. She learned from
the person sitting next to her that they were crops. But to Gauri’s eyes they were
like a pile of faceless coins.
They crossed the unpopulated desert, featureless and flat, and finally reached
the opposite edge of America, and the low sprawl of Los Angeles, dense and
ongoing. A place she knew would contain her, where she knew she would be
conveniently lost. Within her was the guilt and the adrenaline unleashed by what
she’d done, the sheer exhaustion of effort. As if, in order to escape Rhode Island,
she’d walked every step of the way.
She entered a new dimension, a place where a fresh life was given to her. The
three hours on her watch that separated her from Bela and Subhash were like a
physical barrier, as massive as the mountains she’d flown over to get here. She’d
done it, the worst thing that she could think of doing.
After her first job she’d moved briefly north, to teach in Santa Cruz, and then
in San Francisco. But she had come back to Southern California to live out her
life, in a small college town flanked by biscuit-colored mountains on the other
side of the freeway. A campus mainly of undergraduates, at a small but well-run
school built after World War II.
It was impossible, at such an intimate institution, to lead an anonymous life.
Her job was not only to teach students but to mentor them, to know them. She
was expected to maintain generous office hours, to be approachable.
In the classroom she led groups of ten or twelve, introducing them to the great
books of philosophy, to the unanswerable questions, to centuries of contention
and debate. She taught a survey of political philosophy, a course on metaphysics,
a senior seminar on the hermeneutics of time. She had established her areas of
specialization, German Idealism and the philosophy of the Frankfurt School.
She broke her larger classes into discussion groups, sometimes inviting small
batches of students to her apartment, making tea for them on Sunday afternoons.
During office hours she spoke to them in her book-lined office in the soft light of
a lamp she’d brought from home. She listened to them confess that they were not
able to hand in a paper because of a personal crisis that was overwhelming their
lives. If needed, she handed them a tissue from the box she kept in her drawer,
telling them not to worry, to file for an incomplete, telling them that she

understood.
The obligation to be open to others, to forge these alliances, had initially been
an unexpected strain. She had wanted California to swallow her; she had wanted
to disappear. But over time these temporary relationships came to fill a certain
space. Her colleagues welcomed her. Her students admired her, were loyal. For
three or four months they depended on her, they accompanied her, they grew
fond of her, and then they went away. She came to miss the measured contact,
once the classes ended. She became an alternate guardian to a few.
Because of her background she was given a special responsibility to oversee
students who came from India. Once a year she invited them to dinner, catering
biriyani and kebabs. The students tended to be wealthy, pleased to be in
America, not intimidated by it. They’d been made in a different India. At ease, it
seemed, anywhere in the world.
Certain former students sent her notes at the holidays, invited her to their
weddings. She made time for them, because she came to have the time, because
she saw to the needs of no one else.
Her output, apart from the teaching, was steady, esteemed by a handful of
peers. She had published three books in her life: a feminist appraisal of Hegel, an
analysis of interpretive methods in Horkheimer, and the book that had been
based on her dissertation, that had grown out of a blundering essay she’d written
for Professor Weiss: The Epistemology of Expectation in Schopenhauer.
She remembered the slow birth of the dissertation, behind a closed door in
Rhode Island. Aware that the exigencies of her work were masking those of
being a mother. She remembered fretting, as the years passed, as the process of
the dissertation deepened, thinking that it would never be done, that perhaps she
would fail at this objective, too. But Professor Weiss had called her after reading
it, telling her he was proud of her.
She could have spoken to Professor Weiss in German now, having studied it
for so long, then spending a year, her fortieth, as a visiting scholar at Heidelberg
University. He was still alive. She’d heard that he’d moved to Florida for his
retirement. He had helped Gauri get into the doctoral program in Boston, and
then get her first teaching job, in California. He was the one to mention it to her,
wanting to do her a favor, always keeping her in mind, not realizing that she
would choose this job over the job of raising her child.
She’d not kept in touch with him. She imagined word had spread, and that
people in Rhode Island, at the university, had learned of what she’d done. And
she knew that Weiss, who had mentored her, who had believed in her, who had
always asked after Bela, would have lost his respect for her.

Her ideology was isolated from practice, neutered by its long tenure in the
academy. Long ago she’d wanted her work to be in deference to Udayan, but by
now it was a betrayal of everything he had believed in. All the ways he had
influenced and inspired her, shrewdly cultivated for her own intellectual gain.
A few times a year she attended conferences, held in various parts of the
country, or in foreign ones. They were the only long-distance journeys she made.
At times she enjoyed the brief change of scene, the shift in routine. At times she
enjoyed sharing the infrequent fruit of her solitary labor.
The embroidered turquoise shawl she liked to have on hand during flights
was always folded up inside her carry-on bag. The one thing Subhash had given
her that she’d kept. She had traveled back to the East Coast, though she’d
avoided Providence, even Boston and New Haven. It felt too close. Too illicit, to
cross that line.
Impractically, she’d remained a citizen of her birthplace. She was still a
green-card holder, renewing her Indian passport when it expired. But she had
never returned to India. It meant standing in separate lines when she traveled, it
meant extra questions these days, fingerprints when she reentered the United
States from abroad. But she was always welcomed back, ushered through.
For the sake of retirement, for the sake of simplifying the end of her life, she
would need to become an American. In this way, too, Udayan would soon be
betrayed.
In any case, California was her only home. Right away she had adapted to its
climate, both comforting and strange, hot but seldom oppressive. Arid instead of
damp, apart from the rich fog of certain afternoons.
Gratefully she embraced its lack of winter, its paucity of rainfall, its blistering
desert winds. The only cold of the place was visual, on the mountaintops, the
abbreviated patches of white that collected among their peaks.
She’d met other refugees from the East Coast who had fled for their own
reasons, who had slipped from their former skins, not knowing what they would
find but compelled to make the journey. Like Gauri, they had tethered
themselves to California, never going back. There were enough of these people
that it ceased to matter where she was originally from, or what had brought her
here. Instead, at social gatherings, when required to make small talk, she was
able to participate in that collective sense of discovery, of gratitude for the place.
Certain plants were familiar to her. Stunted banana trees with leaves that were
rusty at their edges, bearing the piercing violet blossoms her mother-in-law had
taught her to soak and chop and cook in Tollygunge. The bleached bark of
eucalyptus. Shaggy date trees, sheathed with pointed scales.

Though she was close to another coast, the massive ocean on this side of the
country kept to itself; it never felt as encroaching, as corrosive, as the harsh sea
in Rhode Island that had stripped things down, that had always looked so
turbulent to her and at the same time starved for color, for life. The new sense of
scale, the vast distances between one place and another, had also been a
revelation. The hundreds of miles of freeway one could drive.
She had explored little of it, and yet she felt protected by that impersonal
ongoing space. The spiny growth, the hot air, the small concrete houses with redtiled roofs—all of it had welcomed her. The people she encountered seemed less
reserved, less censorious, offering a smile but then keeping out of her way.
Telling her, in this land of bright light and sharp shadows, to begin again.
And yet she remained, in spite of her Western clothes, her Western academic
interests, a woman who spoke English with a foreign accent, whose physical
appearance and complexion were unchangeable and, against the backdrop of
most of America, still unconventional. She continued to introduce herself by an
unusual name, the first given by her parents, the last by the two brothers she had
wed.
Her appearance and accent caused people to continue to ask her where she
came from, and some to form certain assumptions. Once, invited to give a talk in
San Diego, she’d been picked up by a driver the university had sent, so that she
would be spared the effort of driving herself. She had greeted him at the door
when he rang the bell. But the driver had not realized, when she told him good
morning, that she was his passenger. He had mistaken her for the person paid to
open another person’s door. Tell her, whenever she’s ready, he’d said.
In the beginning she’d retreated willingly into the pure and proper celibacy of
widowhood that, because of Bela and Subhash, she was initially denied. She
avoided situations where she might be introduced to someone, adopting the
Western custom of wearing a wedding band during the day.
She turned down dinner invitations, offers to have lunch. She kept to herself
at conferences, always retiring to her room, not caring if people found her
unfriendly. Given what she’d done to Subhash and Bela, it felt wrong to seek the
companionship of anyone else.
Isolation offered its own form of companionship: the reliable silence of her
rooms, the steadfast tranquility of the evenings. The promise that she would find
things where she put them, that there would be no interruption, no surprise. It
greeted her at the end of each day and lay still with her at night. She had no wish
to overcome it. Rather, it was something upon which she’d come to depend, with

which she’d entered by now into a relationship, more satisfying and enduring
than the relationships she’d experienced in either of her marriages.
When desire eventually began to push its way through, its pattern was
arbitrary, casual. And given her life, the dinners she was expected to attend at
the homes of colleagues, the conferences, opportunities were there.
Mainly they were fellow academics, but not always. There was the man
whose name she’d forgotten, who’d built the bookshelves in her apartment.
There was the idle husband of a musicologist at the American Academy in
Berlin.
Sometimes she juggled lovers, and at other times, for extended periods, there
was no one. She’d grown fond of some of these men, remaining friendly with
them. But she’d never allowed herself to reach the point where they might
complicate her life.
Only Lorna had unraveled her. She had knocked on Gauri’s door during her
office hours one day, a stranger introducing herself, tilting her head against the
doorframe. A tall woman in her late thirties, her center-parted hair in a small
chignon. Nicely dressed, in fitted trousers, a white button-down shirt. So that at
first Gauri thought she was another professor at the college, wandering in from
some other department, with a question to ask.
But no, she was a graduate student at UCLA, she’d driven in and found
Gauri, she’d read everything Gauri had written. She’d worked for years in
advertising, living in New York, in London, in Tokyo, before quitting her job
and going back to university. She was seeking an outside reader for her
dissertation, a study of relational autonomy, holding a partial draft of it in her
hand. She was willing to help Gauri with any research or grading in exchange
for the privilege.
Please say yes.
Her beauty was sober, in its prime. A long neck, clear gray eyes, abbreviated
brows. Earlobes so scant they seemed almost to be missing. Slightly visible
pores on her face.
I heard your talk last month at Davis, Lorna said. I asked you a question.
I don’t remember.
You don’t remember the question?
I don’t remember your asking it.
Lorna reached into her satchel and pulled out a PowerBar.
It was about Althusser. I’m sorry, I haven’t had lunch. Do you mind?
Gauri shook her head. She watched as Lorna unwrapped and broke apart and

chewed the PowerBar, explaining, between bites, the genesis of her project, the
particular angle she wanted to pursue. Her hands seemed small for her height,
the wrists delicate. She told Gauri she’d been working up the nerve to approach
her for nearly a year.
Gauri felt disoriented in the little office that was so familiar to her. At once
ambushed and flattered. How could she have forgotten such a face?
The topic interested her, and they set up a schedule, exchanging e-mails,
meeting at restaurants and coffee shops. Lorna worked in fits and starts,
distracting herself for days, then suddenly producing coherent chapters. She
called Gauri when she felt stuck, whenever she doubted herself, whenever it was
not going well.
Attraction motivated Gauri to pick up the phone, to allow the conversations to
extend beyond a reasonable arc. Images of Lorna, fragments of their exchanges,
began to distract her. When they met in person she began to dress with care. She
had no recollection of crossing a line that drove her to desire a woman’s body.
With Lorna she found herself already on the other side of it.
There were times, as they sat together at a table, scrutinizing a page of
manuscript, that the sides of their hands, each holding a pen with which to mark
the text, brushed together. Times their faces were close. There were times, as
Lorna talked and Gauri listened, the two of them alone in a room, perhaps
standing a few feet apart, that Gauri felt her balance faltering. She worried that
she would not be able to control the temptation to take one step closer, then
another, until the moment the space between them was obliterated.
She acted on none of these impulses. Whatever had induced them, whatever
continued to provoke them, she could not be certain whether Lorna thought of
her in the same way.
One evening Lorna showed up at her office without calling first. She did this
often enough. She’d just finished the final chapter, the pages tucked in a thick
manilla envelope that she cradled in one arm.
The floor of the department was quiet, the students in their dorms, only the
janitors and a few scattered professors were in the building at that hour.
Lorna handed the envelope to Gauri. She looked exhausted, exultant. For the
first time she was dressed casually, in jeans, a T-shirt. She’d not bothered to put
up her hair. She had been to a grocery store. Inside the tote bag she set on the
desk were wrapped wedges of cheese, grapes, a box of crackers. Two paper
cups, a bottle of wine.
What’s this?
I thought we might celebrate.

Here?
Gauri stood up from her desk and shut the door, locking it, knowing it should
have remained open. When she turned around Lorna was facing her, looking at
her, standing too close.
She took Gauri’s hand, putting it inside her T-shirt, on top of one of her
breasts, beneath the pliant material of her bra. Gauri felt the nipple under the bra
thickening, hardening, as her own were.
The softness of the kisses was new. The smell of her, the sculptural plainness
of her body as the clothes were removed, as piles of papers were pushed aside to
make room on the daybed behind the desk. The smoothness of her skin, the
focused distribution of hair. The sensation of Lorna’s mouth on her groin.
She’d never had a lover younger than herself. Gauri had been forty-five, her
body beginning to break down in small ways: molars that needed to be crowned,
a permanently burst blood vessel that forked like scarlet lightning in the corner
of her eye. Conscious of her growing imperfections, she had been preparing to
retreat, not rush headlong, as she’d done.
Though Lorna wasn’t technically her student—at least, not at the institution
that employed her—it was still a breach of conduct. It would have been a
scandal if anyone detected what was going on. Not just that evening in her office
but various other times, sporadically but often enough, in either Gauri’s bed or
Lorna’s, and in the room of a hotel they drove to one weekend, on the coast.
When the dissertation was complete Gauri sat at the defense, among the other
readers on Lorna’s committee, posing questions. As if they had not spent those
occasions, those evenings, together.
Then Lorna was offered a job in Toronto and moved away. There had never
been any discussion of their encounters evolving into anything else. The liaison
ended, without rancor but definitively. Yet Gauri was humiliated, for not taking
it as lightly.
Somehow she and Lorna had remained on friendly terms, making time for a
coffee if they happened to run into one another at a conference. Gauri saw how
the relationship had shifted: how she had reverted from lover to colleague,
nothing more.
It was not unlike the way her role had changed at so many other points in the
past. From wife to widow, from sister-in-law to wife, from mother to childless
woman. With the exception of losing Udayan, she had actively chosen to take
these steps.
She had married Subhash, she had abandoned Bela. She had generated
alternative versions of herself, she had insisted at brutal cost on these

conversions. Layering her life only to strip it bare, only to be alone in the end.
Now even Lorna was over a decade ago, long enough to break away from the
stem of her existence. Receding, fading, alongside the other disparate elements
of her past.
Her life had been pared down to its solitary components, its self-reliant code.
Her uniform of black slacks and tunics, the books and the laptop computer she
needed to do her job. The car she used to get from one place to another.
Her hair was still cut short, a monkish style with a middle part. She wore oval
glasses on a chain around her neck. There was a bluish tinge now to the skin
below her eyes. Her voice raspy from years of lecturing. Her skin drier after
absorbing this stronger, southern sun.
Her work habits were no longer nocturnal; on her own, she followed ancient
patterns and cues, in bed by ten, upright at dawn. She allowed herself few
frivolities. A group of plants she cultivated in pots on her patio. Jasmine that
opened up in the evenings, flame-colored hibiscus, creamy gardenia with glossy
leaves.
On the patio, with its wooden trellis overhead, terra-cotta tiles underfoot, she
liked to sit after a long day in her study, to drink a cup of tea and sort through
her bills, to feel the afternoon light on her face. To look over a sheaf of printed
pages she was working on, and sometimes to eat dinner.
In her car, when she tired of public radio, she listened to a biography or some
other commercially published book she’d meant but never made time to read.
But even these she borrowed from the library.
Beyond these elements she did not tend to indulge herself. Her existence all
these years, after Udayan, without Bela or Subhash, remained indulgence
enough. Udayan’s life had been taken in an instant. But hers had gone on.
Her body, in spite of its years, was as stubbornly intact as the muddy green
teapot, shaped vaguely like an Aladdin’s lamp, a wedge of cork in its lid, that
she’d bought for a dollar at a yard sale in Rhode Island. It still kept her company
during her hours of writing. It had survived her flight to California, wrapped up
in a cardigan, and served her still.
One day, pausing to look through one of the catalogues that cluttered her
mailbox, she came across a picture of a small round wooden table meant for
outdoors. It wasn’t essential, and yet she picked up the phone and placed the
order, having meant for too long to replace the dirty glass-topped wicker table

that had been on the patio for years, covered by a series of printed cloths.
A week or so after she’d placed the order, a delivery truck stopped in front of
her building. She expected a flat heavy box, a day spent poring over an
instruction manual, with a bag of nuts and bolts that she would have to tighten
herself. Instead the table was delivered to her fully assembled, carried off the
truck and into her home by two men.
She told them where to put it, signed a sheet of paper to acknowledge its
arrival, tipped them, and sat down. She put her hands flat on the table and
smelled the strong odor of the wood. Of teak.
She put her face to the table’s surface, inhaling deeply, her cheek against the
slats. It was the smell of the bedroom furniture she’d left behind in Tollygunge,
the wardrobe and dressing table, the bed with slim posts on which she and
Udayan had created Bela. Ordered from an American catalogue, delivered off a
truck, it had come to her again.
The aroma of the table wasn’t as powerful, as constant, as that of the other
furniture had been. But now and then it rose up as she sat on the patio, enhanced
perhaps by the sun’s warmth, or circulated by the Santa Ana winds. A
concentrated peppery smell that reduced all distance, all time.
What had Subhash told Bela, to keep her away? Nothing, probably. It was the
just punishment for her crime. She understood now what it meant to walk away
from her child. It had been her own act of killing. A connection she had severed,
resulting in a death that applied only to the two of them. It was a crime worse
than anything Udayan had committed.
She had never written to Bela. Never dared reach out, to reassure her. What
reassurance was hers to give? What she’d done could never be undone. Her
silence, her absence, seemed decent in comparison.
As for Subhash, he had done nothing wrong. He had let her go, never
bothering her, never blaming her, at least to her face. She hoped he’d found
some happiness. He deserved it, not she.
Though their marriage had not been a solution, it had taken her away from
Tollygunge. He had brought her to America and then, like an animal briefly
observed, briefly caged, released her. He had protected her, he had attempted to
love her. Every time she had to open a new jar of jam, she resorted to the trick
he’d taught her, of banging the edge of the lid three or four times with a spoon,
to break the seal.

Chapter 2
In the new millennium a path was completed, an easement of a rail spur that had
once taken passengers from Kingston station to Narragansett Pier.
The course was moderate, through forest cover, skirting a river, some smaller
creeks. There were benches here and there to rest on if one was tired, and at
longer intervals a sign, indicating his position on the trail, perhaps also
indicating a native species of tree.
On Sunday mornings, after breakfast, he drove to the wooden train station
where he had first arrived as a student, where he went on occasion to greet Bela
on the platform, when she visited. Many years ago there had been a fire, but in
time the station was restored and a high-speed rail put in. He parked the car and
began walking, alone, through the sheltered innards of the town. At times, even
now, Subhash could not fathom the extremes of his life: coming from a city with
so little space for humans, arriving in a place where there was still so much of it
to spare.
He kept moving for at least an hour, sometimes a little more, for it was
possible to travel six miles and back. It was the town he had lived in for more
than half his life, to which he had been quietly faithful, and yet the new path
altered his relationship to it, turning it foreign again. He walked past the backs of
certain neighborhoods, alongside fields where schoolchildren played sports, over
a wooden footbridge. Past a bog filled with cattails, past a former textile mill.
He preferred shade these days to the coastline. He’d been born and bred in
Calcutta, and yet the sun in Rhode Island, bearing down through the depleted
ozone, now felt stronger than the sun of his upbringing. Merciless against his
skin, striking him, especially in summer, in a way he could no longer endure. His
tawny skin never burned, but the sensation of sunlight overwhelmed him. He
sometimes took it personally, the enduring blaze of that distant star.
He passed a swamp at the start of his walks, where birds and animals came to
nest, where red maple and cedar grew from mossy mounds. It was the largest
forested wetland in southern New England. It had once been a glacial
depression, and was still bordered by a moraine.
According to signs he stopped to read, it had also once been the site of a
battle. Growing curious, he turned on his computer one day at home, and began

learning, on the Internet, details of an atrocity.
On a small island in the middle of the swamp the local Narragansett tribe had
built a fort. In a camp of wigwams, behind a palisade of sticks, they had housed
themselves, believing their refuge was impregnable. But in the winter of 1675,
when the marsh ground was frozen, and the trees were bare, the fort was
attacked by a colonial militia. Three hundred people were burned alive. Many
who’d escaped died of disease and starvation.
Somewhere, he read, there was a marker and a granite shaft that
commemorated the battle. But Subhash got lost the day he set out through the
swamp to find it. When he was younger he had loved nothing more than to
wander like this, with Bela. He’d been compelled, back then, to follow crude
directions, unmarked trails through woods, isolated with her, discovering
blueberry bushes, secluded ponds in which to swim. But he had lost that
confidence, that intrepid sense of direction. He felt only aware now that he was
alone, that he was over sixty years old, and that he did not know where he stood.
One Sunday, lost in his thoughts, he was surprised to see a helmeted man with a
familiar face approaching on his bike, on the other side of the path, coasting to a
stop.
Jesus, Subhash. Didn’t I teach you to always keep your eyes on the road?
Sitting astride a thin-framed ten-speed was Richard, his apartment mate from
decades ago, shaking his head, smiling at him. What the hell are you still doing
here?
I never left.
I thought you’d gone back to India after you finished. I didn’t even think to
look you up.
There was a bench nearby, and here they sat and talked. The hair under
Richard’s helmet was no longer dark, a patch of it gone at the back, but what he
had he still wore in a ponytail. He’d put on some weight, but Subhash recalled
the handsome, wiry graduate student he’d first met, who’d reminded him in
some ways of Udayan. A time before either of them had married, when they had
lived with one another, and driven together to buy groceries, and shared their
meals.
Richard was married, a grandfather. After leaving Rhode Island he’d missed
it, always intending someday to retire here. A year ago he and his wife, Claire,
had sold their house in East Lansing and bought a cottage in Saunderstown, not
far from Subhash.
He’d founded a center for nonviolent studies at a university in the Midwest

and still served as a member of its board, though he’d managed never to wear a
tie a day in his life. He was full of sundry plans—another book he was in the
middle of writing, a kitchen he was trying to remodel himself, a political blog he
maintained. A trip to Southeast Asia, to Phnom Penh and Ho Chi Minh City, he
was planning with Claire.
Can you believe it? he said. After all that, I’m finally going to Vietnam.
Sitting beside him, Subhash delivered the sparse details of his own life. A
wife from whom he was estranged, a daughter who had grown up and moved
away. A job at the same coastal research lab he’d been with nearly thirty years.
Some consulting work on oil spills from time to time, or for the town’s
Department of Public Works. He was without a family, just as he’d been when
he’d known Richard. But he was alone in a different way.
Still working full-time?
For as long as they let me.
Still driving my car?
Not since Nixon resigned and the transmission died.
I always tell Claire about that curry you used to make. How you’d put onions
in the blender.
Richard had traveled to India, to New Delhi and to visit Gandhi’s birthplace
in Gujarat. He’d wanted to include Calcutta, but hadn’t made it there. Maybe on
the way back from Vietnam, he said.
The next question came innocently. That brother of yours, the Naxalite. What
ever happened to him?
•••
He and Richard exchanged phone numbers and e-mails. They met up for a walk
along the paths, or in town for a beer. Twice they’d gone fishing, casting their
rods off the rocks at Point Judith, hooking sea robins, throwing back what they
caught.
Subhash would promise, whenever they parted, that the next time they’d meet
would be at Subhash’s home, that Claire would come, and that Subhash would
prepare a curry. He thought of planning it for one of Bela’s visits, so that
Richard could meet her. But this hadn’t yet happened. The friendship remained a
loose but easy bond between them, just as it had always been.
By now he was used to Richard’s mass e-mails, announcing lectures and
rallies, quoting statistics about the cost of the Iraq War, directing him to a link to
Richard’s blog. He was used to the number and Richard’s last name, Grifalconi,

saluting him from time to time in the little window of his telephone.
He saw it one weekend morning as he watched a program on CNN. He turned
down the volume with the remote. He did not expect the voice to belong to
Richard’s wife, Claire, a woman he had not yet spoken to or met, telling him
Richard had died a few days ago. A blood clot in his leg had traveled to his lungs
the day after a bike ride Richard and Claire had taken together, out to Rome
Point.
Subhash put down the phone. He shut off the television. His eyes were
distracted by a movement he saw through the window of his living room. It was
the restlessness of birds, rearranging themselves.
He walked to the window to have a better look. At the top of a tree in his
yard, a group of them, small and loud and dark, were frantically coming and
going. Taking, in winter, what nourishment the tree still had to give. There was a
determined fury to their movements. An act of survival that now offended him.
For the first time in his life Subhash entered a funeral home, kneeled down and
regarded a body laid out in a coffin, neatly dressed. He observed the lack of life
in Richard’s face, the facile betrayal of it, as if an expert had carved an effigy out
of wax. He remembered his last glimpse of his mother, covered by a shroud.
After the service he drove to the reception at Richard’s home, not so different
from other American receptions he’d attended in his life. There was a long table
with food laid out, platters of cheese and salads. People dressed in dark colors
were drinking glasses of wine, carving slices from a ham.
Claire stood at one end of the room, flanked by their children, their
grandchildren, thanking people for coming, shaking their hands. Saying there
had been no sign of distress until Richard complained that he felt short of breath.
The next morning, he’d shaken Claire awake, pointing at the telephone, unable
to speak. He’d died in the ambulance, Claire following in their car behind.
The guests stood in circles, talking. Some photographs were taken by distant
relatives for whom the gathering was a reunion as well as a funeral. For those
who had traveled long distances it was an opportunity to explore Rhode Island,
to drive to Newport the following day.
Elise Silva was a neighbor.
She came up to the sliding glass window where Subhash was standing, taking
in the view of the descending birch-filled property behind Richard’s house.
When he turned to look at her, she introduced herself.
I saw Richard and Claire a few weeks ago, hand in hand like they’d just met,
she said. She told him that there was a small pond behind the trees. When it

froze over, Elise said, Richard and Claire would go skating with their elbows
linked.
She had olive skin, nearly as tan as his. Her hair had turned white but her
brows were still dark. The hair was pulled back as Bela sometimes wore hers, a
single clip fastened at the back of her head so that it would not interfere with her
face. She wore a black dress with long sleeves, gray stockings, a silver chain
around her neck.
They spoke of how long they’d both known Richard. But there was another
connection Elise and Subhash shared. It emerged when he told her his name, and
then she asked if by any chance he was related to a student named Bela Mitra,
who had taken her American history class many years ago at the local high
school.
I’m her father.
He still felt nervous, proclaiming it that way.
He looked at this woman who had once taught her. Elise Silva was one of so
many things he had not known about his daughter, after she’d reached a certain
age. He still remembered the names of some of her teachers in elementary
school. But by high school it was just the report card, the list of grades he
scanned.
You don’t know me, and yet you’ve let me drive your daughter to Hancock
Shaker Village, she said. She had taken Bela with a small group of other students
on a field trip there.
My ignorance is shameful. I don’t even know where Hancock Shaker Village
is.
She laughed. That is shameful.
Why does one visit?
She explained. A religious sect begun in the eighteenth century, dedicated to
celibacy, to simple life. A utopian population whose very faith had caused their
numbers to dwindle. She asked where Bela lived now.
Nowhere. She’s a nomad.
Let me guess, she carries her life around in a backpack, doing things to make
the world a better place?
How did you know?
Some kids form early. They’re focused. Bela was one.
He had a sip of wine. She had no choice, he said.
Elise looked at him, nodding. Indicating that she knew the circumstances, that
Gauri had left.

She talked to you about it?
No. But her teachers were told.
Do you still teach?
After fifty-five I couldn’t keep up with them. I suppose I needed a change.
She worked part-time at the local historical society now, she said. She was
transferring archives online, editing their newsletter.
He told her he’d been reading about the Great Swamp Massacre. He asked if
any records remained.
Oh sure. You can even find musket balls if you poke around the obelisk.
I tried to find it once. I got lost.
It’s tricky. You used to have to pay a farmer who maintained the road.
He felt tired from standing. He realized he had not eaten. I’m going to get
some food. Would you like to join me?
They approached the buffet table. Richard’s widow stood at one end. She was
crying, being embraced by one of her guests.
I went through this, years ago, Elise said. She had watched her husband die
from leukemia at forty-six. He’d left her with three children, two sons and a
daughter. The youngest had been four. After her husband’s death she’d moved
with her children into her parents’ home.
I’m sorry.
I had my family. Sounds like, with Bela, you were on your own.
Her daughter had married a Portuguese engineer and lived in Lisbon. It was
where Elise’s ancestors were from, but she’d never visited Europe until her
daughter’s wedding. Her sons lived in Denver and Austin. For a while, after she
retired, she’d split her time among those places, helping out with grandchildren,
going to Lisbon once a year. But she had moved back to Rhode Island about a
decade ago, after her father died, to be closer to her mother.
She mentioned a tour the following weekend, a house in the village that the
historical society had restored. She handed him a postcard that was in her purse,
with the details.
He accepted the card, thanking her. He folded it to fit into his jacket pocket.
Tell Bela hello from me, she said, leaving him with no one to talk to, turning
to someone else in the room.
After the funeral, for several nights, sometimes as late as three o’clock in the
morning, he lay awake, unable to lose consciousness for any sustained period.
The house was silent, the world surrounding it silent, no cars on the road at that

hour. Nothing but the sound of his own breathing, or the sound his throat made if
he swallowed.
The house, always to his regret, was too far from the bay to hear the waves.
But sometimes the wind was strong enough to approximate the roar of the sea as
it blew inland. A violent power, insubstantial, rooted in nothingness.
Threatening, as he lay unmoving under his blanket, to tear the rooms of the
house from the foundation, to fell the trembling trees, to demolish the structure
of his life.
A colleague, noticing his fatigue at work, suggested getting more exercise, or
a glass of wine in the evenings with dinner. A cup of chamomile tea. There were
pills he could take, but he resisted this option. Already there was a pill to lower
his cholesterol, another to raise his potassium, a daily aspirin to promote the
passage of blood to his heart through his veins. He stored them in a plastic box
with seven compartments, labeled with the days of the week, counting them out
with his morning oatmeal.
Again it was anxiety that kept him up, though not the same anxiety that used
to rouse him from sleep after Gauri first left and he was alone with Bela in the
house, asleep in the next room. Aware that she was suffering, aware that he was
the only person in the world responsible for raising her.
He remembered Bela as an infant, when the distinction between night and day
did not exist for her: awake, asleep, awake, asleep, shallow alternating phases of
an hour or two. He’d read somewhere that at the start of life these concepts were
reversed, that time within the womb was the inverse of time outside of it. He
remembered learning, the first time he was at sea, about how whales and
dolphins swam close to the surface of the water, how they emerged to draw air
into their lungs, each breath a conscious act.
He drew breath through his nostrils, hoping this essential function, as faithful
as the beating of his heart, might release him for a few hours. His eyes were
closed, but his mind was unblinking.
It was like this now since the news of Richard’s death: a disproportionate
awareness of being alive. He yearned for the deep and continuous sleep that
refused to accommodate him. A release from the nightly torment that took place
in his bed.
When he was younger wakefulness would not have troubled him; he would
have taken advantage of the extra hours to read an article, or step outside to look
at the stars. At times even his body felt full of energy, and he wished it were
daylight, so that he could get up and walk along the bike path. He would walk as
far as the bench where he’d bumped into Richard two years ago, to sit and think.

Instead, in his bed, he found himself traveling into the deeper past, sifting at
random through the detritus of his boyhood. He revisited the years before he left
his family. His father returning from the market every morning, the fish his
mother would slice and salt and fry for breakfast, silver-skinned pieces spilling
out of a burlap bag.
He saw his mother hunched over the black sewing machine she used to
operate with her feet, pumping a pedal up and down, unable to talk because of
the pins she held between her lips. She sat before it in the evenings, hemming
petticoats for her customers, stitching curtains for the house. Udayan would oil
the machine for her, fix the motor from time to time. A bird in his yard in Rhode
Island, its call a rapid stopping and starting, mimicked the sound of it.
He saw his father teaching him and Udayan how to play chess, drawing the
squares on a sheet of paper. He saw his brother hunching over, cross-legged on
the floor, extending his index finger as he was finishing up a meal, to consume
the final sauce that coated his plate.
Udayan was everywhere. Walking with Subhash to school in the mornings,
walking home in the afternoons. Studying in the evenings on the bed they’d
shared. Books spread between them, memorizing so many things. Writing in a
notebook, concentrating, his face just inches above the page. Lying beside him at
night, listening to the jackals howling in the Tolly Club. Quick-footed, assured,
controlling the ball in the field behind the lowland.
These minor impressions had formed him. They had washed away long ago,
only to reappear, reconstituted. They kept distracting him, like pieces of
landscape viewed from a train. The landscape was familiar, but certain things
always jolted him, as if seen for the first time.
Until he left Calcutta, Subhash’s life was hardly capable of leaving a trace.
He could have put everything belonging to him into a single grocery bag. When
he was growing up in his parents’ house, what had been his? His toothbrush, the
cigarettes he and Udayan used to smoke in secret, the cloth bag in which he
carried his textbooks. A few articles of clothing. Until he went to America he
had not had his own room. He had belonged to his parents and to Udayan, and
they to him. That was all.
Here he had been quietly successful, educating himself, finding engaging
work, sending Bela to college. It had been enough, materially speaking.
But he was still too weak to tell Bela what she deserved to know. Still
pretending to be her father, still hoarding what had not been earned. Udayan had
been right in calling him self-serving.
The need to tell her hung over him, terrified him. It was the greatest

unfinished business of his life. She was old enough, strong enough to handle it,
and yet, because she was all he loved, he could not muster the strength.
He was increasingly aware these days of how much he owned, of the ongoing
effort his life required. The thousands of trips to the grocery store he had made,
all the heaping bags of food, first paper, then plastic, now canvas sacks brought
from home, unloaded from the trunk of the car and unpacked and stored in
cupboards, all to sustain a single body. The pills he swallowed every morning.
The cinnamon sticks he pried out of a tin to flavor the oil for a pot of curry or
dal.
One day he would die, like Richard, and his things would remain for other
people to puzzle over or sort through, to throw away. Already his brain had
stopped holding on to directions he would never have to follow again, the names
of people he would speak to only once. So much of what occupied his mind was
negligible. There was only one thing, the story of Udayan, that he wanted to lay
bare.
He recognized the house at once. It was the rooming house he’d once lived in
with Richard, across from the hand pump and the village well. A white wooden
house with black shutters. Because the addresses of the houses had changed
since then, because there had not been a picture on the postcard Elise had given
him, he had not known.
Elise smiled when she saw him, handing him his ticket off a fat spool, his
change. She looked different today, wearing a loose shift of sage-colored linen,
her silver hair framing her face, a pair of sunglasses on her head.
Thank you for coming. How have you been?
I know this house. I used to live here. With Richard.
You did?
When I first got here, yes. You didn’t know?
Her face changed, the smile fading, but there was a look of concern now in
her eyes. I had no idea.
She didn’t share what he’d told her with the rest of the group once the tour
began. The layout had changed, the number of rooms fewer than they’d been.
The rooms were sparsely furnished, the doorways fitted with iron latches, the
furniture made of dark wood. The tables had dropped leaves that partially
concealed their pedestals, like a modest woman’s skirt. The surface of the
writing desk could be tucked away and locked. The lintel of the fireplace was
made of oak.

He remembered nothing. And yet he had lived here, he had looked out
through these small windows as he’d studied. A time so long ago, when he was
new to Rhode Island, when Udayan was still alive. Here he had read Udayan’s
letters. Here he had looked at a photograph of Gauri, wondering about her, not
realizing that he was to marry her.
Elise pointed to the different styles of chairs that were popular: slat-back,
banister back, fiddleback. The street had been the town’s commercial district,
she told the group. Next door there had been a hat shop, and after that a
barbershop, where the village men went to get shaved.
This house had first been a tailor’s shop and residence, then a lawyer’s office,
then a family’s home for four generations. It was cut up into a rooming house in
the sixties. When the last landlord died, he’d bequeathed it to the historical
society, and slowly they had raised funds to restore it, collaborating with a local
art gallery so that there would be exhibits in the rooms downstairs.
He was struck by the effort to preserve such places. The corner cupboard
encased platters and bowls people had eaten from, candlesticks from which their
light had burned. The kitchen walls displayed the ladles and griddles they had
cooked with. The pine floors were the same hue they’d been when those people
had walked through the rooms.
The effect was disquieting. He felt his presence on earth being denied, even
as he stood there. He was forbidden access; the past refused to admit him. It only
reminded him that this arbitrary place, where he’d landed and made his life, was
not his. Like Bela, it had accepted him, while at the same time keeping a
distance. Among its people, its trees, its particular geography he had studied and
grown to love, he was still a visitor. Perhaps the worst form of visitor: one who
had refused to leave.
He thought of the two homes that belonged to him. The house in Tollygunge,
which he had not returned to since his mother’s death, and the house in Rhode
Island in which Gauri had left him, which he imagined would be his last. A
relative managed the house in Tollygunge on his behalf, collecting the rent and
depositing it into a bank account there, drawing on the income to oversee any
repairs.
He would never go back to live there, and yet he could not bring himself to
sell it; that small plot of land, and the prosaic house that stood on it, still bore
family’s name, as his parents had hoped it would.
A doctor and his family lived in it now, the bottom floor serving as his
chamber. Perhaps ignorant of its history, perhaps having heard some version of it
from neighbors. No group would go out of its way to admire it, two hundred

years from now.
At the end of the tour he added his name and phone number, his e-mail, to a
list for the historical society. He accepted another postcard from Elise,
announcing a plant sale the following month.
After their brief exchange she had paid him no special interest that afternoon,
always speaking to the group. She had not approached him, as he hoped she
might, when he had lingered alone in the upstairs hallway, in the part of the
house that had felt most familiar to him.
He concluded it had been for the sake of the historical society that she’d
invited him, that it had meant nothing else. But a few days later, she called.
You’re all right?
Why do you ask?
You seemed shaken the other day. I didn’t want to intrude.
She wanted to invite him to something else. Not a play or a concert,
something he might have turned down. She said she remembered him
mentioning, at Richard’s funeral, that he liked walking along the bike path. She
belonged to a hiking club that got together once a month, to explore tucked-away
landmarks and trails.
We’re meeting at the Great Swamp next time, so I thought of you, she said,
before asking if he wanted to come along.

Chapter 3
The ginkgo leaves, yellow a few days ago, glow apricot now. They are the only
source of brightness this morning. Rain from the night before has caused a fresh
batch of leaves to fall onto the bluestone slabs that pave the sidewalk. The slabs
are uneven, forced up here and there by the roots of the trees. The treetops aren’t
visible through the windows of Bela’s room, two steps ground level. Only when
she emerges from the stoop, pushing open a wrought-iron gate, to step out into
the day.
The block is lined with row houses facing one another. Mostly inhabited, a
few boarded up. She’s been in the neighborhood a few months, because the
opportunity arose. She’d been living upstate, east of Albany. Driving down
every Saturday to one of the farmers’ markets in the city, unloading the truck,
setting up tents. Someone mentioned a room in a house.
It was an opportunity to live cheaply in Brooklyn for a while. There was a job
she could walk to, clearing out a dilapidated playground, converting it into
vegetable beds. She trains teenagers to work there after school, showing them
how to shovel out the crabgrass, how to plant sunflowers along the chain-link
fence. She teaches them the difference between a row crop and a cover crop. She
oversees senior citizens who volunteer.
She lives with ten other people in a house meant for one family. They are
people writing novels and screenplays, people designing jewelry, people whose
computer start-ups have failed. People who’ve recently graduated from college,
and older people with pasts they don’t care to discuss. They all keep to
themselves, operating on different schedules, but they take turns feeding one
another. There is one set of bills, one kitchen, one television, rotating chores. In
the mornings they sign up for time slots to use the bathrooms. Once a week, on
Sundays, those who can make it sit down to a collective meal.
People still talk about the shooting a few years ago, in the middle of the day,
outside the drugstore on the corner. They talk about a fourteen-year-old boy,
whose parents live across the street, who was killed. Most people get their
groceries from bodegas or run-down supermarkets. But now there’s a coffee
shop with an espresso machine, wedged among the other storefronts. There are
fathers in suits, walking children to school.

One of the houses at the end of the block is shrouded with netting. The
peeling facade is being scraped down to reveal a base layer of thickly ridged
gray. Climbing roses, a combination of orange and red, are in bloom in the small
plot behind the gate. The name of the contractor, according to the sign posted out
front, is Italian, but the workmen come from Bangladesh. They speak in the
language Bela’s parents had used with one another. A language she’d understood
better than she’d spoken in her childhood. A language she stopped hearing after
her mother left.
Her mother’s absence was like another language she’d had to learn, its full
complexity and nuance emerging only after years of study, and even then,
because it was foreign, a language never fully absorbed.
She can’t understand what these men are saying. Just some words here and
there. The accent is different. Still, she always slows down when she passes
them. She’s not nostalgic for her childhood, but this aspect of it, at once familiar
and foreign, gives her pause. Part of her wonders whether the dormant
comprehension in her brain will ever be jostled. If one day she might remember
how to say something.
Some days she sees the workmen sitting on the stoop of the house, taking a
break, joking with one another, smoking cigarettes. One of them is older, with a
wispy white beard nearly to his chest. She wonders how long they’ve lived in
America, whether and in what way they might be related. She wonders if they
like it here. Whether they’ll return to Bangladesh, or stay permanently. She
imagines them living in a group house, as she does. She sees them sitting down
to dinner together at the end of their long day, eating rice with their hands.
Praying at a mosque in Queens.
What do they make of her? Of her faded gray jeans, the unlaced boots on her
feet? Long hair she’ll tie back later, most of it tucked for now inside her hooded
sweatshirt. A face without makeup, a day-pack strapped across her chest.
Ancestors from what was once a single country, a common land.
Apart from their vocabulary, their general coloring, none of these men
resemble her father. But somehow they remind her of him. They cause her to
think of him in Rhode Island, to wonder how he’s doing.
Noel reminds her in another way of her father. He lives in the house, with his
girlfriend, Ursula, and their daughter, Violet, in two rooms on the top floor that
Bela’s never seen. Noel spends his days with Violet; Ursula, a cook in a
restaurant, a pretty woman with a pixie haircut, is the one who works.
Bela sees Noel taking Violet to kindergarten in the mornings and, a few hours
later, bringing her home. She sees him taking her to the park, teaching her to ride

a bike. She sees him running behind his daughter as she struggles to gain her
balance, grabbing on to a woolen scarf he’s tied around her chest. She sees him
fixing Violet’s dinners, grilling a single hamburger for her on the hibachi behind
the house.
Violet doesn’t begrudge Ursula all the time she’s away. Nor does Noel. They
kiss her good-bye in the mornings, they fall into her arms when she comes home,
sometimes with desserts from the restaurant. Because she’s the exception, and
not the rule, Violet forms a different relationship to Ursula. Less frequent
contact, but more intense. She adjusts her expectations, just as Bela once did.
Noel and Ursula sometimes knock on Bela’s door as they prepare their own
dinner, later at night, after Violet has gone to bed. There is always plenty, she is
always welcome, they say. Bread and cheese, a big salad Ursula tosses with her
fingers. Ursula is always a little wired when she gets home from her shifts at the
restaurant. She likes to roll a joint for the three of them, listen to music, tell
stories about her day.
Bela enjoys spending time with them, and tries to be generous in kind. She
looks after Violet, if Ursula and Noel want to go see a movie. She’s taken Ursula
out to the community garden, sending her back with herbs and sunflowers for
her restaurant. But she doesn’t want to come to depend on them. She says no
when Noel and Ursula decide, on Ursula’s birthday, to have a picnic on Fire
Island. She’s been in too many friendships with other couples like Noel and
Ursula. Couples who go out of their way to include her, to offer her the company
she lacks, only to remind her that she’s still on her own.
She’s used to making friends wherever she goes, then moving on, never
seeing them again. She can’t imagine being part of a couple, or of any other
family. She’s never had a romantic relationship that’s endured for any length of
time.
She feels no bitterness, seeing Noel and Violet and Ursula together. Their
closeness fascinates her, also comforts her. Even before her mother left, they’d
never really been a family. Her mother had never wanted to be there. Bela knows
this now.
Visiting her father last summer, she’d learned that he was seeing someone.
Not just anyone, but someone she knew. Mrs. Silva had been her history teacher.
But Bela was asked, the day they all went out to breakfast, to call her Elise.
She’d been astonished to learn of their involvement; the most significant
figure of her upbringing, paired with a minor one. She’d been secretly upset by
it, at first. But she knew it was unfair of her, given that she barely saw her father,
given that she continued to measure out her contact with him, whether to deny

herself or to deny him, she could not be sure.
She saw he’d been nervous, telling her. She saw that he was afraid she would
react badly, that maybe she would use this as further cause to keep away.
Intuiting his hesitance, not wishing to intimidate him, she had reassured him,
saying she was happy he’d found a companion, that of course she wished him
well.
The truth is, she had always liked Elise Silva. Bela had forgotten about her,
but she remembered looking forward to her class. Last summer, right away,
she’d perceived the affection between Elise and her father. The way they’d
studied the menu together at breakfast, her father looking over Elise’s shoulder
when he might have picked up his own. The way Elise encouraged him to forgo
the oatmeal and indulge in Belgian waffles. She observed a tranquility in their
faces. She saw how, shyly, in contrast to her mother and father, they were
already united.
She wonders if her father and Elise will eventually marry. But this would
mean his divorcing her mother first. Bela will never marry, she knows this about
herself. The unhappiness between her parents: this has been the most basic
awareness of her life.
When she was younger she’d been angry at her father, more angry than she’d
been at her mother. She’d blamed him for driving her mother away, and for not
figuring out a way to bring her back. Perhaps a remnant of that anger is the
reason she doesn’t bother to tell him now that she’s living just three hours away
in New York City. But this has been her policy: seeing him on her own terms,
never making it clear where she is.
At this point she’s lived nearly half her life apart from him. Eighteen years in
Rhode Island, fifteen on her own. She’ll be thirty-four on her next birthday. She
craves a different pace sometimes, an alternative to what her life has come to be.
But she doesn’t know what else she might do.
She wishes it were easier, the time she spends with her father. She wishes
Rhode Island, which she’d loved as a child, wouldn’t remind her of her mother,
who’d hated it. When Bela’s there she’s aware that she is unwanted, that her
mother is never coming back for her. In Rhode Island she feels whatever is solid
within her draining. And so, though she continues visiting, though she’s more or
less made peace with her father, though he is her only family, she can never bear
it for very long.
Years ago, Dr. Grant had helped her to put what she felt into words. She’d
told Bela that the feeling would ebb but never fully go away. It would form part
of her landscape, wherever she went. She said that her mother’s absence would

always be present in her thoughts. She told Bela that there would never be an
answer for why she’d gone.
Dr. Grant was right, the feeling no longer swallows her. Bela lives on its
periphery, she takes it in at a distance. The way her grandmother, sitting on a
terrace in Tollygunge, used to spend her days overlooking a lowland, a pair of
ponds.
She approaches the workmen. Once again she absorbs their conversation,
both foreign and familiar. They have no idea that their talk affects her. She
moves down the block, saluting them, wondering where she’ll go after Brooklyn.
They see her and wave.
The next time she visits her father she’ll speak to him in English. Were her
mother ever to stand before her, even if Bela could choose any language on earth
in which to speak, she would have nothing to say.
But no, that’s not true. She remains in constant communication with her.
Everything in Bela’s life has been a reaction. I am who I am, she would say, I
live as I do because of you.

Chapter 4
June brought clouds that concealed the sun, storms that turned the sea gray. The
atmosphere was raw enough for Subhash to keep wearing corduroy slippers
instead of flip-flops; to continue to preheat the electric blanket on the bed. The
rhythm of the rain was nocturnal, drumming heavily on the rooftop, tapering to a
drizzle in the mornings, pausing but never clearing. It gathered strength and
weakened, then intensified again.
At the side of the house he scraped scales of fungus off the shingles. His
basement smelled of mildew, his eyes stinging when he put in the laundry. The
soil of his vegetable garden was too wet to till, the roots of the seedlings he’d
planted washing away. The rhododendrons shed their purple petals too soon, the
peonies barely opening before the stalks bent over, the blossoms smashed across
the drenched ground. It was carnal, the smell of so much moisture. The smell of
the earth’s decay.
At night the rain would wake him. He heard it pelting the windows, washing
the pitch of the driveway clean. He wondered if it was a sign of something. Of
another juncture in his life. He remembered rain falling the first night he spent
with Holly, in her cottage. Heavy rain the evening Bela was born.
He began expecting it to leak through the bricks around the fireplace, to drip
through the ceiling, to seep in below the doors. He thought of the monsoon
coming every year in Tollygunge. The two ponds flooding, the embankment
between them turning invisible.
In July his garden started filling with weeds. The evenings were long, the
morning sky turned light at five. Bela called to say she was arriving. Sometimes
she came by train, other times she flew into Boston or Providence. Once she
showed up after driving herself hundreds of miles in a borrowed car.
He vacuumed the carpet in her bedroom, laundered the sheets, though no one
had slept on them since Bela’s last visit to Rhode Island. He brought up another
box fan from the basement now that it had turned warm and sunny, a bit humid,
even, unscrewing the plastic grilles and wiping the blades before setting it into
her window.
On her shelves were certain things they’d discovered together, in the canopy

of the woods, or along the shore. A small bird’s nest of woven twigs. The skull
of a garter snake. The vertebra of a porpoise, shaped like a propeller. He
remembered the excitement of finding these things with her, how she’d preferred
them to toys and dolls. He remembered how she’d put pinecones and stones into
the hood of her coat, when it was winter, when her pockets got too full, when
she was small.
She would stir up the staid atmosphere of his life. She would scatter her
things through the house, shed her clothes on the floor; her long hairs would
slow the shower drain. The foods she liked to eat, that she would go to the health
food store to buy, would stand out for a while on the kitchen counter: amaranth
flakes, chunks of carob, herbal teas. Butter made from almonds, milk derived
from rice. Then she would go away.
He set out for Boston to greet her. He remembered the drive to meet Gauri at
the airport, in 1972, believing he would spend his life with her. He remembered
coming back from the same airport with Bela, twelve years later, to discover that
Gauri was gone.
She arrived with a duffel bag, a backpack. Her plane had landed from
Minnesota. She stood out from the others in their suits and wind-breakers,
checking messages on their cell phones, tensely rolling their luggage behind
them. She was brown, sturdy, unadorned. She stood undistracted. She
approached him, her skin radiant, embracing him with her strong arms.
How are you, Bela?
I’m good. I’m well.
Are you hungry? Would you like to go out to eat somewhere, in Boston?
I want to go home. Let’s go to the beach tomorrow. How have you been?
He told her that his health was fine, that he was busy with his research, with
an article he was contributing to. He said that the tomatoes in his garden weren’t
thriving; there were black spots on the leaves.
Don’t bother with them. Too much rain this spring. How is Elise?
He told her Elise was fine. But such small talk felt imbalanced, given that
Bela had never brought a boyfriend home.
She’d never sought his permission, when she was a teenager and still lived
with him, to date. She had given him no trouble in that regard. The lack of it
troubled him now.
Even today part of him had hoped that she would surprise him, and appear
with a companion at the airport. Someone to care for her, to share the
unconventional life she led. I won’t be here forever, he’d once gone as far as to
say, conveying the news of Richard’s death by phone. But Bela had only

reproached him for being melodramatic.
He had learned to set aside the responsibility he’d once believed would be
his: to do his part to secure a daughter’s future by pairing it with another
person’s. If he’d raised her in Calcutta it would have been reasonable for him to
bring up the subject of her marriage. Here it was considered meddlesome, outof-bounds. He had raised her in a place free from such stigmas. When he’d
voiced his concerns one evening to Elise, she had advised him to say nothing,
reminding him that so many people these days waited until their thirties to
marry, even their forties.
Then again, how could he expect Bela to be interested in marriage, given the
example he and Gauri had given? They were a family of solitaries. They had
collided and dispersed. This was her legacy. If nothing else, she had inherited
that impulse from them.
She missed New England. She always said so as he drove her back to the house.
The expression on her face as she looked through the window of the car was one
of unfiltered recognition. She asked him to pull over when she saw one of the
trucks that appeared here and there in summer, that sold cups of frozen
lemonade.
At the house she opened up her bags, unwrapping fragrant plums and
nectarines from sheets of tissue, arranging them in bowls.
How long will you stay? he asked over dinner, over the lamb and rice he’d
made. Two weeks this time?
She had eaten two helpings. She put her fork down.
It depends.
On what? Is something the matter?
She looked into his eyes. He saw nervousness in hers, combined with
eagerness, and a certain resolve. He remembered how she would press her palms
together when she was a little girl, bobbing up and down in waist-deep water
when she was learning to swim. Pausing, deliberating, preparing for the effort,
for the leap of faith it required.
There’s something I need to tell you, Baba. Some news.
His heart skipped a beat, then started racing. He understood it now. The
reason for the smile that had been on her face when he saw her at the airport, the
contentment that he’d sensed all evening, humming within her.
But no, she had not met anyone. There was no special friend she wanted to
introduce him to, to invite to the house.

She took a deep breath, exhaled.
I’m pregnant, she said.
She was more than four months along. The father was not a part of her life, not
aware of her condition. He was simply someone Bela had known, with whom
she had been involved, perhaps for a year, perhaps merely for an evening. She
did not say.
She wanted to keep the child. She wanted to become a mother. She told him
that she’d thought about it carefully, that she was ready.
She said it was better that the father did not know. It was less complicated
that way.
Why?
Because he’s not the kind of father I want for my child. She added after a
moment, He’s nothing like you.
I see.
But he did not see. Who was this man who had turned his daughter into a
mother? Who was unaware, undeserving, of paternity?
He began gently. It’s not so easy, Bela, bringing up a child alone.
You did it. Lots of people do.
Ideally, a child has both parents in its life, he continued. A father as well as a
mother.
Does it bother you?
What?
That I’m not married?
You have no fixed income, Bela. No stable home.
I have this one.
And you are welcome here, always. But you stay with me two weeks of the
year. The rest of the time you are elsewhere.
Unless.
Unless?
She wanted to come home again. She wanted to stay with him, to give birth in
Rhode Island. She wanted to provide the same home for her child that he had
provided for her. She wanted not to have to work for a while.
Would that be all right with you?
The coincidence coursed through him, numbing, bewildering. A pregnant
woman, a fatherless child. Arriving in Rhode Island, needing him. It was a
reenactment of Bela’s origins. A version of what had brought Gauri to him,

years ago.
After dinner, after clearing the table and washing the dishes, Bela told him she
wanted to take a drive.
Where?
I want to watch the sunset from Point Judith.
You don’t need to rest?
I’m full of energy. Will you come with me?
But he said he was tired from the trip to Boston and back, that he preferred
not to go out again.
I’ll go, then.
On your own?
He could not help it, the thought of her driving the car, something she’d done
capably since she was sixteen, worried him now. He had an irrational impulse
not to let her out of his sight.
She shook her head as he handed her the keys. I’ll be careful. I’ll be back in a
little while.
And though they had not seen each other in a year, though she’d asked him to
accompany her, he felt, as she must have felt, the need to be alone, to think
privately about what she’d said.
He turned the lights on outside. But inside where he sat, after she left, he did
not bother. He watched the sky turn pale before deepening, the silhouettes of the
trees turning black, the contrast acute. They looked two-dimensional, lacking
texture. After a few more minutes their outlines were indistinguishable from the
night sky.
Gauri had walked out on her. But he knew that his own failing was worse. At
least Gauri’s actions had been honest, definitive. Not craven, not ongoing, not
stealthily leeching her trust, like his.
And yet this child, their child, was now determined to be a mother. Already
he knew she would be a different mother than Gauri. He sensed the pride, the
ease, with which she carried the child.
Her refusal to reveal who the father was, her insistence upon raising a child
without one; he could not set this concern aside. But it wasn’t the prospect of
Bela being a single mother that upset him. It was because he was the model she
was following; that he was an inspiration to her.
A conversation between them rose to his memory, from long ago.
Why aren’t there two of you? she’d asked, sitting across from him.

The question had startled him. At first he had not understood.
I have two eyes, she’d persisted. Why do I see only one of you?
An innocent question, an intelligent one. She’d been six or seven. He’d told
her that in fact each eye did take in a different image, at a slightly different
angle. He’d covered one of her eyes, then the other, so she could see for herself.
So that he’d appeared to double, shifting back and forth.
He’d told her the brain fused the separate images together. Matching up what
was the same, adding in what was different. Making the best of both.
So I see with my brain, not my eyes?
She would have to see with her mind now. Somehow, she would have to
process what he would say.
He was still sitting in the dark when, about an hour later, he heard the car’s
approach. The sharp croak of the emergency brake, the soft thud of the door.
He walked to the entry, opening the front door before she rang the bell. He
saw her on the other side of the screen that was covered with moths. For years he
had worried about how much the information would upset her, but there was
now a doubled worry, for the child she was carrying. She had returned to him,
seeking stability. Now was the worst time. And yet he was unable to wait
another moment.
The presence of another generation within her was forcing a new beginning,
also demanding an end. He had replaced Udayan and turned into her father. But
he could not become a grandfather in the same surreptitious way.
He was afraid Bela would hate him now, just as she hated Gauri. Because she
had not married, he had not given her away, symbolically or otherwise, to
another man. But this was what he felt he was about to do. He prepared himself
to give her back to Udayan. To push her away at the very moment she wanted to
come back to him. To risk letting her go.
What are you doing, Baba? she said, causing the insects to scatter, stepping
into the house. It’s getting late. Why are all the lights off? Why are you standing
here like this?
In the darkened hallway, she could not see the tears already forming in his
eyes.
All night they stayed up. Until it grew light again, he attempted to explain.
I’m not your father.
Who are you, then?
Your stepfather. Your uncle. Both those things.

She refused to believe him. She thought something had happened to him, that
he’d lost his mind, that perhaps he’d suffered a stroke. She kneeled in front of
him on the sofa, gripping him by the shoulders, inches from his face.
Stop saying that, she said. He sat, passive, in her clutches, and yet he felt as if
he were striking her. He was aware of the brute force of the truth, worse than any
physical blow. At the same time he had never felt more pathetic, more frail.
She shouted at him, asking why he’d never told her, pushing him angrily
against the sofa. Then she started to cry. She behaved just as he felt—as if he
had suddenly died in front of her.
She started shaking him, willing him to come back to life, as if he were just a
shell now, as if the person she’d known were gone.
As the night wore on and the information settled over her, she asked a few
questions about the circumstances of Udayan’s death. She asked a bit about the
movement, of which she was ignorant, and was now curious; this was all.
Was he guilty of anything?
Certain things. Your mother never told me the full story.
Well, what did she tell you?
He told her the truth, that Udayan had plotted violent acts, that he had
assembled explosives. But he added that after all these years it remained
uncertain, the extent of what he had done.
Did he know about me? Did he know I was going to be born?
No.
She sat across from him, listening. Somewhere in the house, he told her, there
were a few letters he’d saved, that Udayan had sent to him. Letters that referred
to Gauri as his wife.
He offered to read them to Bela, but she shook her head. Her face was
implacable. Now that he’d come back to life, he was a stranger to her.
He was unaware of the conversation reaching any conclusion, only of his
growing exhausted. He covered one of his eyes with his hand because of the
strain, the impossibility of keeping it open. All the sleepless nights, ever since
Richard’s death, were crushing him, and he excused himself, unable to stay
awake, going up to his bed.
When he woke in the morning she was already gone. Part of him knew she
would be, that the only way to keep her in the house after what he’d told her
would be to tie her to it. Still, he rushed into her bedroom and saw that though
the bed had been slept in, and remade, the bags she’d brought with her were not
there.

Downstairs on the kitchen counter, among the bowls filled with fruit, the
phone book was still open, turned to the page that listed the taxi company that
served the town.
•••
The facts of her paternity had changed. Two instead of one. Just as she was now
in pregnancy, fused with a being she could not see or know.
This unknown person maturing inside her was the only being with whom
Bela felt any connection as she traveled away from Rhode Island to calm herself,
to take in what she’d been told. It was the only part of her that felt faithful,
familiar. As she stared out the window of a Peter Pan bus at the scenery of her
childhood, she recognized nothing.
She’d been lied to all her life. But the lie refused to accommodate the truth.
Her father remained her father, even as he’d told her he wasn’t. As he’d told her
that Udayan was.
She could not blame her father for not telling her until now. Her own child
might blame her, someday, for a similar reason.
Here was an explanation for why her mother had gone. Why, when Bela
looked back, she remembered spending time with either one parent or the other,
but so seldom with both at the same time.
Here was the source of the compunction that had always been in her, of being
unable to bring pleasure to her mother. Of feeling unique among children, being
a child who was incapable of this.
Around Bela her mother had never pretended. She had transmitted an
unhappiness that was steady, an ambient signal that was fixed. It was transmitted
without words. And yet Bela was aware of it, as one is aware of a mountain.
Immovable, insurmountable.
Now there was a third parent, pointed out to her like a new star her father
would teach her to identify in the night sky. Something that had been there all
along, contributing a unique point of light. That was dead but newly alive to her.
That had both made her and made no difference.
She remembered vaguely the portrait in Tollygunge, on the wall above a stack
of receipts. A smiling face, a dirty frame of pale wood. A young man her
grandmother referred to as her father, until her father told her it was a portrait of
Udayan. She no longer remembered the face in detail. After being told it was not
her father, she’d stopped paying attention to it.
She understood now why her mother had not returned with them that summer

to Calcutta. Why she’d never gone back at any other time, and why she’d never
talked about her life there, when Bela had asked.
When her mother had left Rhode Island, she’d taken her unhappiness with
her, no longer sharing it, leaving Bela with a lack of access to that signal instead.
What had seemed impossible had taken place. The mountain was gone.
In its place was a heavy stone, like certain stones embedded deep in the sand
when she dug on the beach. Too large to unearth, its surface partly visible, but its
contours unknown.
She taught herself to ignore it, to walk away. And yet the hole remained her
hollow point of origin, the cold crosshairs of her existence.
She returned to it now. At last the sand gave way, and she was able to pry out
what was buried, to raise it from its enclosure. For a moment she felt its
dimensions, its heft in her hands. She felt the strain it sent through her body,
before hurling it once and for all into the sea.
For a few days Subhash heard nothing. He tried her cell phone, not surprised
when she didn’t answer. He had no idea where she’d gone. There was no one
whom he might have asked. He wondered if she had gone to California, to track
Gauri down, to hear her side of it. He began to convince himself that this must
have been what she’d done.
The next time he spoke to Elise he said that Bela’s plans for visiting had
changed. Many times he’d wanted to explain to Elise that he was not really
Bela’s father—that this was part of the reason Gauri had left. He’d felt that she
would have understood. But out of loyalty to Bela he’d said nothing. It was Bela
who deserved to know first.
He slept and slept, waking only briefly, never refreshed. When he was no
longer able to rest he remained in bed. He remembered the isolation of being at
sea, the silence when the captain would cut the engine. Though he had
unburdened himself, his head felt heavy, there was a discomfort that would not
go away. For a few days he called in sick to the lab.
He wondered if he should retire. If he should sell the house and move far
away. He wanted to call Gauri, to lash out at her, to tell her she had defeated him
utterly. That he had surrendered the truth, that from now on Bela would always
see him for what he was. But really he only wanted Bela somehow to forgive
him.
At night, in spite of the sultry days, the wind gusted, the cool air chilling him
through the open windows, the season threatening to slip away though it had
only just arrived.

At the end of the week, the phone rang. His stomach felt vacant, he had eaten
almost nothing. Only tea now and again, and the softening fruit Bela had
brought. The stubble was stiff against his face. He was in bed, thinking it might
be Elise, checking in on him.
He thought of letting it ring, but picked up at the last minute, wanting to hear
her voice, needing now to tell her what had happened, to seek her advice.
But it was Bela.
Why aren’t you at work? she asked him.
Quickly he sat up. It was as if she’d stepped into the room and found him that
way, disheveled, desperate.
I am— I decided to take the day off.
I saw pilot whales. They were so close to the shore I could have swum out to
touch them. Is that normal at this time of year?
He could not think straight enough to fully grasp what she was saying, never
mind respond. As relieved as he was to hear from her, he was afraid that he
would say the wrong thing, and that she would hang up.
Where are you? Where did you go?
She’d taken a taxi to Providence, a bus to Cape Cod. She knew a friend in
Truro to stay with, a friend from high school, married now, who’d spent
summers there, who’d moved there permanently some years ago. The beaches
were beautiful, she said. She hadn’t been up that way since she was a teenager.
He remembered taking her to the Cape when she was little. Late spring, the
first year that Gauri was gone. When they’d walked together along the bay,
she’d run ahead of him, excited to look at something.
He caught up to her and saw that it was a beached dolphin, its eye sockets
hollow, still seeming to grin. He’d taken out his camera to photograph it.
Lowering the camera from his face, he realized Bela was crying. Silently at first,
then audibly when he put his arms around her.
How long will you be there? he asked her now.
I’m getting a ride back to Hyannis. There’s a bus from there that gets in
tonight at eight.
Gets in where?
Providence.
For a moment he was silent, as she was. She was calling from her cell phone;
he couldn’t tell if she was still there, or if the line had gone dead.
Baba?
He had heard her. He’d heard her still calling him this. Can you pick me up,

he heard her say, or should I get a cab?
In the days that followed she thanked him for telling her about Udayan—it was
by name that she referred to him—saying that it helped to explain certain things.
She’d heard what was necessary; she didn’t need him to tell her anything more.
In a way, she said, it helped her to feel closer to the child she was having. It
was a detail, an element of life that, for different reasons, they would share.
In autumn her daughter was born. After she became a mother she told
Subhash it made her love him more, knowing what he’d done.

Part VII

Chapter 1
On her patio in California, Gauri has her toast and fruit and tea. She turns on her
laptop, raises her spectacles to her face. She reads the day’s headlines. But they
might be from any day. A click can take her from breaking news to articles
archived years ago. At every moment the past is there, appended to the present.
It’s a version of Bela’s definition, in childhood, of yesterday.
Once in a while Gauri notices a piece in American papers mentioning
Naxalite activity in various parts of India, or in Nepal. Short pieces about Maoist
insurgents blowing up trucks and trains. Setting fire to police camps. Fighting
corporations in India. Plotting to overthrow the government all over again.
She skims these articles only sometimes, not wanting to know too much.
Some of them refer back to Naxalbari, providing context for those who have
never heard of it. They offer links to time lines of the movement, which
summarize the events of those half-dozen years as a doomed critique of
postcolonial Bengal. And yet the failure remains an example, the embers
managing to ignite another generation.
Who were they? Was this new movement sweeping up young men like
Udayan and his friends? Would it be as rudderless, as harrowing? Would
Calcutta ever experience that terror again? Something tells her no.
Too much is within her grasp now. First at the computers she would log on to
at the library, replaced by the wireless connection she has at home. Glowing
screens, increasingly foldable, portable, companionable, anticipating any
possible question the human brain might generate. Containing more information
than anyone has need for.
So much of it, she observes, is designed to eliminate mystery, to minimize
surprise. There are maps to indicate where one is going, images of hotel rooms
one might stay in. The delayed status of a plane one need not rush to board.
Links to people, famous or anonymous—people one might reunite with, or fall
in love with, or hire for a job. A revolutionary concept, already taken for
granted. Citizens of the Internet dwell free from hierarchy. There is room for
everyone, given that there are no spatial constraints. Udayan might have
appreciated this.
Some of her students no longer go to the library. They don’t turn to a dog-

eared dictionary to look up a word. In a way they don’t have to attend her class.
Her laptop contains a lifetime of learning, along with what she will not live to
learn. Summaries of philosophical arguments in online encyclopedias,
explanations of modes of thinking that took her years to comprehend. Links to
chapters in books she’d once had to hunt down and photocopy, or request from
other libraries. Lengthy articles, reviews, assertions, refutations, it’s all there.
She remembers standing on a balcony in North Calcutta, talking to Udayan.
The library at Presidency where he would come to find her sometimes, sitting at
a table barricaded with books, a giant fan rustling the papers. He’d stand behind
her, saying nothing, waiting for her to turn around, to sense that he was there.
She remembers reading smuggled books in Calcutta, the particular stall to the
left of the Sanskrit College that carried what Udayan liked, that went out of its
way for him. Ordering foreign volumes from publishers. She remembers the
incremental path of her education, hours sifting through card catalogues, at
Presidency, then in Rhode Island, even early on in California. Writing down call
numbers with short pencils, searching up and down aisles that would turn dark
when the timers on the lights expired. She recalls, visually, certain passages in
the books she’d read. Which side of the book, where on the page. She
remembers the strap of the tote bag, digging into her shoulder as she walked
home.
She cannot avoid it; she is a member of the virtual world, an aspect of her
visible on the new sea that has come to dominate the earth’s surface. There is a
profile of her on the college website, a relatively recent photograph. A list of the
courses she teaches, a trail marking her accomplishments. Degrees, publications,
conferences, fellowships. Her e-mail, and her mailing address at the department,
should anyone want to send her something or get in touch.
A little more digging would yield footage with a small group of other
academics, historians and sociologists, participating in a recent panel discussion
at Berkeley. There she is walking into the room, taking her place at the table,
behind a placard bearing her name. Patiently listening, reviewing her index
cards, as each member of the panel clears his throat, leans forward, and slowly
comes to his point.
Too much information, and yet, in her case, not enough. In a world of
diminishing mystery, the unknown persists.
She’s found Subhash, still working at the same lab in Rhode Island. She
discovers PDF files of articles he coauthors, his name mentioned in connection
to an oceanography symposium he attends.
Only once, unable to help herself, she’d searched for Udayan. But as she

might have predicted, in spite of all the information and opinion, there was no
trace of his participation, no mention of the things he’d done. There had been
hundreds like him in Calcutta at that time, foot soldiers who’d been
anonymously dedicated, anonymously executed. His contribution had not been
noted, his punishment was standard for the time.
Like Udayan, Bela is nowhere. Her name in the search engine leads to
nothing. No university, no company, no social media site yields any information.
Gauri finds no image, no trace of her.
It doesn’t mean anything, necessarily. Only that Bela doesn’t exist in the
dimension where Gauri might learn something about her. Only that she refuses
Gauri that access. Gauri wonders if the refusal is intentional. If it is a conscious
choice on Bela’s part, to ensure that no contact is made.
Only her brother, Manash, has sought her out, reconnecting to her via e-mail.
Asking after her, asking if she would ever return to Calcutta to visit him. She’s
told him she’s separated from Subhash. But she’s invented a vague and
predictable destiny for Bela, saying she’d grown up, that she’d gotten married.
Every so often Gauri continues to search for her, continues to fail. She knows
that it’s up to her, that Bela won’t come to her otherwise. And she doesn’t dare
ask Subhash. The effort flops like a just-caught fish inside her. A brief burst of
possibility as the name is typed onto the screen, as she clicks to activate the
search. Hope thrashing in the process of turning cold.
•••
Dipankar Biswas was a name new to her in-box, but stored in memory. A
Bengali student of hers from many years ago. He was born the same year as
Bela, raised in a suburb of Houston. She’d felt generous toward him. They’d
exchanged a few words in Bengali. She’d regarded him, for the years he was her
student, as a gauge for how Bela might be.
He’d spent summers in Calcutta, staying at his grandparents’ house on Jamir
Lane. She thought he’d gone off to law school, but no, he’d changed his mind,
explaining in his e-mail that he was a visiting professor of political science at
one of the other colleges in the consortium, specializing in South Asia. Telling
her she’d been an influence.
He was writing to say hello, to say he was nearby. He was coming to her
college the following week, to attend a panel. He asked Gauri if he could take
her to lunch. He was putting together a book, hoping she might contribute to it.
Would she be open to discussing the possibility?

She considered saying no. Instead, curious to see him again, she suggested a
quiet restaurant she knew well, where she came from time to time on her own.
Dipankar was already at the table. No longer in the shorts and sandals he
would wear to her class, no string of shells around his neck. A striped cotton
shirt now, loafers, belted trousers covering his legs. He’d gone to Nebraska for
graduate school, Buffalo for his first job. He was glad to be in California again.
He took out his iPhone, showing her pictures of his twins, a boy and girl, in the
arms of his American wife.
She congratulated him. She wondered if Bela really was married by now. If
she’d also had a child.
They ordered their food. She had an hour, she told Dipankar, before she
needed to get back to campus. Tell me, what’s this book about?
You were at Presidency in the late sixties, right?
He’d gotten a contract from an academic press, to write a history of students
at the college when the Naxalite movement was at its height. The idea was to
compare it to the SDS in America. He was hoping to write it as an oral history.
He wanted to interview her.
Her eyelid twitched. It was a nervous tic she’d developed at some point. She
wondered if it was noticeable. She wondered if Dipankar could detect the nerve
firing.
I wasn’t involved, she said. Her mouth felt dry.
She lifted her glass to her lips. She drank some water. She felt tiny cubes of
ice, slipping down her throat before she could catch them.
It doesn’t matter, Dipankar said. I want to know what the atmosphere was
like. What students were thinking and doing. What you observed.
I’m sorry, I don’t want to be interviewed.
Not even if we protect your identity?
She was suddenly afraid that he knew something. That maybe her name was
on a list. That an old file had been opened, an investigation of a long-ago
occurrence under way. She put a hand over her eyelid, to steady it.
But no, she saw that he’d simply been counting on her. That she was just a
convenient source. There was a pause as their food was brought to the table.
Listen, I can tell you what I know. But I don’t want to be part of the book.
Fair enough, Professor.
He asked her permission, and turned on a small recording device. But it was
Gauri who posed the first question.
What got you interested in this?

He told her his own father’s brother had been involved. A college student
who’d gotten in over his head, who’d been imprisoned. Dipankar’s grandparents
had managed to get him out. They’d sent him to London.
What does he do now?
He’s an engineer. He’s the subject of the first chapter of the book. Under an
alias, of course.
She nodded, wondering what the fate had been of so many others. If they’d
been as fortunate. There was so much she might have said.
He talked to me about the rally the day the party was declared, Dipankar
continued.
She remembered standing in the heat on May Day, under the Monument.
Watching Kanu Sanyal at the rostrum, set free.
She and Udayan had been among thousands on the Maidan, listening to his
speech. She remembered the sea of bodies, the fluted white column, with its two
balconies at the top, rising into the sky. The rostrum, decorated with a life-sized
portrait of Mao.
She remembered Kanu Sanyal’s voice, emitted through the loudspeaker. A
young man with glasses, ordinary-looking, charismatic nevertheless. Comrades
and friends! she still heard him calling out, greeting them. She remembered the
single emotion she’d felt a part of. She remembered being thrilled by the things
he’d said.
Her impressions were flickering, from a lifetime ago. But they were vivid
inside Dipankar. All the names, the events of those years, were at his fingertips.
He could quote from the writings of Charu Majumdar. He knew about the rift,
toward the end, between Majumdar and Sanyal, Sanyal objecting to the
annihilation line.
Dipankar had studied the movement’s self-defeating tactics, its lack of
coordination, its unrealistic ideology. He’d understood, without ever having been
a part of things, far better than Gauri, why it had surged and failed.
My uncle was still there when Sanyal got arrested again, in 1970. He was sent
away to London soon after.
This, too, she remembered. His followers had begun rioting. It was after
Sanyal’s arrest, a year after the party’s declaration, that the worst violence in
Calcutta had begun.
I was married that year.
And your husband? Was he affected?
He was in America, studying, she said. He had nothing to do with it. She was

grateful that the second reality could paper over the first.
I’m planning to do some fieldwork in Calcutta, he said. Is there anyone you
still know, people I might want to talk to?
I’m afraid not. I’m sorry.
I’d like to get up to Naxalbari if I can. I’d like to see the village where Sanyal
lived, after he was released from prison.
She nodded. You should.
It fascinates me, the turn his life took.
What do you mean?
The way he was chastened but remained a hero. Still cycling through villages
in Naxalbari years later, mobilizing support. I would have liked to speak to him.
Why don’t you?
He’s dead. You hadn’t heard?
It had happened nearly a year ago. His health was in decline. His kidneys and
eyesight failing. He’d been suffering from depression. A stroke in 2008 had left
him partly paralyzed. He’d refused to be treated in a government hospital. He’d
refused to approach the state while he was still fighting it.
He died of kidney failure?
Dipankar shook his head. He killed himself.
She went home, to her desk, and switched on the computer. She typed Kanu
Sanyal’s name into the search box. The hits appeared, one after the next, in a
series of Indian sites she’d never looked at before.
She began clicking them open, reading details of his biography. One of the
founding members of the movement, along with Majumdar. A movement that
still threatened the Indian state.
Born in 1932. Employed early on as a clerk in a Siliguri court.
He’d worked as a CPI(M) organizer in Darjeeling, then broken with the party
after the Naxalbari uprising. He’d gone to China to meet with Mao. He’d spent
close to a decade in jail. He’d been the chairman of the Communist Party of
India, Marxist-Leninist. Following his release, he’d renounced violent
revolution.
He’d remained a communist, dedicating his life to the concerns of tea
plantation workers, rickshaw drivers. He’d never married. He’d concluded that
India was not a nation. He supported the independence of Kashmir, of Nagaland.
He owned a few books, clothes, cooking utensils. Framed pictures of Marx
and Lenin. He’d died a pauper. I was popular once, I have lost my popularity,

he’d said in one of his final interviews. I am unwell.
Many of the articles celebrated his life, his commitment to India’s poor, his
tragic passing. They referred to him as a hero, a legend. His critics condemned
him, saying that a terrorist had died.
It was the same set of information, repeated in various ways. She opened the
links anyway, unable to stop.
One of them led to a video. A television news segment from March 23, 2010.
A female newscaster’s voice was summarizing the details. There was some
black-and-white footage of Calcutta streets in the late sixties, banners and
graffiti, a few seconds of a protest march.
It cut to a shot of weeping villagers, their faces in their hands. People
gathered at the doorway of a house, the thatched mud hut that had served as
Sanyal’s home, his party office. His cook was being interviewed. She was
agitated, nervous in front of the camera. Speaking in the particular accent of the
village.
She’d come to check on him after his lunch, she explained to the reporter. She
looked through the window but didn’t see him resting in his bedroom. The door
wasn’t latched. She checked again. Then she saw him in another part of the
room.
Gauri saw him, too. On the screen of her computer, on her desk, in her
darkened study in California, she saw what the cook had seen.
A seventy-eight-year-old man, wearing an undershirt and cotton pajamas,
hanging from a nylon rope. The chair he’d used to secure the rope still stood in
front of him. It had not been knocked over. No spasm, no final reaction, had
kicked it away.
His head was cocked to the right, the back of his neck exposed above the
undershirt. The sides of his feet were touching the floor. As if he were still
supported by the earth’s gravity. As if all he had to do was straighten his
shoulders and move on.
For a few days she was unable to rid her mind of the image. She could not stop
thinking about the final passivity of a man who’d refused, until the moment his
life ended, to bow his head.
She could not rid herself of the emotion it churned up in her. She felt a
terrible weight, combined with a void.
The following week, stepping off a staircase outside a campus building, not
paying attention, she lost her footing and fell. She reached out, broke the fall

with her hand. The skin had split from its contact with the pathway. She looked
and saw blood beading across it, highlighting the etched lines of her palm.
Someone rushed over, asking if she was all right. She was able to stand, to
take a few steps. The greater pain was in her wrist. Her head was spinning, and
there was a throbbing on one side.
A university ambulance took her to the hospital. The wrist was badly
sprained, and because the pain in her head had not subsided, because it had
spread to the other side also, she would need to get some scans, some tests.
She was given forms to fill out and asked to name her next of kin. All her life,
on such forms, having no other choice, she’d put Subhash’s name. But there had
never been an emergency, never a need to contact him.
Weakly she formed the letters with her left hand. The address in Rhode
Island, and the phone number she still remembered. She used to dial it
sometimes when the receiver was still on its hook, when thinking of Bela. When
she was appalled by her transgression, overtaken by regret.
She had not been a patient in a hospital since Bela was born. Even now the
memory was intact. A rainy evening in summer. Twenty-four years old. A typed
bracelet around her wrist. Everyone congratulating Subhash when it was over,
flowers coming from his department at the university.
Again she was given a bracelet, entered into the hospital’s system. She gave
them the information they needed about her medical history, the insurance card.
There was no one to help her this time. She was dependent on the nurses, the
doctors, when they came.
A few X-rays were taken, a CT scan. Her right hand was bound up, just as
Udayan’s had been after his accident. They told her she was a bit dehydrated.
They put fluids into her veins.
She was kept there until evening. The scans showed no bleeding on the brain.
She went home with nothing more than a prescription for painkillers and a
referral to a physical therapist. She had to call a colleague, for she was told that
she would be unable to drive for a few weeks, unable to negotiate the simple
town, with its short grassy blocks, where she had lived for so many years.
The colleague, Edwin, drove her to the pharmacy to pick up her prescriptions.
He invited her to stay with him and his wife for a few days, offering her their
guest room, saying it would be no trouble. But Gauri told him there was no need.
She returned to her own home, sat at the desk in her office, pulled out a pair of
scissors, and managed to clip away the typed bracelet around her wrist.
She switched on the computer, then lit the burner on the stove to make tea.
She struggled to remove the tea bag from its wrapper, to raise the boiling kettle

over the cup. Everything done slowly, everything feeling clumsy in the hand she
was not accustomed to using.
The refrigerator was empty, the carton of milk nearly finished. Only then did
she remember that she’d intended to buy groceries as she was walking to her car,
when she’d fallen. She would have to call Edwin later, and ask him if he minded
picking up a few things.
It was eleven o’clock on a Friday morning. She had no classes to teach, no
plans for the evening. She poured herself a glass of water, spilling some of it on
the counter. Somehow she managed to open the bottle of pills. She left the cap
off, so that she would not have to do it again.
Not wanting to burden anyone, but unable to manage alone, she went away, a
weekend’s journey that had nothing to do with work. With one hand she packed
a small suitcase. She left her laptop at home. She called a car service and
checked into a hotel that some of her colleagues liked, in a desert town. A place
where she could walk in the mountains and soak her body in a spring, where she
would not have to cook for a few days.
On the roof of the hotel, at the pool surrounded by steep hills, she observed an
elderly, wealthy-looking Indian couple taking care of a little boy. They were
trying to teach the boy not to fear the water, showing him how little plastic
figures floated, the grandfather swimming a few strokes to demonstrate. The
husband and wife lightly quarreled, in Hindi, about how much sunscreen to put
on the child, whether or not his head should be protected by a hat.
The husband was nearly bald but still vigorous. What hair was left wreathed
the lower portion of his head. The wife seemed younger, her hair tinted with
henna, her toenails polished, pretty sandals on her feet. At breakfast Gauri
watched them feeding the boy yogurt and cereal from a spoon.
They asked Gauri, in English, where she was from, saying they came to
America every summer, that this was where both their sons lived and that they
liked it very much. One son lived in Sacramento, the other in Atlanta.
Since becoming grandparents, they took each of their grandchildren on a
separate vacation, to get to know them on their own terms, and to give their sons
and daughters-in-law some time to themselves.
At our age, what else is there to live for? the man asked Gauri, the child
tucked into his elbow. And yet they preferred India, not wanting to retire here.
Do you go back often? the wife asked.
It’s been a while.
Are you a grandmother?
Gauri shook her head, then added, wanting suddenly to align herself with this

couple, I’m still waiting.
How many children do you have?
One. A daughter.
Normally she told people she did not have any children. And people backed
away politely from this revelation, not wanting to press.
But today Gauri could not deny Bela her existence. And the woman merely
laughed, nodding, saying that children these days had minds of their own.
In time her wrist grew stronger. In her therapy sessions they wrapped it in
warmed wax. Again she was able to grasp her toothbrush and clean her teeth, to
sign a check, or turn the knob of a door. Then she was able to drive again, to
seize the gearshift and make a turn, to edit drafts and correct student papers with
her dominant hand.
The semester went on, she taught her last classes, turned in her grades. She
would be on leave the coming fall. One afternoon, after finishing up at her desk,
she walked across the parking lot of her apartment complex and opened her
mailbox. With some effort she twisted the key.
She returned to her apartment and pushed back the sliding glass door that was
off the living room, leading to her patio. She set the mail on the teak table and
sat down to go through it.
Among the bills, the catalogues that had come to her that day, there was a
personal letter. Subhash’s handwriting was on the envelope, the return address of
the house in Rhode Island, close to the bay. He had boiled down to the proof of
his penmanship, the dried saliva on the back of a stamp.
He’d sent it care of her department. The secretary had done the courtesy of
forwarding it to her home.
Inside was a short letter written in Bengali, on two sides of a sheet of office
stationery. She had not read Bengali penmanship in decades; her communication
with Manash was by e-mail, in English.

Gauri,
The Internet tells me this is your address, but please
confirm that this has reached you. As you see, I am in the
same place. I am in decent health. I hope you are, too. But
I will be seventy before too long, and we are entering a
phase of life when anything might happen. Whatever lies

ahead, I would like to begin to simplify things, given that,
legally, we remain tied. If you have no objection, I am
going to sell the house in Tollygunge, to which you still
have a claim. I also think it’s time to remove your name as
joint owner of the house in Rhode Island. I will leave it to
Bela, of course.
She paused, warming her hand against the surface of the table before
continuing. The hand had turned vulnerable while it was bound up. Now her
veins protruded, so that they resembled a piece of coral rooted to her wrist.
He told her he didn’t want to drag her back to Rhode Island in the event of an
emergency, not wanting to burden her in case he were to go first.

I don’t mean to rush you, but I’d like to resolve things
by the end of the year. I don’t know if there’s anything else
we have to say to one another. Though I cannot pardon
what you did to Bela, it was I who benefited, and continue
to benefit, from your actions, however wrong they were.
She remains a part of my life, but I know she is not a part
of yours. If it were easier I’d be open to our meeting in
person, and concluding things face-to-face. I bear you no
ill will. Then again it’s just a matter of some signatures,
and of course the mail will do.
She had to read the letter a second time to realize the point of it. That after all
this time, he was asking her for a divorce.

Chapter 2
Telling no one in their families, not even Manash, they’d married each other. It
was January 1970. A registrar came to a house in Chetla. It belonged to one of
Udayan’s comrades, a senior party member who was also a professor of
literature. A gentle man, mild of manner, a poet. They called him Tarun-da.
A few other comrades had been there. They asked her questions, and told her
how to conduct herself from now on. Udayan placed his hand over a copy of the
Red Book before they signed the papers. His sleeves rolled back as they always
were, his forearms exposed. A beard and moustache by then. When they’d
finished, and both of them were perched on the edge of a sofa, leaning together
over the low table where the papers had been spread, he turned to look at her,
grinning, taking a moment to convey to her, only to her, how happy he was.
She did not care what her aunts and uncles, her sisters, would think of what
she was doing. This would serve to put them behind her. The only one in her
family she cared about was Manash.
Some cutlets and fish fries were brought in and distributed, a few boxes of
sweets. This was the extent of the celebration. They spent their first week as
husband and wife together in the house in Chetla, in a room the professor had to
spare.
It was there, at night, after their many shared conversations, that they began
to communicate in a different way. There that she first felt his hand exploring
the surface of her body. There, as he slept next to her, that she felt the cool of his
bare shoulder nestled in her armpit. The warmth of his knees against the backs of
her legs.
The entrance to the house was at the side, off a long alley, hidden from the
street. The staircase turned sharply, once and then again, leading to rooms
organized tightly around the balcony. The floors were cracked here and there,
brownish red.
The rooms were filled with Tarun-da’s books, piled in stacks as tall as
children. Housed in cabinets and on shelves. The sitting room, at the front of the
building, had a narrow balcony overlooking the street. They were told not to
stand there, not to draw attention to themselves.
A few days later she wrote to Manash, saying she had not, after all, gone on a

trip to Santiniketan with her friends. She told him that she had married Udayan,
and that she would not be returning home.
Then Udayan went to Tollygunge, to tell his parents what they had done. He
told his parents that they were prepared to live elsewhere. They were stunned.
But his brother was in America, and they wanted their remaining son home.
Secretly Gauri had hoped that his parents would not take them in. In that
cluttered but cheerful house in Chetla, hiding with Udayan, she’d felt at once
brazen and protected. Free.
Udayan talked about their living on their own one day. He didn’t believe in a
joint family. And yet, for the time being, because they could not go on staying at
the professor’s home, because the home was a safe house and the room they’d
been given was needed to harbor someone, because he did not make enough
money for them to rent a flat elsewhere, he took her to Tollygunge.
It was only a few miles away. Still, traveling toward it, after Hazra Road, Gauri
perceived a difference. The city she knew at her back. The light brighter in her
eyes, the trees more plentiful, casting a dappled shade.
His parents stood in the courtyard, waiting to receive her. The house was
spacious but utilitarian, plain. She understood immediately the circumstances
from which Udayan had come, the conventions he’d rejected.
The end of her sari was draped over her head in a gesture of propriety. His
mother’s head was draped also. This woman was now her mother-in-law. She
was wearing a sari of crisp cream-colored cotton, checked with golden threads.
Her father-in-law was tall and lean, like Udayan, with a moustache, a placid
expression, swept-back graying hair.
Her mother-in-law asked Udayan if he objected to a few abbreviated rituals.
He objected, but she ignored him, blowing her conch shell, then putting tuberose
garlands around their necks. A woven tray was raised toward Gauri’s head, her
chest, her belly. A tray heaped with auspicious items, with fruit.
She was presented with a box, opened to show the necklace inside. On the
tray was a pot of vermillion powder. Her mother-in-law instructed Udayan to
apply it to the parting of her hair. Taking Gauri’s left hand, she pressed her
fingers together and slid an iron bangle over her wrist.
A few strangers, now her neighbors, had gathered to watch, looking over the
courtyard wall.
You are our daughter now, her in-laws said, accepting her though they had
not wanted her, placing their hands in a gesture of blessing over her head. What
is ours is yours. Gauri bowed down, to take the dust from their feet.

The courtyard had been decorated with patterns in her honor, painted by
hand. At the threshold of the house a pan of milk was simmering on a coal stove,
coming to a boil as she approached. There were two stunted banana trees, one on
either side of the door. Inside there was another pan of milk, tinted with red. She
was told to dip her feet into the red liquid, then walk up the staircase. The
staircase was still under construction, there was not a banister to hold.
The steps had been covered loosely with a white sari, like a thin slippery
carpet laid over the treads. Every few steps there was an overturned clay cup she
had to crush, bearing down with all her strength. This was the first thing asked of
her, to mark her passage into Udayan’s home.
Because the lane was so narrow there was rarely the sound of a car or even a
cycle rickshaw going past. Udayan told her it was easier, when returning to the
enclave, to get out at the corner by the mosque and walk the rest of the way.
Though many of the houses were walled off, she could hear the lives of others
carrying on. Meals being prepared and served, water being poured for baths.
Children being scolded and crying, reciting their lessons. Plates being scoured
and rinsed. The claws of crows striking the rooftop, flapping their wings,
scavenging for peels.
Every morning she was up at five, climbing stairs to a new portion of the
house, and accepting the cup of tea her mother-in-law poured, a biscuit stored in
the cream cracker tin. The line for the gas hadn’t been hooked up yet, so the day
began with the elaborate process of lighting the clay stove with coals, dung
patties, kerosene, a match.
Thick smoke stung her eyes, blurring her vision as she fanned the flame. Her
mother-in-law had told her, the first morning, to put away the book she’d
brought with her, and to concentrate on the task at hand.
The workers arrived soon afterward. Barefoot, with soiled rags twisted
around their heads. They hollered and hammered throughout the day, so that
studying in the house was impossible. Dust coated everything, bricks and mortar
brought in by the barrowful, additional rooms completed one by one.
After her father-in-law brought back a fish from the market, it was her job to
cut the pieces, coat them with salt and turmeric, and fry them in oil. She sat in
front of the stove on the flats of her feet. She reduced the sauce they would put
the fish into for evening, seasoning it according to her mother-in-law’s
instructions. She helped cut up cabbage, shell peas. Rid spinach of sand.
If the servant was late or had a day off she had to grind the turmeric root and
chilies on a stone slab, to pound mustard or poppy seeds if her mother-in-law

wanted to cook with them that day. When she ground the chilies her palms felt
as if the skin had been scraped off. Tipping the rice pot onto a plate, she let the
water drain, making sure the cooked grains didn’t slip out. The weight of the
inverted pan strained her wrists, steam scalding her face if she forgot to turn it
away.
Twice a week she accomplished all this before bathing and packing her books
and taking the tram back to North Calcutta, to visit the library, to attend lectures.
She hadn’t complained to Udayan. But he had known, telling her to be patient.
He told her that one day, when his brother, Subhash, returned from America
and got married, there would be another daughter-in-law to do her share. And
from time to time Gauri had wondered who that woman would be.
In the evenings she waited for Udayan to return from his tutoring job, watching
from the terrace of her in-laws’ home. And when he pushed through the
swinging wooden doors he always paused to look up at her, as he used to look
up from the intersection below her grandparents’ flat, she hoping he would stop
by, he hoping to find her there. But now it was different: his arrival was
expected, and the fact that she stood waiting for him was not a surprise, because
they were married, and this was the house where they both lived.
He would wash up and have something to eat, and then she would put on a
fresh sari and they would go out for a walk. Behaving at first like any other
recently married couple. She enjoyed being out of the house with him, but she
was unsettled by the quiet of Tollygunge, the raw simplicity she perceived.
The neighborhood was set in its ways. More uniformly Bengali than in North
Calcutta, where Punjabis and Marwaris occupied many of the flats in her
grandparents’ building, where the radio shop across from Chacha’s Hotel played
Hindi film songs that floated over the traffic, where the energy of students and
professors was thick in the air.
Here there was little to distract her, the way the view from her grandparents’
balcony could occupy her day and night. From her in-laws’ house there was little
to see. Only other homes, laundry on rooftops, palms and coconut trees. Lanes
curving this way and that way. The hyacinth that teemed, greener than grass, in
the lowland and the ponds.
He began to ask her to do certain things. And so, in order to help him, in order to
feel a part of it, she agreed. At first the tasks were simple. He drew her maps,
telling her to walk here or there in the course of an errand, to observe whether a
scooter or cycle was parked outside.

He gave her notes to deliver, at first to a letter box somewhere in Tollygunge,
then in person. He told her to place the sheet of paper under the rupees she used
to pay the man at the stationer’s, if she needed to buy some ink. The note usually
contained a piece of information. A location or a time of day. Some
communication that made no sense to her but was essential to someone else.
One series of notes went to a woman who worked at a tailor’s shop. Gauri
was to ask specifically for a woman named Chandra, to take measurements for a
blouse. The first time, Chandra greeted her as if they were old friends, asking
how she’d been. A pudgy woman with a bit of kink to her hair.
She took Gauri behind a curtain, calling out different numbers without ever
placing the tape against Gauri’s body, yet writing them in her pad. It was
Chandra who undraped herself, taking advantage of the drawn curtain, taking the
note from Gauri’s hand, reading and refolding it. She tucked it inside her own
blouse, underneath her brassiere, before opening the curtain again.
These missions were small joints in a larger structure. No detail overlooked.
She’d been linked into a chain she could not see. It was like performing in a
brief play, with fellow actors who never identified themselves, simple lines and
actions that were scripted, controlled. She wondered exactly how she was
contributing, who might be watching her. She asked Udayan but he would not
tell her, saying this was how she was being most useful. Saying it was better for
her not to know.
The following February, just after their first marriage anniversary, he arranged
for her to have a tutoring job. Effigies of Saraswati stood on the street corners,
students offered textbooks at her feet. The kokils were beginning to sing, their
calls plaintive, yearning. A brother and sister in Jadavpur needed help passing
their Sanskrit exams.
Every day she went to their home, taking a cycle rickshaw to get there,
introducing herself by a fictitious name. Before she went the first time, Udayan
described the house to her, as if he’d already been there. He told her about the
room where she’d sit, the arrangement of the furniture, the color of the walls, the
study table that was beneath the window.
He told her which of the chairs at the table she was to take. To pull the curtain
slightly to one side, saying she wanted to let in a bit of light, if it happened to be
drawn.
At a certain point during the hour, he told her, a policeman would walk past
the house, crossing the window from left to right. She was to jot down the time
he passed by, and observe whether or not he was in uniform.

Why?
This time he told her. The policeman’s route passed a safe house, he said.
They needed to know his schedule, his days off. There were comrades needing
shelter. They needed him out of the way.
Sitting with her students, helping them with their grammar, her wristwatch
resting on the table, her diary open, she saw him. A man in his thirties, cleanshaven, in his khaki uniform, heading off for duty. From a window on the
second floor she saw the black of his moustache, the top of his head. She
described him to Udayan.
With the brother and sister she read lines from the Upanishads, the Rig Veda.
The ancient teachings, the sacred texts she’d first studied with her grandfather.
Atma devanam, bhuvanasya garbho. Spirit of the gods, seed of all the worlds. A
spider reaches the liberty of space by means of its own thread.
One day, a Thursday, the policeman was not in uniform. Instead of walking
from left to right he came from the opposite direction, in civilian clothing. He
was accompanying a little boy home from school. It was twenty past the hour.
He was walking in a more casual way.
When she reported this to Udayan, he said, Keep observing him. Next week,
when he’s off duty again, tell me which day. Remember to jot down the time.
Again the following Thursday, at twenty past, she saw the policeman in his
alternate guise, holding the hand of the young boy, coming from the opposite
direction. It was the boy who would be in uniform those days. White shorts and
a shirt, a water canteen over one shoulder, a satchel in his hand. Damp hair
neatly combed. She saw the boy skipping, two or three lively paces to each of
his father’s slower strides.
She heard the boy’s voice, telling his father about what he’d learned in school
that day, and heard his father, laughing at the things he said. She saw their joined
hands, their arms slightly swinging.
Four weeks passed. It was always a Thursday, she told Udayan. That was the
day he walked his son home from school.
You are positive, Thursday? Never another day?
No, never.
He seemed satisfied. But then he asked, You’re certain it’s his son?
Yes.
How old is he?
I don’t know. Six or seven.
He turned his face from her. He asked her nothing more.

The week before going to America to be with Subhash, she went back to
Jadavpur, to the neighborhood of the brother and sister she’d tutored. She hired a
rickshaw. She wore a printed sari now that she was married again, looking as she
had when she’d been Udayan’s wife.
She was five months pregnant, carrying a child who would not know him.
She had leather slippers on her feet, bangles on her wrists, a colorful purse in her
lap. She wore sunglasses, not wanting to be noticed. Soon the heat would be
unbearable, but she would be far away by then.
She approached the street of the brother and sister, then told the rickshaw to
stop. Continuing on foot, she looked at the letter boxes mounted to each home.
The last one bore the name she’d been looking for. The name the investigator
had mentioned the day she and Subhash had been questioned. It was a singlestory house, a simple grille enclosing the verandah. The name of a dead man was
painted carefully on the wood of the letter box, in white block letters. Nirmal
Dey. The policeman they’d needed out of the way.
The occupants of the house were visible, standing on the verandah, facing the
street, staring out though there was nothing to see. It was as if they’d been
waiting for her. There was the little boy Gauri used to see skipping down the
road while holding his father’s hand. All this time she’d seen the boy only from
the back, for he’d always been walking away from her. But she knew, just from
looking at his body, that it was him.
For the first time she saw his face. She saw the loss that would never be
replaced, a loss that the child forming inside her shared.
He was home from school, no longer in his bright white uniform, but in a pair
of faded shorts and a shirt instead. He stood still, his fingers hooked over the
grille. Briefly he looked at her, then averted his gaze.
She imagined the afternoon at school he’d waited to be picked up by his
father. Being told, finally, by someone, that his father would not be coming for
him.
Next to him was a woman, the boy’s mother. A woman perhaps only a few
years older than Gauri. It was the mother who wore white now, as Gauri had
worn until a few weeks ago. The colorless fabric was wrapped around the
woman’s waist, draped over her shoulder, over the top of her head. Her life
turned upside down, her complexion looking like it had been scrubbed clean.
Seeing Gauri, the mother did not look away. Who are you looking for? she
asked.
Gauri said the only reasonable thing she could think of, the surname of the
brother and sister she’d tutored.

They live back that way, the woman told her, pointing in the opposite
direction. You’ve come too far.
She walked away, aware that the woman and boy had already forgotten her.
She was like a moth that had strayed into a room, only to flutter out of it again.
Unlike Gauri, they would never think back to this moment. Though she’d had a
hand in something they would mourn all their lives, she had already slipped from
their minds.

Chapter 3
Meghna was four. Old enough to be apart from Bela for a time. She was
attending a summer program run by the school where she would begin
kindergarten in the fall. It was out past the train station, on a campsite by a pond.
A few times a week she spent her mornings in the company of other children,
learning to play with them in a grove of trees, and sit with them at a picnic table,
to share food. They baked brown rolls that she brought home in small paper
packets. When it rained she sat in a teepee, resting on sheepskin. Molding
beeswax, watching felted dolls enact stories that were read aloud.
Because Bela had to leave the house so early, it was Subhash who dropped
Meghna off those mornings. Bela picked her up when her shift was done. It was
good to be working again. To wake up before the sun rose, to sweat once it was
in the sky, to feel tightness in her arms and legs at the end of the day.
She’d come to this farm as a child on field trips with her class, to watch the
shearing of sheep. She’d come with her father to pick out pumpkins in October,
bedding plants in spring. Now she sowed seeds in the rocky, acidic soil, scraping
it with a hoe to remove weeds.
She’d dug long trenches for potatoes. She’d created narrow footpaths between
the rows for microorganisms to thrive. She’d started the early crops in a
hoophouse, and in cut-up pieces of sod, before moving seedlings to open ground.
One afternoon, taking advantage of the sunshine after a cloudy start to the
day, needing to cool off her body, she drove with Meghna to the cove in
Jamestown where her father used to bring her, where she had first learned to
swim. On the way back from the beach she noticed corn for sale, and stopped the
car.
On the table there was a coffee can with a slit in the plastic lid, asking a dollar
for three ears. There was a price list for a few other items. Bundles of radishes
and basil. A picnic cooler containing oak-leaf. Butterheads, free from tipburn.
She picked up the can, heard a few coins rattling inside. She bought some
corn, some radishes, pushing the bills through the slot. The following week she
went back, making the short drive over the bridge from her father’s house. Still
there was no one. She began to wonder who had grown these things, who was so
trusting. Who left them, untended, for a seagull to carry away, for strangers to

buy or steal.
Then, on a Saturday, someone was there. He had more vegetables in the back
of a pickup truck, onions and carrots in baskets, tatsoi with spoon-shaped leaves.
Two small black lambs sat in a cage, on a bed of straw, wearing matching red
collars. When Meghna approached he showed her how to feed them from her
hand, and let her pet their wool.
You grow this stuff on the island? Bela asked.
No. I come here to fish. A friend lets me keep a stand on his property, given
how many tourists pass through this time of year.
She picked up a lemon cucumber. She smelled its skin.
We tried growing these this season.
Where’s that?
Keenans’, off 138.
I know the Keenans. Are you new to Rhode Island?
She shook her head. They’d both been born here. They’d attended different
high schools, not so far apart.
He had green eyes, a few creases in the skin, salt-and-pepper hair that stirred
in the breeze. He was courteous, but he was not afraid to look at her.
Next time I’ll bring the rabbits. I’m Drew.
He kneeled down and put out his hand, not to Bela but to Meghna. What’s
your name?
But Meghna wouldn’t answer, and Bela had to say it for her.
Pretty. What’s it mean?
It was one of the rivers that flowed into the Bay of Bengal, Bela told him. A
name Subhash had chosen, had given.
Anyone call you Meg for short?
No.
Can I? Next time your mommy stops by?
He began bringing other animals, chicks and puppies and kittens, so that
Meghna started talking about Drew during the week, asking Bela when they
would visit him again. He gave Bela things she wasn’t paying for, tucking them
into her bag and refusing her money. Purple bush beans that turned green when
she cooked them. Pink heads of garlic, peas in their pods.
The farm belonged to his family. He’d lived on it all his life. It was just a few
acres now, something one could take in at a glance. There used to be more of it,
land lived off for several generations. But his parents had had to sell a large
portion to developers. He had the support of some community shareholders to

run it now.
One day he offered to show them the farm. It was on the other side of the bay,
close to the Massachusetts border. It was where the rest of the animals lived—a
peacock, guinea hens, sheep grazing by a salt marsh that bordered the property.
Should we follow you?
Save your gas. Come with me.
You’ll have to drive us back here, then.
Need to head this way later anyway.
And so Bela got into the roomy sun-warmed cab of Drew’s pickup truck,
placing Meghna between them, shutting the door.
She began seeing him on weekends. She’d never allowed herself to be courted.
He was attentive, never aggressive. He started showing up when she was
working a row, asking when her break was, suggesting they go for a swim.
She started to keep him company on certain Saturdays, standing beside him
under a white tent at an outdoor market in Bristol, slicing tomatoes for customers
to sample. She drove with him to make deliveries to restaurants, dropping off
boxes of produce for his subscribers. She walked on the beach with him, helping
to collect the seaweed he used for mulch. When he sat still he kept busy,
working with wood. He started making things for Meghna. Furniture for her
dollhouse, a marble run.
She’d been to so many places; he’d been here all his life. He employed a few
people who left at the end of the day. He lived on his own. His parents were both
dead. He’d married a girl he’d gone to high school with. They’d never had
children, and divorced long ago.
After a month Bela introduced him to her father and to Elise. He came by the
house on the morning of her birthday so they could all meet. He removed his
boots in the truck, walking barefoot across the lawn, into the house. He brought
a watermelon they shared, and admired the zucchini her father grew in the
backyard, promising to come back another time to taste the way her father
prepared the blossoms, battered and fried. Her father had liked him, well enough
to encourage Bela to spend time with him, looking after Meghna when she did.
Bela told Drew that her mother was dead. It was what she always said when
people asked. In her imagination she returned Gauri to India, saying her mother
had gone back for a visit and contracted an illness. Over the years Bela had come
to believe this herself. She imagined the body being burned under a pile of
sticks, ashes floating away.

Drew began to want her to spend the nights with him. To wake up together on
a Sunday morning, and to eat breakfast in the barn he’d restored. Where, on a
soft bed, she made love with him some afternoons. From the top rung of a
ladder, that led to the cupola, one could see a small wedge of the sea.
She said it was too soon. At first she said that it was for Meghna—not
wanting to take that step casually, wanting to be sure.
Drew said there was a bedroom for Meghna; that he wanted her to be there,
too. He could build her a loft bed, an area to play underneath, a tree house
outside. Toward the end of summer he told Bela he was in love with her. He said
he didn’t need more time, that he was old enough to know what he felt. He
wanted to help her raise Meghna. To be a father to her, if this was something
Bela would allow.
That was the day she told Drew the truth about her mother. That she’d left
and never returned.
She said it was the reason she’d avoided ever being with one person, or
staying in one place. The reason she’d wanted to have Meghna on her own. The
reason, though she liked Drew, though she was almost forty, she didn’t know if
she could give him the things he was seeking.
She told him how she used to sit inside the closet where her mother had kept
her things. Behind the coats she hadn’t taken with her, the belts and purses on
hooks that her father hadn’t yet given away. She would stuff a pillow into her
mouth, in case her father came home early, and heard her crying. She
remembered crying so hard that the skin beneath her eyes would swell, marking
her for a time with two inflated smiles that were paler than the rest of her.
Finally she told him about Udayan. That though she’d been created by two
people who’d loved one another, she’d been raised by two who never did.
Drew held her as he listened. I’m not going anywhere, he said.

Chapter 4
It was an hour’s drive to Providence, a little less after that. She entered the zip
code in the car’s GPS, but soon found that directions weren’t necessary. The
names of the exits leading to the different suburbs and towns came back to her:
Foxborough, Attleboro, Pawtucket. Wooden houses, shingles and siding, a
glimpse of the State House dome. She remembered, after passing through
Providence, then Cranston, that the exit to the town was to the left—that
otherwise the interstate led to New York.
She’d flown to Boston, renting a car at the airport to drive the rest of the way.
It was how Subhash had first brought her, along the same section of highway.
How she used to travel twice a week to go to graduate school. It was autumn in
New England, the air bracing, leaves just starting to turn.
Soon after the exit, another left at the set of traffic lights would have taken
her to him. There was the wooden tower among the tall pines that looked out
over the bay. A picture in Gauri’s drawer in California showed Bela standing at
the top of this tower, squinting in the bright cold, wearing a yellow quilted jacket
with a fur-trimmed hood. Gauri had lifted it hastily out of an album, before
leaving.
She had tried, at first, to write to Subhash. To grant what he’d requested, and
to send a letter in reply. For a few days she’d worked on the letter, dissatisfied
with her attempts.
She knew a divorce made no difference; their marriage had run its course
long ago. And yet his request, reasonable, rational, had upended her. She felt the
need to see him.
Even apart, even now, she felt yoked to him, in unspoken collusion with him.
He had taken her away from Tollygunge. He remained the only link to Udayan.
His enduring love for Bela, the stability of his heart, had compensated for the
deviance of her own.
The timing of the letter had felt like a sign. For she supposed he could have
wanted a divorce ten years ago, or two years from now. She was already
committed to traveling over the East Coast, to London, to attend a conference.
She arranged for a connecting flight, a one-night stay in Rhode Island. She
would give him what he was seeking. She only hoped to stand before him, and

sever their connection face-to-face. In his letter he’d said he was open to this.
But it had not been an invitation. And without asking him, without warning
him, unable even now to conduct herself decently, she’d come.
The leaves had not yet fallen, she could not see the bay. She turned down the
long undulating two-lane road that had been cut into the woods, leading to the
main campus of the university. Homes set back on their properties, giant azaleas,
flat stone walls.
She pulled into a gravel drive. Grounds covered with ivy. A painted wooden
sign hung from hooks, swinging in the breeze, with the name of the inn, the year
it was built. This was the bed-and-breakfast where she’d booked a room.
She carried her suitcase to the front door and tapped the knocker. When no
one came she tried the knob and found the door unlocked. After adjusting to the
dark interior she saw a living room past the entrance, a desk with a little bell on
it, and a sign asking visitors to tap it.
A woman about her age came to greet her. Silver hair, side-parted, worn
loose. Ruddy skin. She was dressed in jeans and a fleece jacket, a paint-stained
canvas apron. A pair of clogs on her feet.
You’re Mrs. Mitra?
Yes.
I was in my studio, the woman said, wiping her hand on a rag before
extending it. Her name was Nan.
The living room was full of things, enamel pitchers resting in matching
platters, glass-fronted cabinets filled with porcelain and books. On a separate
table were works of pottery, platters and mugs, deep bowls glazed in muddy
shades.
Those are all for sale, Nan said. Studio’s out back. More stuff in there, if
you’re interested. Happy to ship it.
Gauri handed over her credit card, her university ID. She watched as Nan
entered information into a ledger.
Might get some rain tonight. Then again, might not. First time out here?
I used to live in Rhode Island.
What part?
A few miles down this road.
Oh, you know it, then.
Nan didn’t ask why she’d returned. She led her up the staircase, to a hallway
lined with doors. Gauri was given a key to her room, another key to the front
entrance were she to come in after eleven at night.

The bed was high, the headboard thin, the double mattress covered with a
white cotton spread. A small television on the dressing table, lace curtains in the
window, filtering a quiet light. She looked at the bookcase by the bed. She
pulled out a volume of Montaigne and put it on the nightstand.
Those were my father’s books. He taught at the university. Lived in this
house until he died at ninety-five. Refused to leave it. Had to get him a childsized wheelchair in the end, because the doorways are so tight.
The professor’s name, when Gauri asked, sounded familiar, but only vaguely.
Perhaps she’d once taken a class with him, she couldn’t recall.
She freshened up, putting on the sweater she’d packed. The room was drafty,
the fireplace just for show. Downstairs there was a real fire burning, and a young
couple standing with their backs to her. On the coffee table was a tray with a
teapot and cups, cookies and grapes. The couple were looking at Nan’s pottery
display, wondering which of the large platters they wanted to buy. Gauri listened
to their discussion, how carefully they considered the choice.
The couple turned around, introduced themselves. They came from Montreal.
She leaned over to shake their hands, their names sliding instantly off Gauri’s
brain. They were not her students, it did not matter. Neither of them was the
person she’d come to see.
They settled together on a champagne-colored sofa. The husband refilled their
teacups.
Will you join us?
No, thank you. Enjoy your evening.
You as well.
She went out to the car. The day was ending, already the sky was turning
pale. She pulled out her cell phone, scrolled down to Subhash’s number.
Something had catapulted her back here, a motivation as unstoppable, also as
egregious, as the one that had caused her to leave.
She was trespassing, breaking the rule they’d long come to obey. He might be
busy this weekend. He might have gone somewhere. Though his letter had been
friendly, of course he might not want to see her at all.
Now the absurdity, the great indiscretion, of what she’d done permeated her.
She’d always felt like an imposition in his life, an intrusion.
She told herself she did not have to do it right away, that there was time. Her
flight to London was not until the following evening. She would go to him
tomorrow, in the light of day, then go straight back to the airport. Tonight she
would simply confirm that he was there.
She drove to the campus, past buildings where she had taken classes, paths

where she had walked with Bela in her stroller. She drove past the mix of stone
buildings and sixties architecture, the buildings that had gone up since. Past the
apartment complex where they had first lived, where they’d brought Bela home
from the hospital. She turned around by the little outbuilding where she had
learned to do the laundry. Then she drove into the town.
The supermarket where Subhash had liked to buy groceries was now a large
post office. There were more places to buy more things, more often: a pharmacy
that stayed open twenty-four hours, a greater variety of places to eat.
She chose a restaurant she remembered, an ice cream shop where Bela liked
to get a cone at the window. A flavor called peppermint stick, studded with red
and green candies, had been her favorite. There was a counter with stools inside,
a few booths at the back. It was a Saturday, and she sat among groups of high
school students who were out without their parents, drinking milk shakes, joking
with one another. A few older people were sitting alone, eating plates of fried
chicken and mashed potatoes.
Again the discomfort she’d always felt in Rhode Island, whenever she set foot
outside the university. Where she’d felt at once ignored and conspicuous,
summed up, in the way. She ate quickly, burning her tongue on a bowl of
chowder, gulping down a small dish of ice cream. She imagined running into
Subhash. Had he become the type to go out to restaurants?
After dinner she drove to the bay, along a promenade where people were
jogging and walking in the twilight. Through a stone archway, flanked by two
towers, like the gateway of a castle by the sea. She continued on toward the
house.
The lights were on. She slowed down, too nervous to come to a stop. There
were two cars in the driveway; she was unprepared for this. Was there a third
one in the garage? Who was visiting him? Who were his friends now? His
lovers? It was the weekend, was he entertaining guests?
She drove back to the inn, exhausted though it was still early for her, evening
just beginning on the West Coast. The couple from Montreal were out, Nan
tucked away in whatever unseen part of the house she occupied.
She went upstairs to her room and saw that two gingersnaps had been left on
a plate by her bed, and a mug with an herbal tea bag on the saucer, next to the
electric kettle.
Nan’s hospitality was measured, and yet Gauri was grateful for the overtures,
however impersonal. A stranger had received her, accommodated her. But Gauri
had no way of knowing, tomorrow, if Subhash would do the same.

In the morning, after breakfast, she repacked her suitcase and settled the bill.
Already it was over, she was departing, and yet the objective of the journey
remained. She erased the temporary traces of herself from the room, smoothing
the pillowcase she had creased, readjusting the piece of lace on the nightstand.
Handing over the key, she felt eager to go but also reluctant, aware that there
was nowhere but the rented car to call her own. Nothing left to do, other than
fulfill the purpose for which she’d come.
She drove back to the highway. The traffic light was her last chance to turn
back toward Boston. Briefly she panicked, putting on her blinker. She irritated
the driver behind her when she changed her mind again, continuing straight.
Today there was only one car in the driveway. A small hatchback that must
have been his, though it surprised her to see how beaten-up it was, that at this
stage of his life he would still drive the kind of car he drove when he was a
graduate student. A Rhode Island license plate, an Obama bumper sticker. Also
one that said Be a Local Hero, Buy Locally Grown.
She saw the Japanese maple, a twig so tender one could snap it apart when
Subhash had planted it; it was three times her height now, the branches
spreading close to the ground, the gray bark as smooth as glazed ceramic. There
were more flowers, black-eyed Susans and daylilies, defying the coming of
winter, thickly growing at the front of the house. Chrysanthemums in pots
decorated the steps.
Should she have brought something? Some offering from California, a bag of
pistachios or lemons, to speak for her existence there?
She had already signed the divorce papers, granted her consent. She would
hand him the documents in person. She would tell him she happened to be
passing through.
She would agree that their marriage should be terminated formally, that of
course the house in Tollygunge, and the one in Rhode Island, were his to sell.
She imagined a strained conversation in the living room, a cursory exchange of
information, a single cup of tea he might offer to prepare.
This was the scenario she’d mapped out on the plane, that she’d reviewed in
bed the night before, and again during her drive that morning.
She sat in the car, looking at the house, knowing he was inside, knowing how
much it would surely upset him to see her, unbidden. Knowing she was in no
position to expect him to open his door to her.
She remembered looking for the policeman’s mailbox in Jadavpur. Terrified
of what she was seeking, part of her already knowing what she’d find.
She was tempted not to bother him. To leave the papers in the mailbox and

turn back. And yet she unfastened her seat belt, and removed the key from the
ignition. Though she did not expect him to forgive her, she wanted to thank him
for being a father to Bela. For bringing Gauri to America, for letting her go.
The shame that had flooded her veins was permanent. She would never be
free from that.
Ultimately, she had come seeking Bela. She’d come to ask about Bela’s life,
to ask Subhash if she might contact her now. To ask if there was a phone
number, an address to which she might write. To ask if Bela might be open to
this, before it was too late.
Cold air stung her face as she stepped out of the car, the wind off the sea
wilder here than inland. She reached into her purse, covering her hands with a
pair of gloves.
It was not too early, ten-thirty. Subhash would be sitting reading the
newspaper, the Providence Journal that had already been removed, she saw,
from the mailbox at the foot of the drive.
Alongside Subhash, she would be seeing a version of Udayan as an old man.
Hearing his voice again. Subhash had remained his proxy, at once alien and
kindred. She walked up the path and rang the bell.

Chapter 5
It was a Sunday morning, the skies calm after late summer’s storms. Soon the
kale, the Brussels sprouts, would be ready for harvesting. A few frosts would
improve the taste. Last night, because the temperature had suddenly dropped,
they’d put comforters back on the beds. Soon the time would change.
Meghna was drawing at the coffee table. Subhash and Elise had gone out for
their breakfast, their walk.
Bela was washing dishes when Meghna came up to her, tugging on the edge
of her sweater.
Someone’s at the door.
She thought maybe it was Drew stopping by without calling first, as he
sometimes did. She turned off the water and dried her hands. She stepped away
from the counter and looked through the window of the living room.
But Drew’s pickup wasn’t in the driveway. There was a small white car
looking brand-new, parked behind Bela’s. She looked through the peephole, but
the visitor was standing to the side.
She opened the door, wondering what would be asked of her, a signature or
contribution for what cause. The glass of the storm door had been recently
replaced for the coming cold.
A woman stood behind it, putting a gloved hand to her mouth.
They were the same height now. Hair flecked with gray, cropped close to her
head. Diminished in build. The skin was softer around the eyes, subduing their
intensity. She seemed slight enough to push away.
She had devoted some attention to her appearance. A layer of lipstick,
earrings, a scarf tucked into her coat.
Bela was barefoot. Wearing the sweatpants she’d slept in, an old pullover of
Drew’s. She reached for the handle of the storm door. She felt for the catch,
locking it from the inside.
Bela, she heard her mother say. She saw tears on her mother’s face. Relief,
disbelief. The voice she remembered, muted through the glass.
Meghna approached. Mama, she asked. Who is that lady?
She didn’t answer.
Why don’t you open the door?

She unlocked the door, opened it. She watched her mother enter the house,
her movements measured, but instinctively knowing the arrangement of things.
Down the short set of steps, to the living room.
Here, where guests were received, they sat. Bela and Meghna on the sofa, her
mother across from them in a chair. Her mother was taking in the dirt under
Bela’s fingernails, the roughened skin of her hands.
Some of the furniture, Bela knew, was the same. The pair of standing lamps
on either side of the sofa, with cream-colored shades and little tables wrapped
around their midsections, on which to put a cup or a glass. A cane-backed
rocking chair. The batik wall hanging of an Indian fishing boat, stretched over a
frame.
But proof of Bela’s life was here also. Her basket of knitting. Her plant
cuttings on the windowsill. Her jars of beans and grains, her cookbooks on the
shelves.
Now her mother was looking at Meghna, then back at Bela.
She is yours?
Yes, I can see that, she continued, answering her own question after some
moments had passed. Bela said nothing. Bela was unable to speak.
When was she born? When did you get married?
They were simple questions, ones that Bela did not mind answering when
posed by strangers. But coming from her mother each felt outrageous. Each was
an affront. She was unwilling to share with her mother, so casually, the facts and
choices of her life. She refused to utter the words.
Her mother turned to Meghna. How old are you?
She raised her hand, showing four fingers, saying, Almost five.
When is your birthday?
November.
Bela was shivering. She could not control it. How had this happened? Why
had she yielded? Why had she opened the door?
You look just like your mother when she was a girl, her mother said. What’s
your name?
Meghna pointed to a drawing she’d made, on which her name was written.
She turned it around, so that it would be easier to read.
Meghna, do you live here? Or are you visiting?
Meghna was amused. Of course we live here.
With your father?
I don’t have a father, Meghna said. Who are you?

I am your—
Aunt, Bela said, speaking for the first time.
Now Bela was looking at Gauri, glaring at her. With a single shake of her
head, silencing Gauri, the admonishment slicing through her, reminding her of
her place.
Gauri felt the same suspension of certainty, the same unannounced but
imminent threat, as when the walls in California would tremble during a minor
quake. Never knowing until it was over, as a cup rattled on the table, as the earth
roiled and resettled itself, whether or not she would be spared.
This lady was a friend of your grandmother’s, Bela said to Meghna. That
makes her your great-aunt. I haven’t seen her since your grandmother died.
Oh, Meghna said. She went back to her drawing. She was kneeling at the
coffee table, her head tilted to one side. A stack of white paper, a wooden box
containing a row of crayons. She was focused on her work, regarding it from an
angle of concentration, also of repose.
Gauri sat, perched on an armchair, in a room whose views had remained
constant. But everything had changed, the decades collapsing but also asserting
themselves. The result was an abyss that could not be crossed.
She’d come seeking Bela, and here she was. Three feet away, unattainable.
She was a grown woman, nearly forty years old. Older than Gauri had been
when she’d left her. The proportions of her face had altered. Wider at the
temples, longer, more sculptural. Inattentive to her appearance, her brows
unshaped, her hair twisted messily at the nape of her neck.
Will you play tic-tac-toe with me? Meghna asked Bela.
Not now, Meglet.
Meghna looked up at Gauri. Her face was brown like Bela’s, her hazel eyes
just as watchful. Will you?
Gauri thought Bela would object, but she said nothing.
She leaned over, taking the crayon from the child’s hand, marking the paper.
You and your mother live here with your grandfather? Gauri asked.
Meghna nodded. And Elise comes every day.
She could not prevent the question from forming, escaping her mouth.
Elise?
When Dadu marries her I’ll have a grandmother, Meghna said. I’m going to
be the flower girl.
Blood was draining from her head. She gripped the armrest, waiting for the
feeling to pass.

She watched Meghna draw a line on the sheet of paper. Look, I won, Gauri
heard her say.
She pulled the envelope of signed documents out of her bag. She set the
envelope on the coffee table and slid it toward Bela.
These are for your father, she said.
Bela was watching her as one watched an infant just learning to walk, as if
she might suddenly topple over and cause some form of damage, even though
Gauri was sitting perfectly still.
He is well? His health is good?
Still she would not answer her, not speak to her directly. There was no
indulgence in her face. No change, from the moment Gauri had arrived.
All right, then.
She was burning with the failure of it. The effort of the journey, the
presumptuous chance she’d taken, the foolish anticipation of coming back. The
divorce was not to simplify but to enrich his life. Though she took up no space in
it, he was still in a position to eradicate her.
She thought of the room that had once been her study. She wondered if it was
Meghna’s room now. Back then she had only wanted to shut the door to it, to be
apart from Subhash and Bela. She’d been incapable of cherishing what she’d
had.
She stood up, adjusted her bag over her shoulder. I’ll be on my way.
Wait, Bela said.
She walked over to a closet and put a jacket on Meghna, a pair of shoes. She
opened the sliding glass door off the kitchen. Will you pick some new flowers
for the table? she said to her. Pick a big bunch, okay? And then go check the bird
feeders. See if we need to give them more food.
The sliding door was shut. Now she and Bela were alone.
Bela walked over to where Gauri was standing. She came up close, so close
that Gauri took a small step backward. Bela raised her hands, as if to push Gauri
away further still, but did not touch her.
How dare you, Bela said. Her voice was just above a whisper. How dare you
set foot in this house.
No one had ever looked at her with such hatred.
Why have you come here?
Gauri felt the wall behind her. She leaned against it for support.
I came to give your father the papers. Also—
Also what?

I wanted to ask him about you. To find you. He said he was open to our
meeting.
And you’ve taken advantage of it. The way you took advantage of him from
the beginning.
It was wrong of me, Bela. I came to say—
Get out. Go back to whatever it was that was more important. Bela shut her
eyes, putting her hands over her ears.
I can’t stand the sight of you, she continued. I can’t bear listening to anything
you have to say.
Gauri walked toward the front door. Her throat was raw with pain. She
needed water but she didn’t dare ask for it. She put her hand on the knob.
I’m sorry, Bela. I won’t bother you again.
I know why you left us, Bela said, directing the words at Gauri’s back.
I’ve known for years about Udayan, she went on. I know who I am.
Now it was Gauri unable to move, unable to speak. Unable to reconcile
hearing Udayan’s name, coming from Bela.
And it doesn’t matter. Nothing excuses what you did, Bela said.
Bela’s words were like bullets. Putting an end to Udayan, silencing Gauri
now.
Nothing will ever excuse it. You’re not my mother. You’re nothing. Can you
hear me? I want you to nod if you can hear me.
There was nothing inside her. Was this what Udayan felt, in the lowland
when he stood to face them, as the whole neighborhood watched? There was no
one to witness what was happening now. Somehow, she nodded her head.
You’re as dead to me as he is. The only difference is that you left me by
choice.
She was right; there was nothing to clarify, nothing more to convey.
There was a knock on the sliding glass door, and Bela went to open it.
Meghna wanted to come in.
She saw Meghna standing at the dining table with Bela, seeking approval for
the flowers she’d chosen. Bela was composed, attentive to her daughter,
behaving as if Gauri were already gone. Together they were taking old flowers
out of a mason jar and replacing them with new ones.
Gauri could not help herself; before leaving, she crossed the room, walked
over to the table, and placed her hand on the girl’s head, then on the cool of her
cheek.
Good-bye, Meghna. I enjoyed meeting you.

Politely, the child looked up at her. Taking her in and then forgetting her.
Nothing more was said. Gauri walked toward the front door, briskly this time.
Bela, not looking up from what she was doing, did nothing to detain her.
She opened the envelope as soon as her mother was out of the house, before
she’d even started the ignition of the car. She made sure she’d signed and agreed
to what her father had asked. What he’d told Bela, a few months ago, he was
ready to do.
There were the signatures, all of them in place. She was thankful for this. As
bewildering as it had been, she was thankful that it was she, not her father,
who’d had to confront Gauri. She was thankful that she’d shielded him from
that.
Her mother’s brief presence had shocked Bela as a dead body might. But
already she had vanished again. She listened to the sound of the car fading, then
disappearing, and then it was as if her mother had never come back, and those
few moments had never happened. And yet she’d returned, stood before her,
spoken to her, spoken to Meghna. Bela had dreamed it so many times.
This morning, seeing her mother, the force of her anger had crushed her.
She’d never felt such violent emotion before.
It twisted through the love she felt for her father, her daughter, her guarded
fondness for Drew. Its destructive current uprooted those things, splintering
them and flinging them aside, shearing the leaves from the trees.
For a moment she was flung back to the day they’d returned from Calcutta.
The ripe heat of August, the door to the study left open, the desktop nearly bare.
The grass sprouting to her shoulders, spreading before her like a sea.
Even now Bela felt the urge to strike her. To be rid of her, to kill her all over
again.

Chapter 6
VIP Road, the old way to and from the airport in Dum Dum, had once been
remote enough for bandits, avoided after dark. But now she passed high-rise
apartment buildings, glass-fronted offices, a stadium. Lit-up malls and
amusement parks. Foreign companies and five-star hotels.
The city was called Kolkata now, the way Bengalis pronounced it. The taxi
traveled along a peripheral artery that bypassed the northern portion of the city,
the congested center. It was evening, the traffic dense but moving quickly.
Flowers and trees were planted along the sides of the road. New flyovers, new
sectors replacing what used to be farmland and swamp. The taxi was an
Ambassador. But most of the other cars were imported, smaller sedans.
After the bypass, turning after a fancy hospital, a few familiar things. The
train tracks at Ballygunge, the tangled intersection at Gariahat. Life pouring out
of crooked lanes, seated on broken steps. Hawkers, selling clothes, selling
slippers and purses, lining the streets.
It was Durga Pujo, the city’s most anticipated days. The stores, the sidewalks,
were overflowing. At the ends of certain alleys, or in gaps among buildings, she
saw the pandals. Durga armed with her weapons, flanked by her four children,
depicted and worshiped in so many versions. Made of plaster, made of clay. She
was resplendent, formidable. A lion helped to conquer the demon at her feet. She
was a daughter visiting her family, visiting the city, transforming it for a time.
The guesthouse was on Southern Avenue. The flat was on the seventh floor.
Overlooking the lake. A women’s fitness club below. The elevator seemed
hardly more spacious than a telephone booth. Yet somehow she and the
caretaker and her suitcase managed to fit.
You’ve come for Pujo? the caretaker asked.
She’d been on her way to London, not here. Somewhere over the Atlantic, the
destination had become clear.
In London she hadn’t left the airport. The lecture she was supposed to deliver,
the printed pages in a folder in her suitcase, would go unheard.
She hadn’t bothered e-mailing the organizers of the conference to explain her
absence. It didn’t matter to her. Nothing did, after the things Bela had said.
She’d gone to the booking office in Heathrow, asking about flights to India.

The Indian passport she continued to carry, the citizenship she’d never
renounced, enabled her, the following morning, to board another plane.
It took her to Mumbai. It was a direct flight, there was no longer a need to
refuel in the Middle East. Another night at another airport hotel, cold white
sheets, Indian television programs. Black-and-white films from the sixties, CNN
International. Unable to sleep, turning on her laptop, she looked up guesthouses
in Kolkata, booked a place to stay.
The kitchen would be stocked in the morning. The durwan could send
someone out to bring in dinner tonight, she heard the caretaker say.
That won’t be necessary.
Should I set up a driver?
She could pay him a flat rate for the day, the caretaker told her. He would
show up as early as she liked. He would take her, within the city limits,
anywhere she wanted to go.
I’ll be ready at eight, she said.
She woke in darkness, her eyes open at five. At six she showered with hot water.
She shed her clothes in a corner of the bathroom, brushed her teeth at a pink
sink. On the pantry shelves in the kitchen she found a box of Lipton, lit a burner,
and made herself a cup of tea. She drank it, and ate a packet of crackers left over
from the plane.
At seven the doorbell rang. A maid carrying a bag of fruit, bread and butter,
biscuits, the newspaper. The caretaker had mentioned something about this.
Her name was Abha. She was a woman in her thirties, a talkative mother of
four children. The eldest, she told Gauri, was sixteen. In the afternoons she had a
job, at one of the fancy hospitals, cleaning. She brewed more tea, set out a plate
of biscuits.
Abha’s tea was better, stronger, served with sugar and warmed milk. A few
minutes later, she brought out another plate.
What’s this?
She’d prepared an omelette, sliced toast with butter. The butter was salty, the
omelette spiced with pieces of chili. Gauri ate everything. She drank more tea.
At eight o’clock, looking down from the small balcony off the bedroom,
Gauri saw a car parked below. The driver was a young man with curly hair and a
potbelly, wearing trousers, leather slippers. He was leaning against the hood,
smoking a cigarette.
She went to the north, up College Street, past Presidency, to visit her old

neighborhood, to find Manash. But Manash was in Shillong, where one of his
sons lived; he went every year at this time. His wife received her in her
grandparents’ old flat, where the dark stairwell was still uneven, where the door
opened for her, where Manash and his family continued to live.
She sat with them in one of the bedrooms. She met his other son, the
grandchildren from that family. They were incredulous to see her, welcoming,
polite. They offered her sandesh, mutton rolls, tea. Behind her, beyond the
shuttered door, she heard a constable’s whistle, the clanging of the tram.
She was tempted to ask if she could step outside for a moment, onto the
balcony that wrapped around the rooms of the flat, then changed her mind. How
many hours had she spent staring down at the traffic, the intersection, her body
bent slightly forward, elbows on the railing, chin cupped in her hand? She was
unable to picture herself, suddenly, standing there.
Using a cell phone, they rang Manash in Shillong. She heard his voice on the
phone. Manash, whom she’d followed to this city, who’d been the conduit to
Udayan; Manash, the first companion of her life.
Gauri, he said. His voice had deepened, also weakened. An old man’s voice.
Thick with the emotion she also felt.
It’s really you?
Yes.
What finally brings you here?
I needed to see it again.
Still he addressed her in the affectionate mode, the diminutive form of
exchange reserved for bonds formed in childhood, never questioned, never
subject to change. It was how parents spoke to their children, how Udayan and
Subhash had once spoken to one another. It conveyed the intimacy of siblings
but not of lovers. It was not how either Udayan or Subhash had spoken to her.
Come to Shillong for a few days. If not, wait for me to come back to Kolkata.
I’ll try. I’m not sure how long I can stay.
He told her she was the only one of his sisters still living. That their family
had dwindled to the two of them.
How is my niece, my Bela? Will I meet her? Will I know her one day?
She assured him, knowing it would never happen. She said goodbye. The
driver headed south again. Toward Chowringhee, Esplanade. The Metro
Cinema, the Grand Hotel.
She sat in the car, in snarled traffic, the atmosphere heavy with smog. She
saw a version of herself, standing on one of the crowded busses, hanging on to a

strap, wearing one of the cotton saris she’d worn to college. Going to meet
Udayan somewhere he’d suggested, some tucked-away restaurant where no one
would recognize them, where he would be waiting for her, where they could sit
across from one another for as long as they liked.
Should I take you to New Market? the driver asked her. Or to one of the new
shopping centers?
No.
When the driver approached Southern Avenue she told him to continue.
To Kalighat?
To Tollygunge. Just after the tram depot, not too far in.
Past the replica of Tipu Sultan’s mosque, past the cemetery. There was a
metro station now, opposite the depot, cutting through the city underground. It
traveled all the way to Dum Dum, the driver said. She saw people rushing up the
shallow steps, people old enough to work, young enough to have grown up with
the metro all their lives.
She saw the high brick walls on either side of the road, shielding the film
studios, the Tolly Club. Forty years later the little mosque at the corner still
stood, the red-and-white minarets visible.
She told the driver to stop, giving him money for tea, asking him to wait for
her there. It would be a brief visit, she said.
People were glancing at her now that she was out of the car. Taking in her
sunglasses, her American clothing and shoes. Unaware that once she, too, had
lived here. Cell phones rang, but the rubber horns of the cycle rickshaws still
squawked on the main roads.
Behind the mosque there was a grouping of huts with walls of woven
bamboo, sheltering those who still lived there.
She continued down the lane, stepping past the stray dogs. Some of the
houses were taller now, blocking out more of the sky. They had windows made
of glass, wooden trims painted white. Rooftops thick with antennas. Patios with
terrazzo floors. The older homes were more derelict, constructed from narrow
bricks, sections of filigree missing.
All of it was crammed tightly together. Not a single empty plot, no space for
children to play cricket or football. The lane remained so narrow that a car could
barely fit.
She came to the house in which she was once destined to grow old with
Udayan. The home in which she had conceived Bela, in which Bela might have
been raised.

She’d expected to find it aged but standing, as she was. In fact it looked
younger, the edges smoother, the facade painted a warm orange shade. The
swinging wooden double doors had been replaced by a cheerful green gate, to
match the terrace grilles.
The courtyard no longer existed. The proportions of the building had
extended forward, so that the facade nearly abutted the street. That area was
perhaps now a living room, or a dining room, she could not tell. In one of the
rooms a television was on. The open drain at the threshold, that she’d stepped
over to come and go, had been closed.
She walked past the house, across the lane, and over toward the two ponds.
She had forgotten no detail. The color and shape of the ponds clear in her mind.
But the details were no longer there. Both ponds were gone. New homes filled
up an area that had once been watery, open.
Walking a bit farther, she saw that the lowland was also gone. That sparsely
populated tract was now indistinguishable from the rest of the neighborhood, and
on it more homes had been built. Scooters parked in front of doorways, laundry
hung out to dry.
She wondered if any of the people she passed remembered things as she did.
She was tempted to stop a man about her age who looked vaguely familiar, who
might have been one of Udayan’s class friends. He was on his way to the
market, wearing an undershirt, a lungi, carrying a shopping bag. He passed by,
not recognizing her.
Somewhere close to where she stood, Udayan had hidden in the water. He’d
been taken to an empty field. Somewhere there was a tablet with his name on it,
commemorating the brief life he’d led. Or perhaps this, too, had been removed.
She was unprepared for the landscape to be so altered. For there to be no trace
of that evening, forty autumns ago.
Scarcely two years of her life, begun as a wife, concluded as a widow, an
expectant mother. An accomplice in a crime.
It had seemed reasonable, what Udayan had asked of her. What he’d told her:
that they wanted a policeman out of the way. Depending on one’s interpretation,
it had not even been a lie.
She’d accepted the benign version. The stray particle of doubt, the mute piece
of her that suspected something worse, as she sat by the window with the brother
and sister, glancing down at the street, she’d smothered.
No one connected her to it. Still no one knew what she’d done.
She was the sole accuser, the sole guardian of her guilt. Protected by Udayan,
overlooked by the investigator, taken away by Subhash. Sentenced in the very

act of being forgotten, punished by means of her release.
Again she remembered what Bela had said to her. That her reappearance
meant nothing. That she was as dead as Udayan.
Standing there, unable to find him, she felt a new solidarity with him. The
bond of not existing.
The night before they came for him he fell asleep, as he had been unable to do
for days. But in his sleep he began to cry out, waking her.
At first she could not rouse him, even when she shook him by the shoulders.
Then he woke up, startled, shivering. His head burned with fever. He
complained of the cold in the room, of a draft, though the air was humid and
still. He asked her to turn off the fan and close the shutters.
She spread a quilt over him, pulling it out of a metal trunk that was under
their bed. She tucked it up beneath his shoulders, beneath his chin.
Go back to sleep, she told him.
Just like Independence, he said.
What?
Me and Subhash. We both had a fever. My parents tell a story, of how both
our teeth were chattering the night Nehru made his speech, the night freedom
came. I never told you?
No.
Miserable fools in bed, just like this.
She poured him water he refused to sip, pushing it away so that it spilled over
the quilt. She dampened a handkerchief and wiped his face. She worried that the
fever was caused by an infection, something to do with his injured hand. But he
did not complain of any worse pain, and then the fever began to subside, fatigue
reclaiming him.
Until morning he slept soundly. She stayed awake, sitting in the sweltering
room, sealed up with him. Staring at him, though she could not see him in the
darkness.
Slowly his profile came into view. His forehead, his nose and lips, edged with
gray light. This was the first light that penetrated the vents above the windows,
the plaster there perforated in a series of wavy lines.
A neglected beard covered his cheeks, a moustache hiding the detail of his
face—the shaded groove above his mouth—that she most loved. The image of
him so still, with his eyes closed, disconcerted her. She put her hand over his
chest, feeling its rise and fall.

He opened his eyes, seeming suddenly lucid, himself again.
I’ve been thinking, he said.
About what?
About having children. Would it be enough for you, if we never did?
Why are you thinking of this now?
I can’t become a father, Gauri.
After a moment he added, Not after what I’ve done.
What have you done?
He wouldn’t say. Whatever happened, he told her, he regretted only one
thing: that he had not met her sooner, that he had not known her every day of his
life.
He closed his eyes again, reaching for her hand, their fingers joined. As the
morning steadily brightened, he did not let it go.
At the guesthouse, in a microwave oven, she warmed up the meal Abha had left
for her, eating fish stew and rice at an oval table that sat six. The table was
covered with a flowered tablecloth, a sheet of plastic over that. She watched
some television, then put the leftover food away.
The bed was made, the cover smoothly spread, the nylon mosquito netting
bunched up onto hooks. She lowered it, tucking in the sides. There was only an
overhead light. Not possible to read in bed. She lay in darkness. Eventually, for a
few hours, she slept.
The crows woke her. She got out of bed and stepped onto the balcony that
was off the bedroom. The milky dawn was opaque, as if she were high in the
mountains and not at the base of a sprawling delta, the world’s largest delta, at
the level of the sea.
The balcony was small, just enough room for a plastic stool, a small tub in
which to soak dirty clothes. Not a place to pass the time.
The road was empty. The shopkeepers had not yet arrived to open their
padlocks and raise their grates.
Water was being poured from buckets, the pavement swept clean. A few
people were entering the grounds of the lake for their morning walk, striding
purposefully alone, or in pairs. She saw a stall across the avenue, selling
newspapers and fruit, bottled water and tea.
The street sweeper moved on to the next block. There was no one there now.
She heard the sound of traffic, intensifying. Soon it would be constant. Soon
nothing else would be heard.

She pressed herself against the railing of the balcony. It was high enough. She
felt desperation rising up inside her. Also a clarity. An urge.
This was the place. This was the reason she’d come. The purpose of her
return was to take her leave.
She imagined swinging one leg over, then the other. The sensation of nothing
supporting her, of no longer resisting. It would take only a few seconds. Her
time would end, it was as simple as that.
Forty years ago she hadn’t had the courage. Bela had been inside her. It
wasn’t the emptiness, the husk of existence she felt now.
She thought of Kanu Sanyal, and of the woman who’d found him. A woman
like Abha who saw to his needs, who came and went each day.
Who, coming back from a morning’s walk around the lake, feeling
invigorated, might happen to see her fall? Who, realizing it was too late to save
her, would shield his face, turning away?
She closed her eyes. Her mind was blank. It held only the present moment,
nothing else. The moment that, until now, she’d never been able to see. She
thought it would be like looking directly at the sun. But it did not deflect her.
Then one by one she released the things that fettered her. Lightening herself,
the way she’d removed her bangles after Udayan was killed. What she’d seen
from the terrace in Tollygunge. What she’d done to Bela. The image of a
policeman passing beneath a window, holding his son by the hand.
A final image: Udayan standing beside her on the balcony in North Calcutta.
Looking down at the street with her, getting to know her. Leaning forward, just
inches between them, the future spread before them. The moment her life had
begun a second time.
She leaned forward. She saw the spot where she would fall. She recalled the
thrill of meeting him, of being adored by him. The moment of losing him. The
fury of learning how he’d implicated her. The ache of bringing Bela into the
world, after he was gone.
She opened her eyes. He was not there.
The morning had begun, another day. Mothers taking uniformed children to
school, men and women hurrying to their jobs. The group of men who would sit
playing cards all day had arranged themselves on a cot at the corner. The man
who repaired sarods spread a bedsheet on the pavement, putting out the broken
instruments he would restring and tune that day.
Directly below Gauri a little produce stand had set up, selling tomatoes and

eggplants from shallow baskets. Carrots more red than orange, foot-long string
beans. The owner sat cross-legged under the shade of a soiled tarp, tending to
customers who’d already begun to approach.
He placed the weights on the scale. They were striking the plates. One of the
customers stepped away.
It was Abha, coming to cook breakfast, to brew the tea. She looked up at
Gauri, holding up a bunch of bananas, a small packet of detergent, a loaf of
bread. In her other hand was the newspaper.
She called up. What else for today?
That’s all, nothing else.
At the end of the week she would leave Kolkata and return to her life. When
Abha rang the bell, Gauri left the balcony, and let her in.
Several months later, in California, a second letter arrived from Rhode Island.
This time it was in English. Light blue ink, the address heedlessly scrawled—
how had the mailman deciphered it? No longer the neat penmanship Bela had
learned in school. But here it was, legible enough to reach her, the closest she’d
ever come to visiting.
Gauri studied the envelope, the illustration of a sailboat on the stamp. She sat
at the table on her patio, and unfolded the page. There was a second sheet folded
within it, a drawing Meghna had made and signed: a solid strip of blue sky,
another strip of green ground, a colorful cat floating in the white space between.
The letter bore no salutation.

Meghna asks about you. Maybe she senses something, I
don’t know. It’s too soon to tell her the story now. But one
day I’ll explain to her who you are, and what you did. My
daughter will know the truth about you. Nothing more,
nothing less. If, then, she still wants to know you, and to
have a relationship with you, I’m willing to facilitate that.
This is about her, not about me. You’ve already taught me
not to need you, and I don’t need to know more about
Udayan. But maybe, when Meghna is older, when she and I
are both ready, we can try to meet again.

Part VIII

Chapter 1
On the western coast of Ireland, on the peninsula of Beara, a couple come for a
week’s stay. They drive from Cork through the drowsy countryside, arriving late
in the afternoon to a terrain that is mountainous, stark. The region’s valleys
conceal evidence of prehistoric agriculture. Field patterns, stone-wall systems,
buried under deposits of peat.
They have rented a house in one of the few towns. White stucco, the door and
shutters painted blue. The entire town feels hardly larger than the enclave of
homes in which, long ago, the man was raised.
The street is narrow and sloping, lined with blossoming fuchsia, parked cars.
They are two doors from a pub, an arm’s reach from a yellow church that serves
the residents of the village. From the post office, which is also a general store,
they buy their provisions: milk and eggs, baked beans and sardines, a jar of
blackberry jam. It is possible to sit outside the post office, at a table for two on
the sidewalk, and order a pot of tea, fresh cream and butter, a plate of scones.
At night, after the long journey, a pint of beer at the pub, the man’s sleep is
shallow. He wakes up in the bed where he lies with his new wife. She sleeps
peacefully beside him, her head turned away, hands crossed below her chin.
He goes downstairs and opens the door at the back of the house. He steps
barefoot onto the wooden porch that overlooks the garden, the pastures beyond,
running down to the Kenmare Bay. His hair is thick, snowy white. His wife likes
to run her fingers through it. He sees the wide beam of the moon’s light over the
water, pouring down. He is overwhelmed by the sky’s clarity, the number of
stars.
A strong wind courses over the land, mimicking the sound of the waves. He
looks up, forgetting the names of the constellations he’d once taught his
daughter. Burning gases, perceived on earth as cool points of light.
He returns to bed, still looking out the window at the sky, the stars. He is
startled anew by the fact that their beauty, even in daytime, is there. He is awash
with the gratitude of his advancing years, for the timeless splendors of the earth,
for the opportunity to behold them.
The following morning after breakfast they set out for their first day’s walk,
on paths that edge the sea. They cross rough pastures where sheep and cows

graze in silence against the horizon, fields of foxglove and ferns. The day is
overcast but luminous, the clouds holding. The ocean washes up into stony
inlets, lies calm beyond steep cliffs.
The man and woman take in the immensity of their surroundings. The
stillness of the place. On this outcrop of land, after walking for hours, climbing
up and down little ladders that separate one property from the next, they are less
than halfway to where they thought they might end up on the map of the region
they pause to study.
The trip is a honeymoon, the man’s first, though he was married once before.
A few days ago, across the same ocean, in America, the couple stood to
exchange their vows on the grounds of a small red-and-white church in Rhode
Island that the man has admired for many years, its spire rising over
Narragansett Bay.
The couple’s union was witnessed by a group of friends and family. The man
has gained two sons, a second daughter in addition to his own. There are seven
grandchildren. Flung far apart, occasionally thrust together, they will know each
other in a limited way. Still, it is a point of origin, a looking forward late in life.
The years the couple have together are a shared conclusion to lives separately
built, separately lived. There is no use wondering what might have happened if
the man had met her in his forties, or in his twenties. He would not have married
her then.
The next day when they step out of the house they encounter a group bidding
an unknown villager farewell, mourners in dark clothing spreading down the
sloping street. For a moment it is as if they, too, are part of the funeral. There is
no sense of its boundaries, where it begins or ends, whom it grieves. Then they
pass, respectfully, out of its shadow.
If their grandchildren were along, they would take them by cable car to see
the dolphins and whales that swim off Dursey Island. Instead they devote their
days to walking. Hand in hand, wearing bulky sweaters they’ve bought to ward
off the slight autumn chill.
They stop when they tire, to admire the views, to sit and eat biscuits, pieces of
cheese. In tide pools with rocks that form chambers and grottoes, they discover
heaps of flat gray pebbles, perforated shells that have worn away to hard white
rings. The man gathers a handful, thinking they will make a nice necklace for his
granddaughter in Rhode Island, strung through a bit of yarn. He imagines
placing it on her head, so that it adorns her like a crown.
They come across certain stones that are of interest, that they follow signs to
see. Crude pillars tucked away off minor roads. An Ogham stone, inscribed with

names, in a farmer’s field. A solitary boulder, said to be the incarnation of a
woman with powers of enchantment, aslant on a bluff.
Late one day they trek through a soggy field to reach a group of stones set
into a valley, appearing random but deliberately arrayed, facing one another on
windswept land. Some are shorter than the couple’s heights, others taller. Wider
at the bottom, appearing whittled at the top. Lacking grace but sacred, worn
white in spots with age. One cannot imagine moving them, but their positions
have been carefully considered, each stone laboriously transported, grouped by
human hands.
His wife explains that they date to the Bronze Age, that their purpose was
religious, perhaps funerary or commemorative. How some of them may have
been positioned in relation to the earth’s motion around the sun. For centuries
people have traveled long distances to touch them, to stand before them and
receive their blessing. Some leave a trace of themselves behind.
He sees hair bands, frail chains, lockets, heaped at the base of certain stones.
Twigs tied together, bits of thread. Personal offerings, neglected trinkets of faith.
He knows nothing of this ancient archeology, these enduring beliefs. So much of
the world he is still ignorant of.
He notices clumps of taller growth sprouting throughout the green field, like
marsh grass at low tide. He sees the rocky brown faces of the surrounding hills,
the bay’s calm surface below.
The man thinks of another stone in a distant country clear in his mind. A
simple tablet, like a road marker, bearing his brother’s name. Its surroundings
slowly sullied, the watery place where it once stood now indifferent to the
seasons, converted to more practical means. For years his mother had been a
faithful pilgrim to that shrine, offering flowers to her son, until she was unable to
visit, until even that form of tribute was denied.
On ancient ground that is new to him, in a secluded ruin’s open embrace, his
shoes are caked with mud. He looks up and sees the brooding gray sky stretching
over the earth. The ceaseless movement of the atmosphere, low clouds drifting
for miles.
Amid the gray, an incongruous band of daytime blue. To the west, a pink sun
already begins its descent. The effect is of three isolated aspects, distinct phases
of the day. All of it, strewn across the horizon, is contained in his vision.
Udayan is beside him. They are walking together in Tollygunge, across the
lowland, over the hyacinth leaves. They carry a putting iron, some golf balls in
their hands.
In Ireland, too, the ground is drenched, uneven. He takes it in a final time,

knowing he will never visit this place again. He walks toward another stone and
stumbles, reaching out to it, steadying himself. A marker, toward the end of his
journey, of what is given, what is taken away.

Chapter 2
He didn’t hear the van entering the enclave. He only saw it approach. He
happened to be on the roof. The house was tall enough now. As long as he kept
to the back no one else could see him.
It was just as well to stay away from the parapet. Since the explosion the
exterior world was no longer stable. The soles of his feet no longer anchored
him. The ground below now beckoned, now menaced, if he happened to look
down.
He saw that there were too many of them; that there were three paramilitary
in the courtyard alone. He glanced at the neighboring rooftops. In sections of
North Calcutta it might have been possible to leap, to span the gap between
buildings. But the vertigo made it impossible; he could no longer gauge simple
distances. In any case, in Tollygunge, the homes were built too far apart.
Before his father went to unlock the gate, to let them in, he ran back down the
stairwell. Hunching over as he made the turns, careful not to be spotted through
the terrace grille. Through the new part of the house and into the old. There was
a door at the back of the room he and Subhash had once shared, narrow double
doors leading to the garden.
He climbed over the rear wall of the courtyard as he used to when he was a
child, to escape the house without his mother noticing. Unable to do it quickly
because of his hand, but managing, stepping over the kerosene tin. The evening
was warm, the smell of sulfur strong.
He moved quickly, cutting past the ponds, over to the lowland. He entered the
section where the water hyacinth was thickest, taking one step, then another, the
water receiving him until his body was concealed.
He took a deep breath, closed his mouth, and went under. He tried not to
move. With the fingertips of his uninjured hand he was pinching his nostrils
shut.
After the first few seconds the pressure mounted and burned in his lungs, as if
all the weight of his body were centered there. The breath he was holding was
turning solid, crowding his chest. This was normal, not from a lack of oxygen,
but because carbon dioxide was building up in his blood.
If one could fight the instinct at that point to take a breath, the body could

survive up to six minutes. Blood would begin to ebb from his liver and his
intestines, flowing to his heart and his brain. The doctor who’d treated his hand,
whom he’d asked, had explained this to him.
He monitored his pulse, ministering to himself. It would have been better if
he hadn’t been running. If his pulse had been slower as he’d entered the water.
He began to count. He counted ten seconds. Fighting the urge to surface, forcing
himself to bear it a few seconds more.
Underwater there was the freedom of not having to struggle to listen to
anything. He was spared the frustration of misunderstanding, of asking people to
repeat things. The doctor said the hearing might improve, that the distortion and
the ringing in his ears might subside over time. He would have to wait and see.
The silence underwater was not absolute. Rather, a toneless exhalation that
penetrated his skull. It was different from the partial deafness he’d been
experiencing since the explosion. Water, a better conductor of sound than air.
He wondered if this deafness was what it was like to visit a country where
one did not understand the language. To absorb nothing of what was said. He
had never been to another country. Never been to China or to Cuba. He
remembered something he’d read recently, the final words Che had written to his
children: Remember that the revolution is the important thing and that each one
of us alone is worth nothing.
But in this case it had fixed nothing, helped no one. In this case there was to
be no revolution. He knew this now.
If he was worth nothing, then why was he so desperate to save himself? Why,
in the end, did the body not obey the brain?
All at once his body overcame him and he surfaced, his head and chest
exposed, his nostrils burning, his lungs gasping for air.
Two paramilitary stood facing him, their guns raised. One of them was
shouting into a megaphone, so that Udayan had no trouble hearing what was
said.
They’d surrounded the lowland. He saw that a soldier stood at a distance
behind him, two more to either side. They’d captured his family. They would
start shooting them if he did not surrender, the voice announced. A threat loud
enough not only for his own benefit but for the entire neighborhood to hear.
Carefully he stood up in thick weedy water that came to his waist. He was
spitting up what he’d swallowed, coughing so violently that his organs seized.
They were telling him to walk forward, to raise his hands above his head.
Again the unsteadiness, the dizziness. The surface of the water at an angle,
the sky lower than it should be, the horizon unfixed. He wanted a shawl for his

shoulders. The soft maroon one Gauri always kept hanging on a rod in their
room, that enveloped him in her smell some mornings when he wrapped it
around himself to smoke his first cigarette on the roof.
He had hoped that she and his mother were still out shopping. But when he
emerged from the water, he saw that they had returned in time for this.
It had begun in college, in Gauri’s neighborhood, on the campus just down the
street from the flat where she lived. There was always talk during labs, during
meals at the canteen, about the country and all that was wrong with it. The
stagnant economy, the deterioration of living standards. The latest rice shortage,
pushing tens of thousands to the verge of starvation. The travesty of
Independence, half of India still in chains. Only it was Indians chaining
themselves now.
He got to know some members of the Marxist student wing. They’d talked of
the example of Vietnam. He started cutting classes, wandering with them
through Calcutta. Visiting factories, visiting slums.
In 1966 they’d organized a strike at Presidency, over the maladministration of
hostels. They’d demanded that the superintendent resign. They’d risked
expulsion. They’d shut down all of Calcutta University, for sixty-nine days.
He’d gone to the countryside to further indoctrinate himself. He’d been
instructed to move from place to place, to walk fifteen miles each day before
sundown. He met tenant farmers living in desperation. People who resorted to
eating what they fed their animals. Children who ate one meal a day.
Those with less sometimes killed their families, he was told, before ending
their own lives.
Their subsistence was contingent on arrangements with landowners,
moneylenders. On people who took advantage of them. On forces beyond their
control. He saw how the system coerced them, how it humiliated them. How it
had stripped their dignity away.
He ate what he was given. Coarse grains of rice, thinned lentils. Water that
never quenched his thirst. In some villages there was no tea. He seldom bathed,
he’d had to defecate in fields. No place to suffer with privacy the violent cramps
that ripped through his bowels, through the stinging aperture of his skin. For him
it was a temporary deprivation. But too many knew nothing else.
At night he and his companions were hidden on beds of string, on sacks of
grain. They were tormented by mosquitoes, slow-moving swarms that bit them
to the bone. Some of the boys came from wealthy families. One or two left
within a matter of days. At night, in that collective silence, upset by the things

he’d seen and heard, Udayan allowed himself to think of a single comfort. Gauri.
He imagined seeing her again, talking to her. He wondered if she’d be willing to
be his wife.
One day, visiting a clinic, he confronted the corpse of a young woman. She
was around Gauri’s age, already the mother of numerous children. It was
unclear, from her appearance, why she’d died. No one in the group answered
correctly when the doctor asked them to guess. Trying to obtain cheap rice for
her family, they were told, she had been trampled in a stampede. Her lungs
crushed.
Ironically, her face was full, her belly slack. He imagined the other people
pushing behind her, determined enough to knock her down. People she might
have known from her village, might have called neighbors and friends. Here was
more proof that the system was failing, that such poverty was a crime.
They were told that there was an alternative. Still, in the beginning it had
mainly been a matter of opinion. Of attending meetings and rallies, of continuing
to educate himself. Putting up posters, painting slogans in the middle of the
night. Reading the leaflets of Charu Majumdar, trusting Kanu Sanyal. Believing
a solution was at hand.
In Calcutta, just after the party was formed, Subhash left, going to America.
He was critical of the party’s objectives, disapproving, in fact. His brother’s
disapproval had angered Udayan, but their parting had filled him with
foreboding, though he tried to shake it off, that they would never see one another
again. A few months later he married Gauri.
With Subhash gone Udayan’s only friends were his comrades. Slowly the
missions turned more purposeful. Gasoline poured in the registrar’s office of a
government college. Bomb-making instructions studied, ingredients stolen from
labs. Among the squad members of the neighborhood, a discussion of potential
targets. The Tolly Club, for what it represented. A policeman, for the authority
he embodied, and for his gun.
After the party was declared he began living two lives. Occupying two
dimensions, obeying two sets of laws. In one world he was married to Gauri,
living with his parents, coming and going so as not to arouse suspicion, teaching
his students, guiding them through simple experiments at the school. Writing
cheerful letters to Subhash in America, pretending the movement was behind
him, pretending his commitment had cooled. Lying to his brother, hoping that it
would bring them closer again. Lying to his parents, not wanting to concern
them.
But in the world of the party it had also been expected for him to help kill a

policeman. They were symbols of brutality, trained by foreigners. They are not
Indians, they do not belong to India, Charu Majumdar said. Each annihilation
would spread the revolution. Each would be a forward step.
He’d shown up at the appointed time, guarding the alley where the action was
to take place. The attack occurred in the early afternoon, when the policeman
was on his way to pick up his son from school. A day he was off duty. A day,
thanks to Gauri, they knew he would not be armed.
In meetings Udayan and his squad members had studied where in the
abdomen the dagger should be directed, at what point below the ribs. They
remembered what Sinha had told them before he was arrested: that revolutionary
violence opposed oppression. That it was a force of liberation, humane.
In the alley he’d felt calm and purposeful. He’d watched the constable’s
clothing darken, the look of astonishment, the bulge of the eyes, the grimace of
pain that seized his face. And then the enemy was no longer a policeman. No
longer a husband, or a father. No longer a version of someone who’d once
stricken Subhash with a broken putter outside the Tolly Club. No longer alive.
A simple dagger was enough to kill him. A tool intended to cut up fruit. Not
the loaded gun being aimed now behind Udayan’s head.
He had not been the one to wield the dagger, only to stand watch. But his part
in it had been crucial. He had gone as close as he could, he had dipped his hand
in the fresh blood of that enemy, writing the party’s initials on the wall as the
blood leaked down his wrists, into the crook of his arm, before he ran from the
scene.
Now he stood at the edge of a lowland, in the enclave where he’d lived all his
life. It was an October evening, Tollygunge at dusk, the week before Durga
Pujo.
His parents were pleading with the police, insisting he was innocent. But it
was they who were innocent of the things he’d done.
His hands were bound behind him, the rope chafing his skin. This discomfort
preoccupied him. He was told to turn around.
It was too late to run or to fight. So he stood and waited, his back to his
family, picturing but not seeing them.
The last he’d seen of his parents was the ground at their feet, as he’d bent
down to ask for their pardon. The softened rubber slippers his father wore
around the house. The dark brown border of his mother’s sari, the end of it
draped over her face and wrapped around her shoulders, held by her fingers at
her throat.

It was only Gauri he’d managed to look in the face, at the moment his hands
were being restrained. He could not have turned away from her without having
done that.
He knew that he was no hero to her. He had lied to her and used her. And yet
he had loved her. A bookish girl heedless of her beauty, unconscious of her
effect. She’d been prepared to live her life alone, but from the moment he’d
known her he’d needed her. And now he was about to abandon her.
Or was it she abandoning him? For she looked at him as she’d never looked
before. It was a look of disillusion. A revision of everything they’d once shared.
They pushed him into the back of the van and started the engine. He felt the
vibration of the door slamming shut. They would take him somewhere, outside
the city, to question him, then finish him off. Either that or to prison. But no,
they’d already cut the engine, the van had stopped. The door opened. He was
pulled out again.
They were in the field where he’d come so many times with Subhash.
They asked him nothing. They untied his hands, then pointed, indicating that
he was to walk in a certain direction now, again with his hands raised over his
head.
Slowly, he heard them say. Make sure to pause after every step.
He did as he was told. Step by step he walked away from them. Go back to
your family, they said. But he knew that they were only waiting for him to fall
into the ideal range.
One step, then another. He started counting. How many more?
He’d known from the beginning the risk of what he was doing. But only the
policeman’s blood had prepared him. That blood had not belonged only to the
police officer, it had become a part of Udayan also. So that he’d felt his own life
begin to ebb, irrevocably, as the policeman lay dying in the alley. Since then
he’d waited for his own blood to spill.
For a fraction of a second he heard the explosion tearing through his lungs. A
sound like gushing water or a torrent of wind. A sound that belonged to the fixed
forces of the world, that then took him out of the world. The silence was pure
now. Nothing interfered.
He was not alone. Gauri stood in front of him wearing a peach-colored sari.
She was a little out of breath, sweat pooling in the material of her blouse, from
her armpits. It was the bright afternoon outside the cinema hall, during the
interval. They’d missed the first part of the film.
She’d arrived to meet him in the middle of the day, still more stranger than
wife, about to sit with him in the dark.

Her hair shimmered. He wanted to lift it off her neck, to feel its unfettered
weight against his fingers. The light was bouncing off it, making a mirror of it,
casting a spectrum that was faint but complete.
He strained to hear what she was saying. He took another step toward her,
dropping the cigarette from his fingers.
He adjusted his body in relation to hers. His head angled down, his hand
forming a canopy between them to shield her face from the sun. It was a useless
gesture. Only silence. The sunlight on her hair.


1
1968
On a sticky august evening two weeks before her due date, Ashima Ganguli stands in
the kitchen of a Central Square apartment, combining Rice Krispies and Planters
peanuts and chopped red onion in a bowl. She adds salt, lemon juice, thin slices of
green chili pepper, wishing there were mustard oil to pour into the mix. Ashima has
been consuming this concoction throughout her pregnancy, a humble approximation of
the snack sold for pennies on Calcutta sidewalks and on railway platforms throughout
India, spilling from newspaper cones. Even now that there is barely space inside her, it
is the one thing she craves. Tasting from a cupped palm, she frowns; as usual, there's
something missing. She stares blankly at the pegboard behind the countertop where her
cooking utensils hang, all slightly coated with grease. She wipes sweat from her face
with the free end of her sari. Her swollen feet ache against speckled gray linoleum. Her
pelvis aches from the baby's weight. She opens a cupboard, the shelves lined with a
grimy yellow-and-white-checkered paper she's been meaning to replace, and reaches
for another onion, frowning again as she pulls at its crisp magenta skin. A curious
warmth floods her abdomen, followed by a tightening so severe she doubles over,
gasping without sound, dropping the onion with a thud on the floor.
The sensation passes, only to be followed by a more enduring spasm of discomfort. In
the bathroom she discovers, on her underpants, a solid streak of brownish blood. She
calls out to her husband, Ashoke, a doctoral candidate in electrical engineering at MIT,
who is studying in the bedroom. He leans over a card table; the edge of their bed, two
twin mattresses pushed together under a red and purple batik spread, serves as his
chair. When she calls out to Ashoke, she doesn't say his name. Ashima never thinks of
her husband's name when she thinks of her husband, even though she knows perfectly
well what it is. She has adopted his surname but refuses, for propriety's sake, to utter
his first. It's not the type of thing Bengali wives do. Like a kiss or caress in a Hindi
movie, a husband's name is something intimate and therefore unspoken, cleverly
patched over. And so, instead of saying Ashoke's name, she utters the interrogative that
has come to replace it, which translates roughly as "Are you listening to me?"

At dawn a taxi is called to ferry them through deserted Cambridge streets, up
Massachusetts Avenue and past Harvard Yard, to Mount Auburn Hospital. Ashima
registers, answering questions about the frequency and duration of the contractions, as
Ashoke fills out the forms. She is seated in a wheelchair and pushed through the
shining, brightly lit corridors, whisked into an elevator more spacious than her kitchen.
On the maternity floor she is assigned to a bed by a window, in a room at the end of the
hall. She is asked to remove her Murshidabad silk sari in favor of a flowered cotton
gown that, to her mild embarrassment, only reaches her knees. A nurse offers to fold up
the sari but, exasperated by the six slippery yards, ends up stuffing the material into
Ashima's slate blue suitcase. Her obstetrician, Dr. Ashley, gauntly handsome in a Lord
Mountbatten sort of way, with fine sand-colored hair swept back from his temples,
arrives to examine her progress. The baby's head is in the proper position, has already
begun its descent. She is told that she is still in early labor, three centimeters dilated,
beginning to efface. "What does it mean, dilated?" she asks, and Dr. Ashley holds up
two fingers side by side, then draws them apart, explaining the unimaginable thing her
body must do in order for the baby to pass. The process will take some time, Dr. Ashley
tells her; given that this is her first pregnancy, labor can take twenty-four hours,
sometimes more. She searches for Ashoke's face, but he has stepped behind the
curtain the doctor has drawn. "I'll be back," Ashoke says to her in Bengali, and then a
nurse adds: "Don't you worry, Mr. Ganguli. She's got a long ways to go. We can take

over from here."
Now she is alone, cut off by curtains from the three other women in the room. One
woman's name, she gathers from bits of conversation, is Beverly. Another is Lois. Carol
lies to her left. "Goddamnit, goddamn you, this is hell," she hears one of them say. And
then a man's voice: "I love you, sweetheart." Words Ashima has neither heard nor
expects to hear from her own husband; this is not how they are. It is the first time in her
life she has slept alone, surrounded by strangers; all her life she has slept either in a
room with her parents, or with Ashoke at her side. She wishes the curtains were open,
so that she could talk to the American women. Perhaps one of them has given birth
before, can tell her what to expect. But she has gathered that Americans, in spite of
their public declarations of affection, in spite of their miniskirts and bikinis, in spite of
their hand-holding on the street and lying on top of each other on the Cambridge
Common, prefer their privacy. She spreads her fingers over the taut, enormous drum
her middle has become, wondering where the baby's feet and hands are at this
moment. The child is no longer restless; for the past few days, apart from the occasional
flutter, she has not felt it punch or kick or press against her ribs. She wonders if she is
the only Indian person in the hospital, but a gentle twitch from the baby reminds her that
she is, technically speaking, not alone. Ashima thinks it's strange that her child will be
born in a place most people enter either to suffer or to die. There is nothing to comfort
her in the off-white tiles of the floor, the off-white panels of the ceiling, the white sheets
tucked tightly into the bed. In India, she thinks to herself, women go home to their
parents to give birth, away from husbands and in-laws and household cares, retreating
briefly to childhood when the baby arrives.
Another contraction begins, more violent than the last. She cries out, pressing her head
against the pillow. Her fingers grip the chilly rails of the bed. No one hears her, no nurse
rushes to her side. She has been instructed to time the duration of the contractions and
so she consults her watch, a bon voyage gift from her parents, slipped over her wrist the
last time she saw them, amid airport confusion and tears. It wasn't until she was on the
plane, flying for the first time in her life on a BOAC VC-10 whose deafening ascent
twenty-six members of her family had watched from the balcony at Dum Dum Airport, as
she was drifting over parts of India she'd never set foot in, and then even farther,
outside India itself, that she'd noticed the watch among the cavalcade of matrimonial
bracelets on both her arms: iron, gold, coral, conch. Now, in addition, she wears a
plastic bracelet with a typed label identifying her as a patient of the hospital. She keeps
the watch face turned to the inside of her wrist. On the back, surrounded by the words
waterproof, antimagnetic, and shock-protected, her married initials, A.G., are inscribed.
American seconds tick on top of her pulse point. For half a minute, a band of pain wraps
around her stomach, radiating toward her back and shooting down her legs. And then,
again, relief. She calculates the Indian time on her hands. The tip of her thumb strikes
each rung of the brown ladders etched onto the backs of her fingers, then stops at the
middle of the third: it is nine and a half hours ahead in Calcutta, already evening, half
past eight. In the kitchen of her parents' flat on Amherst Street, at this very moment, a
servant is pouring after-dinner tea into steaming glasses, arranging Marie biscuits on a
tray. Her mother, very soon to be a grandmother, is standing at the mirror of her
dressing table, untangling waist-length hair, still more black than gray, with her fingers.
Her father hunches over his slanted ink-stained table by the window, sketching,
smoking, listening to the Voice of America. Her younger brother, Rana, studies for a
physics exam on the bed. She pictures clearly the gray cement floor of her parents'
sitting room, feels its solid chill underfoot even on the hottest days. An enormous blackand-white photograph of her deceased paternal grandfather looms at one end against
the pink plaster wall; opposite, an alcove shielded by clouded panes of glass is stuffed
with books and papers and her father's watercolor tins. For an instant the weight of the
baby vanishes, replaced by the scene that passes before her eyes, only to be replaced
once more by a blue strip of the Charles River, thick green treetops, cars gliding up and
down Memorial Drive.
In Cambridge it is eleven in the morning, already lunchtime in the hospital's accelerated

day. A tray holding warm apple juice, Jell-O, ice cream, and cold baked chicken is
brought to her side. Patty, the friendly nurse with the diamond engagement ring and a
fringe of reddish hair beneath her cap, tells Ashima to consume only the Jell-O and the
apple juice. It's just as well. Ashima would not have touched the chicken, even if
permitted; Americans eat their chicken in its skin, though Ashima has recently found a
kind butcher on Prospect Street willing to pull it off for her. Patty comes to fluff the
pillows, tidy the bed. Dr. Ashley pokes in his head from time to time. "No need to worry,"
he chirps, putting a stethoscope to Ashima's belly, patting her hand, admiring her
various bracelets. "Everything is looking perfectly normal. We are expecting a perfectly
normal delivery, Mrs. Ganguli."
But nothing feels normal to Ashima. For the past eighteen months, ever since she's
arrived in Cambridge, nothing has felt normal at all. It's not so much the pain, which she
knows, somehow, she will survive. It's the consequence: motherhood in a foreign land.
For it was one thing to be pregnant, to suffer the queasy mornings in bed, the sleepless
nights, the dull throbbing in her back, the countless visits to the bathroom. Throughout
the experience, in spite of her growing discomfort, she'd been astonished by her body's
ability to make life, exactly as her mother and grandmother and all her greatgrandmothers had done. That it was happening so far from home, unmonitored and
unobserved by those she loved, had made it more miraculous still. But she is terrified to
raise a child in a country where she is related to no one, where she knows so little,
where life seems so tentative and spare.
"How about a little walk? It might do you good," Patty asks when she comes to clear the
lunch tray.
Ashima looks up from a tattered copy of Desh magazine that she'd brought to read on
her plane ride to Boston and still cannot bring herself to throw away. The printed pages
of Bengali type, slightly rough to the touch, are a perpetual comfort to her. She's read
each of the short stories and poems and articles a dozen times. There is a pen-and-ink
drawing on page eleven by her father, an illustrator for the magazine: a view of the
North Calcutta skyline sketched from the roof of their flat one foggy January morning.
She had stood behind her father as he'd drawn it, watching as he crouched over his
easel, a cigarette dangling from his lips, his shoulders wrapped in a black Kashmiri
shawl.
"Yes, all right," Ashima says.
Patty helps Ashima out of bed, tucks her feet one by one into slippers, drapes a second
nightgown around her shoulders. "Just think," Patty says as Ashima struggles to stand.
"In a day or two you'll be half the size." She takes Ashima's arm as they step out of the
room, into the hallway. After a few feet Ashima stops, her legs trembling as another
wave of pain surges through her body. She shakes her head, her eyes filling with tears.
"I cannot."
"You can. Squeeze my hand. Squeeze as tight as you like."
After a minute they continue on, toward the nurses' station. "Hoping for a boy or a girl?"
Patty asks.
"As long as there are ten finger and ten toe," Ashima replies. For these anatomical
details, these particular signs of life, are the ones she has the most difficulty picturing
when she imagines the baby in her arms.
Patty smiles, a little too widely, and suddenly Ashima realizes her error, knows she
should have said "fingers" and "toes." This error pains her almost as much as her last
contraction. English had been her subject. In Calcutta, before she was married, she was
working toward a college degree. She used to tutor neighborhood schoolchildren in their
homes, on their verandas and beds, helping them to memorize Tennyson and
Wordsworth, to pronounce words like sign and cough, to understand the difference
between Aristotelian and Shakespearean tragedy. But in Bengali, a finger can also
mean fingers, a toe toes.
It had been after tutoring one day that Ashima's mother had met her at the door, told
her to go straight to the bedroom and prepare herself; a man was waiting to see her. He

was the third in as many months. The first had been a widower with four children. The
second, a newspaper cartoonist who knew her father, had been hit by a bus in
Esplanade and lost his left arm. To her great relief they had both rejected her. She was
nineteen, in the middle of her studies, in no rush to be a bride. And so, obediently but
without expectation, she had untangled and rebraided her hair, wiped away the kohl that
had smudged below her eyes, patted some Cuticura powder from a velvet puff onto her
skin. The sheer parrot green sari she pleated and tucked into her petticoat had been
laid out for her on the bed by her mother. Before entering the sitting room, Ashima had
paused in the corridor. She could hear her mother saying, "She is fond of cooking, and
she can knit extremely well. Within a week she finished this cardigan I am wearing."
Ashima smiled, amused by her mother's salesmanship; it had taken her the better part
of a year to finish the cardigan, and still her mother had had to do the sleeves. Glancing
at the floor where visitors customarily removed their slippers, she noticed, beside two
sets of chappals, a pair of men's shoes that were not like any she'd ever seen on the
streets and trams and buses of Calcutta, or even in the windows of Bata. They were
brown shoes with black heels and off-white laces and stitching. There was a band of
lentil-sized holes embossed on either side of each shoe, and at the tips was a pretty
pattern pricked into the leather as if with a needle. Looking more closely, she saw the
shoemaker's name written on the insides, in gold lettering that had all but faded:
something and sons, it said. She saw the size, eight and a half, and the initials U.S.A.
And as her mother continued to sing her praises, Ashima, unable to resist a sudden and
overwhelming urge, stepped into the shoes at her feet. Lingering sweat from the
owner's feet mingled with hers, causing her heart to race; it was the closest thing she
had ever experienced to the touch of a man. The leather was creased, heavy, and still
warm. On the left shoe she had noticed that one of the crisscrossing laces had missed a
hole, and this oversight set her at ease.
She extracted her feet, entered the room. The man was sitting in a rattan chair, his
parents perched on the edge of the twin bed where her brother slept at night. He was
slightly plump, scholarly-looking but still youthful, with black thick-framed glasses and a
sharp, prominent nose. A neatly trimmed mustache connected to a beard that covered
only his chin lent him an elegant, vaguely aristocratic air. He wore brown socks and
brown trousers and a green-and-white-striped shirt and was staring glumly at his knees.
He did not look up when she appeared. Though she was aware of his gaze as she
crossed the room, by the time she managed to steal another look at him he was once
again indifferent, focused on his knees. He cleared his throat as if to speak but then
said nothing. Instead it was his father who did the talking, saying that the man had gone
to St. Xavier's, and then B.E. College, graduating first-class-first from both institutions.
Ashima took her seat and smoothed the pleats of her sari. She sensed the mother
eyeing her with approval. Ashima was five feet four inches, tall for a Bengali woman,
ninety-nine pounds. Her complexion was on the dark side of fair, but she had been
compared on more than one occasion to the actress Madhabi Mukherjee. Her nails
were admirably long, her fingers, like her father's, artistically slim. They inquired after
her studies and she was asked to recite a few stanzas from "The Daffodils." The man's
family lived in Alipore. The father was a labor officer for the customs department of a
shipping company. "My son has been living abroad for two years," the man's father said,
"earning a Ph.D. in Boston, researching in the field of fiber optics." Ashima had never
heard of Boston, or of fiber optics. She was asked whether she was willing to fly on a
plane and then if she was capable of living in a city characterized by severe, snowy
winters, alone.
"Won't he be there?" she'd asked, pointing to the man whose shoes she'd briefly
occupied, but who had yet to say a word to her.
It was only after the betrothal that she'd learned his name. One week later the
invitations were printed, and two weeks after that she was adorned and adjusted by
countless aunts, countless cousins hovering around her. These were her last moments
as Ashima Bhaduri, before becoming Ashima Ganguli. Her lips were darkened, her
brow and cheeks dotted with sandalwood paste, her hair wound up, bound with flowers,

held in place by a hundred wire pins that would take an hour to remove once the
wedding was finally over. Her head was draped with scarlet netting. The air was damp,
and in spite of the pins Ashima's hair, thickest of all the cousins', would not lie flat. She
wore all the necklaces and chokers and bracelets that were destined to live most of their
lives in an extra-large safety deposit box in a bank vault in New England. At the
designated hour she was seated on a piri that her father had decorated, hoisted five feet
off the ground, carried out to meet the groom. She had hidden her face with a heartshaped betel leaf, kept her head bent low until she had circled him seven times.
Eight thousand miles away in Cambridge, she has come to know him. In the evenings
she cooks for him, hoping to please, with the unrationed, remarkably unblemished
sugar, flour, rice, and salt she had written about to her mother in her very first letter
home. By now she has learned that her husband likes his food on the salty side, that his
favorite thing about lamb curry is the potatoes, and that he likes to finish his dinner with
a small final helping of rice and dal. At night, lying beside her in bed, he listens to her
describe the events of her day: her walks along Massachusetts Avenue, the shops she
visits, the Hare Krishnas who pester her with their leaflets, the pistachio ice cream
cones she treats herself to in Harvard Square. In spite of his meager graduate student
wages he sets aside money to send every few months to his father to help put an
extension on his parents' house. He is fastidious about his clothing; their first argument
had been over a sweater she'd shrunk in the washing machine. As soon as he comes
home from the university the first thing he does is hang up his shirt and trousers,
donning a pair of drawstring pajamas and a pullover if it's cold. On Sundays he spends
an hour occupied with his tins of shoe polishes and his three pairs of shoes, two black
and one brown. The brown ones are the ones he'd been wearing when he'd first come
to see her. The sight of him cross-legged on newspapers spread on the floor, intently
whisking a brush over the leather, always reminds her of her indiscretion in her parents'
corridor. It is a moment that shocks her still, and that she prefers, in spite of all she tells
him at night about the life they now share, to keep to herself.

On another floor of the hospital, in a waiting room, Ashoke hunches over a Boston
Globe from a month ago, abandoned on a neighboring chair. He reads about the riots
that took place during the Democratic National Convention in Chicago and about Dr.
Benjamin Spock, the baby doctor, being sentenced to two years in jail for threatening to
counsel draft evaders. The Favre Leuba strapped to his wrist is running six minutes
ahead of the large gray-faced clock on the wall. It is four-thirty in the morning. An hour
before, Ashoke had been fast asleep, at home, Ashima's side of the bed covered with
exams he'd been grading late at night, when the telephone rang. Ashima was fully
dilated and being taken to the delivery room, the person on the other end had said.
Upon arrival at the hospital he was told that she was pushing, that it could be any
minute now. Any minute. And yet it seemed only the other day, one steel-colored
winter's morning when the windows of the house were being pelted with hail, that she
had spit out her tea, accusing him of mistaking the salt for sugar. To prove himself right
he had taken a sip of the sweet liquid from her cup, but she had insisted on its
bitterness, and poured it down the sink. That was the first thing that had caused her to
suspect, and then the doctor had confirmed it, and then he would wake to the sounds,
every morning when she went to brush her teeth, of her retching. Before he left for the
university he would leave a cup of tea by the side of the bed, where she lay listless and
silent. Often, returning in the evenings, he would find her still lying there, the tea
untouched.
He now desperately needs a cup of tea for himself, not having managed to make one
before leaving the house. But the machine in the corridor dispenses only coffee, tepid at
best, in paper cups. He takes off his thick-rimmed glasses, fitted by a Calcutta
optometrist, polishes the lenses with the cotton handkerchief he always keeps in his
pocket, A for Ashoke embroidered by his mother in light blue thread. His black hair,
normally combed back neatly from his forehead, is disheveled, sections of it on end. He

stands and begins pacing as the other expectant fathers do. So far, the door to the
waiting room has opened twice, and a nurse has announced that one of them has a boy
or a girl. There are handshakes all around, pats on the back, before the father is
escorted away. The men wait with cigars, flowers, address books, bottles of
champagne. They smoke cigarettes, ashing onto the floor. Ashoke is indifferent to such
indulgences. He neither smokes nor drinks alcohol of any kind. Ashima is the one who
keeps all their addresses, in a small notebook she carries in her purse. It has never
occurred to him to buy his wife flowers.
He returns to the Globe, still pacing as he reads. A slight limp causes Ashoke's right
foot to drag almost imperceptibly with each step. Since childhood he has had the habit
and the ability to read while walking, holding a book in one hand on his way to school,
from room to room in his parents' three-story house in Alipore, and up and down the red
clay stairs. Nothing roused him. Nothing distracted him. Nothing caused him to stumble.
As a teenager he had gone through all of Dickens. He read newer authors as well,
Graham Greene and Somerset Maugham, all purchased from his favorite stall on
College Street with pujo money. But most of all he loved the Russians. His paternal
grandfather, a former professor of European literature at Calcutta University, had read
from them aloud in English translations when Ashoke was a boy. Each day at tea time,
as his brothers and sisters played kabadi and cricket outside, Ashoke would go to his
grandfather's room, and for an hour his grandfather would read supine on the bed, his
ankles crossed and the book propped open on his chest, Ashoke curled at his side. For
that hour Ashoke was deaf and blind to the world around him. He did not hear his
brothers and sisters laughing on the rooftop, or see the tiny, dusty, cluttered room in
which his grandfather read. "Read all the Russians, and then reread them," his
grandfather had said. "They will never fail you." When Ashoke's English was good
enough, he began to read the books himself. It was while walking on some of the
world's noisiest, busiest streets, on Chowringhee and Gariahat Road, that he had read
pages of The Brothers Karamazov, and Anna Karenina, and Fathers and Sons. Once, a
younger cousin who had tried to imitate him had fallen down the red clay staircase in
Ashoke's house and broken an arm. Ashoke's mother was always convinced that her
eldest son would be hit by a bus or a tram, his nose deep into War and Peace. That he
would be reading a book the moment he died.
One day, in the earliest hours of October 20, 1961, this nearly happened. Ashoke was
twenty-two, a student at B.E. College. He was traveling on the 83 Up Howrah-Ranchi
Express to visit his grandparents for the holidays; they had moved from Calcutta to
Jamshedpur upon his grandfather's retirement from the university. Ashoke had never
spent the holidays away from his family. But his grandfather had recently gone blind,
and he had requested Ashoke's company specifically, to read him The Statesman in the
morning, Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy in the afternoon. Ashoke accepted the invitation
eagerly. He carried two suitcases, the first one containing clothes and gifts, the second
empty. For it would be on this visit, his grandfather had said, that the books in his glassfronted case, collected over a lifetime and preserved under lock and key, would be
given to Ashoke. The books had been promised to Ashoke throughout his childhood,
and for as long as he could remember he had coveted them more than anything else in
the world. He had already received a few in recent years, given to him on birthdays and
other special occasions. But now that the day had come to inherit the rest, a day his
grandfather could no longer read the books himself, Ashoke was saddened, and as he
placed the empty suitcase under his seat, he was disconcerted by its weightlessness,
regretful of the circumstances that would cause it, upon his return, to be full.
He carried a single volume for the journey, a hardbound collection of short stories by
Nikolai Gogol, which his grandfather had given him when he'd graduated from class
twelve. On the title page, beneath his grandfather's signature, Ashoke had written his
own. Because of Ashoke's passion for this particular book, the spine had recently split,
threatening to divide the pages into two sections. His favorite story in the book was the
last, "The Overcoat," and that was the one Ashoke had begun to reread as the train
pulled out of Howrah Station late in the evening with a prolonged and deafening shriek,

away from his parents and his six younger brothers and sisters, all of whom had come
to see him off and had huddled until the last moment by the window, waving to him from
the long dusky platform. He had read "The Overcoat" too many times to count, certain
sentences and phrases embedded in his memory. Each time he was captivated by the
absurd, tragic, yet oddly inspiring story of Akaky Akakyevich, the impoverished main
character who spends his life meekly copying documents written by others and suffering
the ridicule of absolutely everyone. His heart went out to poor Akaky, a humble clerk
just as Ashoke's father had been at the start of his career. Each time, reading the
account of Akaky's christening, and the series of queer names his mother had rejected,
Ashoke laughed aloud. He shuddered at the description of the tailor Petrovich's big toe,
"with its deformed nail as thick and hard as the shell of a tortoise." His mouth watered at
the cold veal and cream pastries and champagne Akaky consumed the night his
precious coat was stolen, in spite of the fact that Ashoke had never tasted these things
himself. Ashoke was always devastated when Akaky was robbed in "a square that
looked to him like a dreadful desert," leaving him cold and vulnerable, and Akaky's
death, some pages later, never failed to bring tears to his eyes. In some ways the story
made less sense each time he read it, the scenes he pictured so vividly, and absorbed
so fully, growing more elusive and profound. Just as Akaky's ghost haunted the final
pages, so did it haunt a place deep in Ashoke's soul, shedding light on all that was
irrational, all that was inevitable about the world.
Outside the view turned quickly black, the scattered lights of Howrah giving way to
nothing at all. He had a second-class sleeper in the seventh bogie, behind the airconditioned coach. Because of the season, the train was especially crowded, especially
raucous, filled with families on holiday. Small children were wearing their best clothing,
the girls with brightly colored ribbons in their hair. Though he had had his dinner before
leaving for the station, a four-layer tiffin carrier packed by his mother sat at his feet, in
the event that hunger should attack him in the night. He shared his compartment with
three others. There was a middle-aged Bihari couple who, he gathered from
overhearing their conversation, had just married off their eldest daughter, and a friendly,
potbellied, middle-aged Bengali businessman wearing a suit and tie, by the name of
Ghosh. Ghosh told Ashoke that he had recently returned to India after spending two
years in England on a job voucher, but that he had come back home because his wife
was inconsolably miserable abroad. Ghosh spoke reverently of England. The sparkling,
empty streets, the polished black cars, the rows of gleaming white houses, he said,
were like a dream. Trains departed and arrived according to schedule, Ghosh said. No
one spat on the sidewalks. It was in a British hospital that his son had been born.
"Seen much of this world?" Ghosh asked Ashoke, untying his shoes and settling himself
cross-legged on the berth. He pulled a packet of Dunhill cigarettes from his jacket
pocket, offering them around the compartment before lighting one for himself.
"Once to Delhi," Ashoke replied. "And lately once a year to Jamshedpur."
Ghosh extended his arm out the window, flicking the glowing tip of his cigarette into the
night. "Not this world," he said, glancing disappointedly about the interior of the train. He
tilted his head toward the window. "England. America," he said, as if the nameless
villages they passed had been replaced by those countries. "Have you considered
going there?"
"My professors mention it from time to time. But I have a family," Ashoke said.
Ghosh frowned. "Already married?"
"No. A mother and father and six siblings. I am the eldest."
"And in a few years you will be married and living in your parents' house," Ghosh
speculated.
"I suppose."
Ghosh shook his head. "You are still young. Free," he said, spreading his hands apart
for emphasis. "Do yourself a favor. Before it's too late, without thinking too much about it
first, pack a pillow and a blanket and see as much of the world as you can. You will not
regret it. One day it will be too late."

"My grandfather always says that's what books are for," Ashoke said, using the
opportunity to open the volume in his hands. "To travel without moving an inch."
"To each his own," Ghosh said. He tipped his head politely to one side, letting the last of
the cigarette drop from his fingertips. He reached into a bag by his feet and took out his
diary, turning to the twentieth of October. The page was blank and on it, with a fountain
pen whose cap he ceremoniously unscrewed, he wrote his name and address. He
ripped out the page and handed it to Ashoke. "If you ever change your mind and need
contacts, let me know. I live in Tollygunge, just behind the tram depot."
"Thank you," Ashoke said, folding up the information and putting it at the back of his
book.
"How about a game of cards?" Ghosh suggested. He pulled out a well-worn deck from
his suit pocket, with Big Ben's image on the back. But Ashoke politely declined, for he
knew no card games, and besides which, he preferred to read. One by one the
passengers brushed their teeth in the vestibule, changed into their pajamas, fastened
the curtain around their compartments, and went to sleep. Ghosh offered to take the
upper berth, climbing barefoot up the ladder, his suit carefully folded away, so that
Ashoke had the window to himself. The Bihari couple shared some sweets from a box
and drank water from the same cup without either of them putting their lips to the rim,
then settled into their berths as well, switching off the lights and turning their heads to
the wall.
Only Ashoke continued to read, still seated, still dressed. A single small bulb glowed
dimly over his head. From time to time he looked through the open window at the inky
Bengal night, at the vague shapes of palm trees and the simplest of homes. Carefully
he turned the soft yellow pages of his book, a few delicately tunneled by worms. The
steam engine puffed reassuringly, powerfully. Deep in his chest he felt the rough jostle
of the wheels. Sparks from the smokestack passed by his window. A fine layer of sticky
soot dotted one side of his face, his eyelid, his arm, his neck; his grandmother would
insist that he scrub himself with a cake of Margo soap as soon as he arrived. Immersed
in the sartorial plight of Akaky Akakyevich, lost in the wide, snow-white, windy avenues
of St. Petersburg, unaware that one day he was to dwell in a snowy place himself,
Ashoke was still reading at two-thirty in the morning, one of the few passengers on the
train who was awake, when the locomotive engine and seven bogies derailed from the
broad-gauge line. The sound was like a bomb exploding. The first four bogies capsized
into a depression alongside the track. The fifth and sixth, containing the first-class and
air-conditioned passengers, telescoped into each other, killing the passengers in their
sleep. The seventh, where Ashoke was sitting, capsized as well, flung by the speed of
the crash farther into the field. The accident occurred 209 kilometers from Calcutta,
between the Ghatshila and Dhalbumgarh stations. The train guard's portable phone
would not work; it was only after the guard ran nearly five kilometers from the site of the
accident, to Ghatshila, that he was able to transmit the first message for help. Over an
hour passed before the rescuers arrived, bearing lanterns and shovels and axes to pry
bodies from the cars.
Ashoke can still remember their shouts, asking if anyone was alive. He remembers
trying to shout back, unsuccessfully, his mouth emitting nothing but the faintest rasp. He
remembers the sound of people half-dead around him, moaning and tapping on the
walls of the train, whispering hoarsely for help, words that only those who were also
trapped and injured could possibly hear. Blood drenched his chest and the right arm of
his shirt. He had been thrust partway out the window. He remembers being unable to
see anything at all; for the first hours he thought that perhaps, like his grandfather whom
he was on his way to visit, he'd gone blind. He remembers the acrid odor of flames, the
buzzing of flies, children crying, the taste of dust and blood on his tongue. They were
nowhere, somewhere in a field. Milling about them were villagers, police inspectors, a
few doctors. He remembers believing that he was dying, that perhaps he was already
dead. He could not feel the lower half of his body, and so was unaware that the
mangled limbs of Ghosh were draped over his legs. Eventually he saw the cold,
unfriendly blue of earliest morning, the moon and a few stars still lingering in the sky.

The pages of his book, which had been tossed from his hand, fluttered in two sections a
few feet away from the train. The glare from a search lantern briefly caught the pages,
momentarily distracting one of the rescuers. "Nothing here," Ashoke heard someone
say. "Let's keep going."
But the lantern's light lingered, just long enough for Ashoke to raise his hand, a gesture
that he believed would consume the small fragment of life left in him. He was still
clutching a single page of "The Overcoat," crumpled tightly in his fist, and when he
raised his hand the wad of paper dropped from his fingers. "Wait!" he heard a voice cry
out. "The fellow by that book. I saw him move."
He was pulled from the wreckage, placed on a stretcher, transported on another train to
a hospital in Tatanagar. He had broken his pelvis, his right femur, and three of his ribs
on the right side. For the next year of his life he lay flat on his back, ordered to keep as
still as possible as the bones of his body healed. There was a risk that his right leg
might be perma nently paralyzed. He was transferred to Calcutta Medical College,
where two screws were put into his hips. By December he had returned to his parents'
house in Alipore, carried through the courtyard and up the red clay stairs like a corpse,
hoisted on the shoulders of his four brothers. Three times a day he was spoon-fed. He
urinated and defecated into a tin pan. Doctors and visitors came and went. Even his
blind grandfather from Jamshedpur paid a visit. His family had saved the newspaper
accounts. In a photograph, he observed the train smashed to shards, piled jaggedly
against the sky, security guards sitting on the unclaimed belongings. He learned that
fishplates and bolts had been found several feet from the main track, giving rise to the
suspicion, never subsequently confirmed, of sabotage. That bodies had been mutilated
beyond recognition. "Holiday-Makers' Tryst with Death," the Times of India had written.
In the beginning, for most of the day, he had stared at his bedroom ceiling, at the three
beige blades of the fan churning at its center, their edges grimy. He could hear the top
edge of a calendar scraping against the wall behind him when the fan was on. If he
moved his neck to the right he had a view of a window with a dusty bottle of Dettol on its
ledge and, if the shutters were open, the concrete of the wall that surrounded the house,
the pale brown geckos that scampered there. He listened to the constant parade of
sounds outside, footsteps, bicycle bells, the incessant squawking of crows and of the
horns of cycle rickshaws in the lane so narrow that taxis could not fit. He heard the tube
well at the corner being pumped into urns. Every evening at dusk he heard a conch
shell being blown in the house next door to signal the hour for prayer. He could smell
but not see the shimmering green sludge that collected in the open sewer. Life within
the house continued. His father came and went from work, his brothers and sisters from
school. His mother worked in the kitchen, checking in on him periodically, her lap
stained with turmeric. Twice daily the maid twisted rags into buckets of water and wiped
the floors.
During the day he was groggy from painkillers. At night he dreamed either that he was
still trapped inside the train or, worse, that the accident had never happened, that he
was walking down a street, taking a bath, sitting cross-legged on the floor and eating a
plate of food. And then he would wake up, coated in sweat, tears streaming down his
face, convinced that he would never live to do such things again. Eventually, in an
attempt to avoid his nightmares, he began to read, late at night, which was when his
motionless body felt most restless, his mind agile and clear. Yet he refused to read the
Russians his grandfather had brought to his bedside, or any novels, for that matter.
Those books, set in countries he had never seen, reminded him only of his confinement.
Instead he read his engineering books, trying his best to keep up with his courses,
solving equations by flashlight. In those silent hours, he thought often of Ghosh. "Pack a
pillow and a blanket," he heard Ghosh say. He remembered the address Ghosh had
written on a page of his diary, somewhere behind the tram depot in Tollygunge. Now it
was the home of a widow, a fatherless son. Each day, to bolster his spirits, his family
reminded him of the future, the day he would stand unassisted, walk across the room. It
was for this, each day, that his father and mother prayed. For this that his mother gave
up meat on Wednesdays. But as the months passed, Ashoke began to envision another

sort of future. He imagined not only walking, but walking away, as far as he could from
the place in which he was born and in which he had nearly died. The following year,
with the aid of a cane, he returned to college and graduated, and without telling his
parents he applied to continue his engineering studies abroad. Only after he'd been
accepted with a full fellowship, a newly issued passport in hand, did he inform them of
his plans. "But we already nearly lost you once," his bewildered father had protested.
His siblings had pleaded and wept. His mother, speechless, had refused food for three
days. In spite of all that, he'd gone.
Seven years later, there are still certain images that wipe him flat. They lurk around a
corner as he rushes through the engineering department at MIT, checks his campus
mail. They hover by his shoulder as he leans over a plate of rice at dinnertime or nestles
against Ashima's limbs at night. At every turning point in his life—at his wedding when
he stood behind Ashima, encircling her waist and peering over her shoulder as they
poured puffed rice into a fire, or during his first hours in America, seeing a small gray
city caked with snow—he has tried but failed to push these images away: the twisted,
battered, capsized bogies of the train, his body twisted below it, the terrible crunching
sound he had heard but not comprehended, his bones crushed as fine as flour. It is not
the memory of pain that haunts him; he has no memory of that. It is the memory of
waiting before he was rescued, and the persistent fear, rising up in his throat, that he
might not have been rescued at all. To this day he is claustrophobic, holding his breath
in elevators, feels pent-up in cars unless the windows are open on both sides. On
planes he requests the bulkhead seat. At times the wailing of children fills him with
deepest dread. At times he still presses his ribs to make sure they are solid.
He presses them now, in the hospital, shaking his head in relief, disbelief. Although it is
Ashima who carries the child, he, too, feels heavy, with the thought of life, of his life and
the life about to come from it. He was raised without running water, nearly killed at
twenty-two. Again he tastes the dust on his tongue, sees the twisted train, the giant
overturned iron wheels. None of this was supposed to happen. But no, he had survived
it. He was born twice in India, and then a third time, in America. Three lives by thirty. For
this he thanks his parents, and their parents, and the parents of their parents. He does
not thank God; he openly reveres Marx and quietly refuses religion. But there is one
more dead soul he has to thank. He cannot thank the book; the book has perished, as
he nearly did, in scattered pieces, in the earliest hours of an October day, in a field 209
kilometers from Calcutta. Instead of thanking God he thanks Gogol, the Russian writer
who had saved his life, when Patty enters the waiting room.

2
The baby, a boy, is born at five past five in the morning. He measures twenty inches
long, weighs seven pounds nine ounces. Ashima's initial glimpse, before the cord is
clipped and they carry him away, is of a creature coated with a thick white paste, and
streaks of blood, her blood, on the shoulders, feet, and head. A needle placed in the
small of her back has removed all sensation from her waist to her knees, and given her
a blistering headache in the final stages of the delivery. When it is all over she begins to
shiver profoundly, as if beset with an acute fever. For half an hour she trembles, in a
daze, covered by a blanket, her insides empty, her outside still misshapen. She is
unable to speak, to allow the nurses to help exchange her blood-soaked gown for a
fresh one. In spite of endless glasses of water, her throat is parched. She is told to sit
on a toilet, to squirt warm water from a bottle between her legs. Eventually she is
sponged clean, put into a new gown, wheeled into yet another room. The lights are
soothingly dim, and there is only one other bed next to hers, empty for the time being.
When Ashoke arrives, Patty is taking Ashima's blood pressure, and Ashima is reclining
against a pile of pillows, the child wrapped like an oblong white parcel in her arms.
Beside the bed is a bassinet, labeled with a card that says BABY BOY GANGULI.
"He's here," she says quietly, looking up at Ashoke with a weak smile. Her skin is faintly
yellow, the color missing from her lips. She has circles beneath her eyes, and her hair,
spilling from its braid, looks as though it has not been combed for days. Her voice is
hoarse, as if she'd caught a cold. He pulls up a chair by the side of the bed and Patty
helps to transfer the child from mother's to father's arms. In the process, the child
pierces the silence in the room with a short-lived cry. His parents react with mutual
alarm, but Patty laughs approvingly. "You see," Patty says to Ashima, "he's already
getting to know you."
Ashoke does as Patty tells him, stretching out his arms, putting one hand below the
neck, another below the bottom.
"Go on," Patty urges. "He wants to be held tightly. He's stronger than you think."
Ashoke lifts the minuscule parcel higher, closer to his chest. "Like this?"
"There you go," Patty says. "I'll leave you three alone for a while."
At first Ashoke is more perplexed than moved, by the pointiness of the head, the
puffiness of the lids, the small white spots on the cheeks, the fleshy upper lip that
droops prominently over the lower one. The skin is paler than either Ashima's or his
own, translucent enough to show slim green veins at the temples. The scalp is covered
by a mass of wispy black hair. He attempts to count the eyelashes. He feels gently
through the flannel for the hands and feet.
"It's all there," Ashima says, watching her husband. "I already checked."
"What are the eyes like? Why won't he open them? Has he opened them?"
She nods.
"What can he see? Can he see us?"
"I think so. But not very clearly. And not in full color. Not yet."
They sit in silence, the three of them as still as stones. "How are you feeling? Was it all
right?" he asks Ashima.
But there is no answer, and when Ashoke lifts his gaze from his son's face he sees that
she, too, is sleeping.
When he looks back to the child, the eyes are open, staring up at him, unblinking, as
dark as the hair on its head. The face is transformed; Ashoke has never seen a more
perfect thing. He imagines himself as a dark, grainy, blurry presence. As a father to his
son. Again he thinks of the night he was nearly killed, the memory of those hours that
have forever marked him flickering and fading in his mind. Being rescued from that
shattered train had been the first miracle of his life. But here, now, reposing in his arms,
weighing next to nothing but changing everything, is the second.

Apart from his father, the baby has three visitors, all Bengali—Maya and Dilip Nandi, a
young married couple in Cambridge whom Ashima and Ashoke met a few months ago
in the Purity Supreme, and Dr. Gupta, a mathematics postdoc from Dehradun, a
bachelor in his fifties, whom Ashoke has befriended in the corridors of MIT. At feeding
times the gentlemen, including Ashoke, step out into the hall. Maya and Dilip give the
boy a rattle and a baby book, with places for his parents to commemorate every
possible aspect of his infancy. There is even a circle in which to paste a few strands
from his first haircut. Dr. Gupta gives the boy a handsome illustrated copy of Mother
Goose rhymes. "Lucky boy," Ashoke remarks, turning the beautifully sewn pages. "Only
hours old and already the owner of books." What a difference, he thinks, from the
childhood he has known.
Ashima thinks the same, though for different reasons. For as grateful as she feels for
the company of the Nandis and Dr. Gupta, these acquaintances are only substitutes for
the people who really ought to be surrounding them. Without a single grandparent or
parent or uncle or aunt at her side, the baby's birth, like most everything else in
America, feels somehow haphazard, only half true. As she strokes and suckles and
studies her son, she can't help but pity him. She has never known of a person entering
the world so alone, so deprived.
Because neither set of grandparents has a working telephone, their only link to home is
by telegram, which Ashoke has sent to both sides in Calcutta: "With your blessings, boy
and mother fine." As for a name, they have decided to let Ashima's grandmother, who is
past eighty now, who has named each of her other six great-grandchildren in the world,
do the honors. When her grandmother learned of Ashima's pregnancy, she was
particularly thrilled at the prospect of naming the family's first sahib. And so Ashima and
Ashoke have agreed to put off the decision of what to name the baby until a letter
comes, ignoring the forms from the hospital about filing for a birth certificate. Ashima's
grandmother has mailed the letter herself, walking with her cane to the post office, her
first trip out of the house in a decade. The letter contains one name for a girl, one for a
boy. Ashima's grandmother has revealed them to no one.
Though the letter was sent a month ago, in July, it has yet to arrive. Ashima and Ashoke
are not terribly concerned. After all, they both know, an infant doesn't really need a
name. He needs to be fed and blessed, to be given some gold and silver, to be patted
on the back after feedings and held carefully behind the neck. Names can wait. In India
parents take their time. It wasn't unusual for years to pass before the right name, the
best possible name, was determined. Ashima and Ashoke can both cite examples of
cousins who were not officially named until they were registered, at six or seven, in
school. The Nandis and Dr. Gupta understand perfectly. Of course you must wait, they
agree, wait for the name in his great-grandmother's letter.
Besides, there are always pet names to tide one over: a practice of Bengali
nomenclature grants, to every single person, two names. In Bengali the word for pet
name is daknam, mean ing, literally, the name by which one is called, by friends, family,
and other intimates, at home and in other private, unguarded moments. Pet names are
a persistent remnant of childhood, a reminder that life is not always so serious, so
formal, so complicated. They are a reminder, too, that one is not all things to all people.
They all have pet names. Ashima's pet name is Monu, Ashoke's is Mithu, and even as
adults, these are the names by which they are known in their respective families, the
names by which they are adored and scolded and missed and loved.
Every pet name is paired with a good name, a bhalonam, for identification in the outside
world. Consequently, good names appear on envelopes, on diplomas, in telephone
directories, and in all other public places. (For this reason, letters from Ashima's mother
say "Ashima" on the outside, "Monu" on the inside.) Good names tend to represent
dignified and enlightened qualities. Ashima means "she who is limitless, without
borders." Ashoke, the name of an emperor, means "he who transcends grief." Pet
names have no such aspirations. Pet names are never recorded officially, only uttered

and remembered. Unlike good names, pet names are frequently meaningless,
deliberately silly, ironic, even onomatopoetic. Often in one's infancy, one answers
unwittingly to dozens of pet names, until one eventually sticks.
And so at one point, when the baby screws up his rosy, wrinkled face and regards his
small circle of admirers, Mr. Nandi leans over and calls the baby "Buro," the Bengali
word for "old man."
"What's his name? Buro?" Patty inquires brightly, bearing another tray of baked chicken
for Ashima. Ashoke lifts the lid and polishes off the chicken; Ashima is now officially
referred to by the maternity nurses as the Jell-O-and-Ice-Cream Lady.
"No, no, that is not a name," Ashima explains. "We haven't chosen. My grandmother is
choosing."
Patty nods. "Will she be here soon?"
Ashima laughs, her first genuine laugh after giving birth. The thought of her
grandmother, born in the previous century, a shrunken woman in widow's white and
with tawny skin that refuses to wrinkle, boarding a plane and flying to Cambridge, is
inconceivable to her, a thought that, no matter how welcome, how desirable, feels
entirely impossible, absurd. "No. But a letter will."
That evening Ashoke goes home to the apartment, checks for the letter. Three days
come and go. Ashima is shown by the nursing staff how to change diapers and how to
clean the umbilical stub. She is given hot saltwater baths to soothe her bruises and
stitches. She is given a list of pediatricians, and countless brochures on breast-feeding,
and bonding, and immunizing, and samples of baby shampoos and Q-Tips and creams.
The fourth day there is good news and bad news. The good news is that Ashima and
the baby are to be discharged the following morning. The bad news is that they are told
by Mr. Wilcox, compiler of hospital birth certificates, that they must choose a name for
their son. For they learn that in America, a baby cannot be released from the hospital
without a birth certificate. And that a birth certificate needs a name.
"But, sir," Ashima protests, "we can't possibly name him ourselves."
Mr. Wilcox, slight, bald, unamused, glances at the couple, both visibly distressed, then
glances at the nameless child. "I see," he says. "The reason being?"
"We are waiting for a letter," Ashoke says, explaining the situation in detail.
"I see," Mr. Wilcox says again. "That is unfortunate. I'm afraid your only alternative is to
have the certificate read 'Baby Boy Ganguli.' You will, of course, be required to amend
the permanent record when a name is decided upon."
Ashima looks at Ashoke expectantly. "Is that what we should do?"
"I don't recommend it," Mr. Wilcox says. "You will have to appear before a judge, pay a
fee. The red tape is endless."
"Oh dear," Ashoke says.
Mr. Wilcox nods, and silence ensues. "Don't you have any backups?" he asks.
Ashima frowns. "What does it mean, 'backup'?"
"Well, something in reserve, in case you didn't like what your grandmother has chosen."
Ashima and Ashoke shake their heads. It has never occurred to either of them to
question Ashima's grandmother's selection, to disregard an elder's wishes in such a
way.
"You can always name him after yourself, or one of your ancestors," Mr. Wilcox
suggests, admitting that he is actually Howard Wilcox III. "It's a fine tradition. The kings
of France and England did it," he adds.
But this isn't possible, Ashima and Ashoke think to themselves. This tradition doesn't
exist for Bengalis, naming a son after father or grandfather, a daughter after mother or
grandmother. This sign of respect in America and Europe, this symbol of heritage and
lineage, would be ridiculed in India. Within Bengali families, individual names are
sacred, inviolable. They are not meant to be inherited or shared.
"Then what about naming him after another person? Someone you greatly admire?" Mr.
Wilcox says, his eyebrows raised hopefully. He sighs. "Think about it. I'll be back in a

few hours," he tells them, exiting the room.
The door shuts, which is when, with a slight quiver of recognition, as if he'd known it all
along, the perfect pet name for his son occurs to Ashoke. He remembers the page
crumpled tightly in his fingers, the sudden shock of the lantern's glare in his eyes. But
for the first time he thinks of that moment not with terror, but with gratitude.
"Hello, Gogol," he whispers, leaning over his son's haughty face, his tightly bundled
body. "Gogol," he repeats, satisfied. The baby turns his head with an expression of
extreme consternation and yawns.
Ashima approves, aware that the name stands not only for her son's life, but her
husband's. She knows the story of the ac cident, a story she first heard with polite
newlywed sympathy, but the thought of which now, now especially, makes her blood go
cold. There are nights when she has been woken by her husband's muffled screams,
times they have ridden the subway together and the rhythm of the wheels on the tracks
makes him suddenly pensive, aloof. She has never read any Gogol herself, but she is
willing to place him on a shelf in her mind, along with Tennyson and Wordsworth.
Besides, it's only a pet name, not to be taken seriously, simply something to put on the
certificate for now to release them from the hospital. When Mr. Wilcox returns with his
typewriter, Ashoke spells out the name. Thus Gogol Ganguli is registered in the
hospital's files. "Good-bye, Gogol," Patty says, planting a quiet kiss on his shoulder, and
to Ashima, dressed once again in her wrinkled silk sari, "Good luck." A first photograph,
somewhat overexposed, is taken by Dr. Gupta that broiling hot, late summer's day:
Gogol, an indistinct blanketed mass, reposing in his weary mother's arms. She stands
on the steps of the hospital, staring at the camera, her eyes squinting into the sun. Her
husband looks on from one side, his wife's suitcase in his hand, smiling with his head
lowered. "Gogol enters the world," his father will eventually write on the back in Bengali
letters.

Gogol's first home is a fully furnished apartment ten minutes by foot to Harvard, twenty
to MIT. The apartment is on the first floor of a three-story house, covered with salmoncolored shingles, surrounded by a waist-high chain-link fence. The gray of the roof, the
gray of cigarette ashes, matches the pavement of the sidewalk and the street. A row of
cars parked at meters perpetually lines one side of the curb. At the corner of the block
there is a small used bookstore, which one enters by going down three steps from the
sidewalk, and across from it a musty shop that sells the newspaper and cigarettes and
eggs, and where, to Ashima's mild disgust, a furry black cat is permitted to sit as it
pleases on the shelves. Other than these small businesses, there are more shingled
houses, the same shape and size and in the same state of mild decrepitude, painted
mint, or lilac, or powder blue. This is the house Ashoke had brought Ashima to eighteen
months ago, late one February night after her arrival at Logan Airport. In the dark,
through the windows of the taxi, wide awake from jet lag, she could barely make out a
thing, apart from heaps of broken snow glowing like shattered, bluish white bricks on the
ground. It wasn't until morning, stepping briefly outside wearing a pair of Ashoke's socks
under her thin-soled slippers, the frigid New England chill piercing her inner ears and
jaw, that she'd had her first real glimpse of America: Leafless trees with ice-covered
branches. Dog urine and excrement embedded in the snowbanks. Not a soul on the
street.
The apartment consists of three rooms all in a row without a corridor. There is a living
room at the front with a three-sided window overlooking the street, a pass-through
bedroom in the middle, a kitchen at the back. It is not at all what she had expected. Not
at all like the houses in Gone With the Wind or The Seven-Year Itch, movies she'd seen
with her brother and cousins at the Lighthouse and the Metro. The apartment is drafty
during winter, and in summer, intolerably hot. The thick glass windowpanes are covered
by dreary dark brown curtains. There are even roaches in the bathroom, emerging at
night from the cracks in the tiles. But she has complained of none of this. She has kept
her disappointment to herself, not wanting to offend Ashoke, or worry her parents.

Instead she writes, in her letters home, of the powerful cooking gas that flares up at any
time of day or night from four burners on the stove, and the hot tap water fierce enough
to scald her skin, and the cold water safe enough to drink.
The top two floors of the house are occupied by their landlords, the Montgomerys, a
Harvard sociology professor and his wife. The Montgomerys have two children, both
girls, Amber and Clover, aged seven and nine, whose waist-length hair is never braided,
and who play on warm days for hours on a tire swing rigged to the only tree in the
backyard. The professor, who has told Ashima and Ashoke to call him Alan, not
Professor Montgomery as they had at first addressed him, has a wiry rust-colored beard
that makes him look much older than he actually is. They see him walking to Harvard
Yard in a pair of threadbare trousers, a fringed suede jacket, and rubber flip-flops.
Rickshaw drivers dress better than professors here, Ashoke, who still attends meetings
with his adviser in a jacket and tie, thinks frequently to himself. The Montgomerys have
a dull green Volkswagen van covered with stickers: QUESTION AUTHORITY! GIVE A DAMN!
BAN THE BRA! PEACE! They have a washing machine in the basement which Ashoke and
Ashima are permitted to share, a television in their living room which Ashoke and
Ashima can hear clearly through the ceiling. It had been through the ceiling one night in
April, when Ashoke and Ashima were eating their dinner, that they'd heard about the
assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., and just recently, of Senator Robert Kennedy.
Sometimes Ashima and Alan's wife, Judy, stand side by side in the yard, clipping
clothes to the line. Judy always wears blue jeans, torn up into shorts once summer
comes, and a necklace of small seashells around her throat. A red cotton scarf over her
stringy yellow hair, the same texture and shade as her daughters', is always tied at the
back of her neck. She works for a women's health collective in Somerville a few days a
week. When she learned of Ashima's pregnancy she approved of Ashima's decision to
breast-feed but had been disappointed to learn that Ashima was going to put herself in
the hands of the medical establishment for her child's delivery; Judy's daughters were
born at home, with the help of midwives at the collective. Some nights Judy and Alan go
out, leaving Amber and Clover unsupervised at home. Only once, when Clover had a
cold, did they ask Ashima if she could check in on them. Ashima remembers their
apartment with abiding horror—just beyond the ceiling yet so different from her own,
piles everywhere, piles of books and papers, piles of dirty plates on the kitchen counter,
ashtrays the size of serving platters heaped with crushed-out cigarettes. The girls slept
together on a bed piled with clothes. Sitting momentarily on the edge of Alan and Judy's
mattress, she had cried out, falling clumsily backward, startled to discover that it was
filled with water. Instead of cereal and tea bags, there were whiskey and wine bottles on
top of the refrigerator, most of them nearly empty. Just standing there had made
Ashima feel drunk.
They arrive home from the hospital courtesy of Dr. Gupta, who owns a car, and sit in
the sweltering living room, in front of their only box fan, suddenly a family. Instead of a
couch they have six chairs, all of them three-legged, with oval wooden backs and black
triangular cushions. To her surprise, finding herself once again in the gloomy three-room
apartment, Ashima misses the hustle-bustle of the hospital, and Patty, and the Jell-O
and ice cream brought at regular intervals to her side. As she walks slowly through the
rooms it irks her that there are dirty dishes stacked in the kitchen, that the bed has not
been made. Until now Ashima has accepted that there is no one to sweep the floor, or
do the dishes, or wash clothes, or shop for groceries, or prepare a meal on the days she
is tired or homesick or cross. She has accepted that the very lack of such amenities is
the American way. But now, with a baby crying in her arms, her breasts swollen with
milk, her body coated with sweat, her groin still so sore she can scarcely sit, it is all
suddenly unbearable.
"I can't do this," she tells Ashoke when he brings her a cup of tea, the only thing he can
think to do for her, the last thing she feels like drinking.
"In a few days you'll get the hang of it," he says, hoping to encourage her, unsure of
what else to do. He sets the cup beside her on the flaking windowsill. "I think he's falling
asleep again," he adds, looking at Gogol, whose cheeks are working methodically at his

wife's breast.
"I won't," she insists thickly, looking neither at the baby nor at him. She pulls back a bit
of the curtain, then lets it fall. "Not here. Not like this."
"What are you saying, Ashima?"
"I'm saying hurry up and finish your degree." And then, impulsively, admitting it for the
first time: "I'm saying I don't want to raise Gogol alone in this country. It's not right. I
want to go back."
He looks at Ashima, her face leaner, the features sharper than they had been at their
wedding, aware that her life in Cambridge, as his wife, has already taken a toll. On more
than one occasion he has come home from the university to find her morose, in bed,
rereading her parents' letters. Early mornings, when he senses that she is quietly
crying, he puts an arm around her but can think of nothing to say, feeling that it is his
fault, for marrying her, for bringing her here. He remembers suddenly about Ghosh, his
companion on the train, who had returned from England for his wife's sake. "It is my
greatest regret, coming back," Ghosh had confessed to Ashoke, mere hours before he
was killed.
A soft knock on the door interrupts them: Alan and Judy and Amber and Clover, all
there to see the baby. Judy holds a dish covered with a checkered cloth in her hands,
says she's made a broccoli quiche. Alan sets down a garbage bag full of Amber and
Clover's old baby clothes, uncorks a bottle of cold champagne. The foaming liquid
splashes onto the floor, is poured into mugs. They raise their mugs to Gogol, Ashima
and Ashoke only pretending to take sips. Amber and Clover flank Ashima at either side,
both delighted when Gogol wraps a hand around each of their fingers. Judy scoops the
baby out of Ashima's lap. "Hello, handsome," she coos. "Oh, Alan," she says, "let's have
another one of these." Alan offers to bring up the girls' crib from the basement, and
together he and Ashoke assemble it in the space next to Ashima and Ashoke's bed.
Ashoke goes out to the corner store, and a box of disposable diapers replaces the
framed black-and-white pictures of Ashima's family on the dressing table. "Twenty
minutes at three-fifty for the quiche," Judy says to Ashima. "Holler if you need anything,"
Alan adds before they disappear.
Three days later, Ashoke is back at MIT, Alan is back at Harvard, Amber and Clover are
back at school. Judy is at work at the collective as usual, and Ashima, on her own with
Gogol for the first time in the silent house, suffering from a sleep deprivation far worse
than the worst of her jet lag, sits by the three-sided window in the living room on one of
the triangular chairs and cries the whole day. She cries as she feeds him, and as she
pats him to sleep, and as he cries between sleeping and feeding. She cries after the
mailman's visit because there are no letters from Calcutta. She cries when she calls
Ashoke at his department and he does not answer. One day she cries when she goes
to the kitchen to make dinner and discovers that they've run out of rice. She goes
upstairs and knocks on Alan and Judy's door. "Help yourself," Judy says, but the rice in
Judy's canister is brown. To be polite, Ashima takes a cup, but downstairs she throws it
away. She calls Ashoke at his department to ask him to pick up the rice on his way
home. This time, when there is no answer, she gets up, washes her face and combs her
hair. She changes and dresses Gogol and puts him into the navy blue, white-wheeled
pram inherited from Alan and Judy. For the first time, she pushes him through the balmy
streets of Cambridge, to Purity Supreme, to buy a bag of white long-grain rice. The
errand takes longer than usual; for now she is repeatedly stopped on the street, and in
the aisles of the supermarket, by perfect strangers, all Americans, suddenly taking
notice of her, smiling, congratulating her for what she's done. They look curiously,
appreciatively, into the pram. "How old?" they ask. "Boy or girl?" "What's his name?"

She begins to pride herself on doing it alone, in devising a routine. Like Ashoke, busy
with his teaching and research and dissertation seven days a week, she, too, now has
something to oc cupy her fully, to demand her utmost devotion, her last ounce of

strength. Before Gogol's birth, her days had followed no visible pattern. She would
spend hours in the apartment, napping, sulking, rereading her same five Bengali novels
on the bed. But now the days that had once dragged rush all too quickly toward
evening—those same hours are consumed with Gogol, pacing the three rooms of the
apartment with him in her arms. Now she wakes at six, pulling Gogol out of the crib for
his first feeding, and then for half an hour she and Ashoke lie with the baby in bed
between them, admiring the tiny person they've produced. Between eleven and one,
while Gogol sleeps, she gets dinner out of the way, a habit she will maintain for decades
to come. Every afternoon she takes him out, wandering up and down the streets, to pick
up this or that, or to sit in Harvard Yard, sometimes meeting up with Ashoke on a bench
on the MIT campus, bringing him some homemade samosas and a fresh thermos of
tea. At times, staring at the baby, she sees pieces of her family in his face—her
mother's glossy eyes, her father's slim lips, her brother's lopsided smile. She discovers
a yarn store and begins to knit for the coming winter, making Gogol sweaters, blankets,
mittens, and caps. Every few days she gives Gogol a bath in the porcelain sink in the
kitchen. Every week she carefully clips the nails of his ten fingers and toes. When she
takes him in his pram for his immunizations at the pediatrician's, she stands outside the
room and plugs up her ears. One day Ashoke arrives home with an Instamatic camera
to take pictures of the baby, and when Gogol is napping she pastes the square, whitebordered prints behind plastic sheets in an album, captions written on pieces of masking
tape. To put him to sleep, she sings him the Bengali songs her mother had sung to her.
She drinks in the sweet, milky fragrance of his skin, the buttery scent of his breath. One
day she lifts him high over her head, smiling at him with her mouth open, and a quick
stream of undigested milk from his last feeding rises from his throat and pours into her
own. For the rest of her life she will recall the shock of that warm, sour liquid, a taste
that leaves her unable to swallow another thing for the rest of the day.
Letters arrive from her parents, from her husband's parents, from aunts and uncles and
cousins and friends, from everyone, it seems, but Ashima's grandmother. The letters
are filled with every possible blessing and good wish, composed in an alphabet they
have seen all around them for most of their lives, on billboards and newspapers and
awnings, but which they see now only in these precious, pale blue missives. Sometimes
two letters arrive in a single week. One week there are three. As always Ashima keeps
her ear trained, between the hours of twelve and two, for the sound of the postman's
footsteps on the porch, followed by the soft click of the mail slot in the door. The
margins of her parents' letters, always a block of her mother's hasty penmanship
followed by her father's flourishing, elegant hand, are frequently decorated with
drawings of animals done by Ashima's father, and Ashima tapes these on the wall over
Gogol's crib. "We are dying to see him," her mother writes. "These are the most crucial
months. Every hour there is a change. Remember it." Ashima writes back with careful
descriptions of her son, reporting the circumstances of his first smile, the day he first
rolls over, his first squeal of delight. She writes that they are saving money for a trip
home the following December, after Gogol turns one. (She does not mention the
pediatrician's concern about tropical diseases. A trip to India will require a whole new
set of immunizations, he has warned.)
In November, Gogol develops a mild ear infection. When Ashima and Ashoke see their
son's pet name typed on the label of a prescription for antibiotics, when they see it at
the top of his immunization record, it doesn't look right; pet names aren't meant to be
made public in this way. But there is still no letter from Ashima's grandmother. They are
forced to conclude that it is lost in the mail. Ashima decides to write to her grand
mother, explaining the situation, asking her to send a second letter with the names. The
very next day a letter arrives in Cambridge. Though it is from Ashima's father, no
drawings for Gogol adorn the margins, no elephants or parrots or tigers. The letter is
dated three weeks ago, and from it they learn that Ashima's grandmother has had a
stroke, that her right side is permanently paralyzed, her mind dim. She can no longer
chew, barely swallows, remembers and recognizes little of her eighty-odd years. "She is
with us still, but to be honest we have already lost her," her father has written. "Prepare

yourself, Ashima. Perhaps you may not see her again."
It is their first piece of bad news from home. Ashoke barely knows Ashima's
grandmother, only vaguely recalls touching her feet at his wedding, but Ashima is
inconsolable for days. She sits at home with Gogol as the leaves turn brown and drop
from the trees, as the days begin to grow quickly, mercilessly dark, thinking of the last
time she saw her grandmother, her dida, a few days before flying to Boston. Ashima
had gone to visit her; for the occasion her grandmother had entered the kitchen after
over a decade's retirement, to cook Ashima a light goat and potato stew. She had fed
her sweets with her own hand. Unlike her parents, and her other relatives, her
grandmother had not admonished Ashima not to eat beef or wear skirts or cut off her
hair or forget her family the moment she landed in Boston. Her grandmother had not
been fearful of such signs of betrayal; she was the only person to predict, rightly, that
Ashima would never change. Before leaving, Ashima had stood, her head lowered,
under her late grandfather's portrait, asking him to bless her journey. Then she bent
down to touch the dust of her dida's feet to her head.
"Dida, I'm coming," Ashima had said. For this was the phrase Bengalis always used in
place of good-bye.
"Enjoy it," her grandmother had bellowed in her thundering voice, helping Ashima to
straighten. With trembling hands, her grandmother had pressed her thumbs to the tears
streaming down Ashima's face, wiping them away. "Do what I will never do. It will all be
for the best. Remember that. Now go."

As the baby grows, so, too, does their circle of Bengali acquaintances. Through the
Nandis, now expecting a child of their own, Ashoke and Ashima meet the Mitras, and
through the Mitras, the Banerjees. More than once, pushing Gogol in his stroller,
Ashima has been approached on the streets of Cambridge by young Bengali bachelors,
shyly inquiring after her origins. Like Ashoke, the bachelors fly back to Calcutta one by
one, returning with wives. Every weekend, it seems, there is a new home to go to, a
new couple or young family to meet. They all come from Calcutta, and for this reason
alone they are friends. Most of them live within walking distance of one another in
Cambridge. The husbands are teachers, researchers, doctors, engineers. The wives,
homesick and bewildered, turn to Ashima for recipes and advice, and she tells them
about the carp that's sold in Chinatown, that it's possible to make halwa from Cream of
Wheat. The families drop by one another's homes on Sunday afternoons. They drink
tea with sugar and evaporated milk and eat shrimp cutlets fried in saucepans. They sit
in circles on the floor, singing songs by Nazrul and Tagore, passing a thick yellow
clothbound book of lyrics among them as Dilip Nandi plays the harmonium. They argue
riotously over the films of Ritwik Ghatak versus those of Satyajit Ray. The CPIM versus
the Congress party. North Calcutta versus South. For hours they argue about the
politics of America, a country in which none of them is eligible to vote.
By February, when Gogol is six months old, Ashima and Ashoke know enough people
to entertain on a proper scale. The occasion: Gogol's annaprasan, his rice ceremony.
There is no baptism for Bengali babies, no ritualistic naming in the eyes of God. Instead,
the first formal ceremony of their lives centers around the consumption of solid food.
They ask Dilip Nandi to play the part of Ashima's brother, to hold the child and feed him
rice, the Bengali staff of life, for the very first time. Gogol is dressed as an infant Bengali
groom, in a pale yellow pajamapunjabi from his grandmother in Calcutta. The fragrance
of cumin seeds, sent in the package along with the pajamas, lingers in the weave. A
headpiece that Ashima cut out of paper, decorated with pieces of aluminum foil, is tied
around Gogol's head with string. He wears a thin fourteen-karat gold chain around his
neck. His tiny forehead has been decorated with considerable struggle with sandalwood
paste to form six miniature beige moons floating above his brows. His eyes have been
darkened with a touch of kohl. He fidgets in the lap of his honorary uncle, who sits on a
bedcover on the floor, surrounded by guests in front and behind and beside him. The
food is arranged in ten separate bowls. Ashima regrets that the plate on which the rice

is heaped is melamine, not silver or brass or at the very least stainless-steel. The final
bowl contains payesh, a warm rice pudding Ashima will prepare for him to eat on each
of his birthdays as a child, as an adult even, alongside a slice of bakery cake.
He is photographed by his father and friends, frowning, as he searches for his mother's
face in the crowd. She is busy setting up the buffet. She wears a silvery sari, a wedding
gift worn for the first time, the sleeves of her blouse reaching the crook of her elbow. His
father wears a transparent white Punjabi top over bell-bottom trousers. Ashima sets out
paper plates that have to be tripled to hold the weight of the biryani, the carp in yogurt
sauce, the dal, the six different vegetable dishes she'd spent the past week preparing.
The guests will eat standing, or sitting cross-legged on the floor. They've invited Alan
and Judy from upstairs, who look as they always do, in jeans and thick sweaters
because it is cold, leather sandals buckled over woolly socks. Judy eyes the buffet,
bites into something that turns out to be a shrimp cutlet. "I thought Indians were
supposed to be vegetarian," she whispers to Alan.
Gogol's feeding begins. It's all just a touch, a gesture. No one expects the boy to eat
anything more than a grain of rice here, a drop of dal there—it is all meant to introduce
him to a lifetime of consumption, a meal to inaugurate the tens of thousands of
unremembered meals to come. A handful of women ululate as the proceedings begin. A
conch shell is repeatedly tapped and passed around, but no one in the room is able to
get it to emit a sound. Blades of grass and a pradeep's slim, steady flame are held to
Gogol's head. The child is entranced, doesn't squirm or turn away, opens his mouth
obediently for each and every course. He takes his payesh three times. Ashima's eyes
fill with tears as Gogol's mouth eagerly invites the spoon. She can't help wishing her
own brother were here to feed him, her own parents to bless him with their hands on his
head. And then the grand finale, the moment they have all been waiting for. To predict
his future path in life, Gogol is offered a plate holding a clump of cold Cambridge soil
dug up from the backyard, a ballpoint pen, and a dollar bill, to see if he will be a
landowner, scholar, or businessman. Most children will grab at one of them, sometimes
all of them, but Gogol touches nothing. He shows no interest in the plate, instead
turning away, briefly burying his face in his honorary uncle's shoulder.
"Put the money in his hand!" someone in the group calls out. "An American boy must be
rich!"
"No!" his father protests. "The pen. Gogol, take the pen."
Gogol regards the plate doubtfully. Dozens of dark heads hover expectantly. The
material of the Punjabi pajama set begins to scratch his skin.
"Go on, Gogol, take something," Dilip Nandi says, drawing the plate close. Gogol
frowns, and his lower lip trembles. Only then, forced at six months to confront his
destiny, does he begin to cry.

Another August. Gogol is one, grabbing, walking a little, repeating words in two
languages. He calls his mother "Ma," his father "Baba." If a person in the room says
"Gogol," he turns his head and smiles. He sleeps through the night and between noon
and three each day. He has seven teeth. He constantly attempts to put the tiniest
scraps of paper and lint and whatever else he finds on the floor into his mouth. Ashoke
and Ashima are planning their first trip to Calcutta, in December, during Ashoke's winter
break. The upcoming journey inspires them to try to come up with a good name for
Gogol, so they can submit his passport application. They turn to their Bengali friends for
suggestions. Long evenings are devoted to considering this name or that. But nothing
appeals to them. By then they've given up on the letter from Ashima's grandmother.
They've given up on her grandmother remembering the name, for Ashima's
grandmother, they are told, cannot even remember Ashima. Still, there is time. The trip
to Calcutta is four months away. Ashima regrets that they can't go earlier, in time for
Durga pujo, but it will be years before Ashoke is eligible for a sabbatical, and three
weeks in December is all they can manage. "It is like going home a few months after

your Christmas," Ashima explains to Judy one day over the clothesline. Judy replies
that she and Alan are Buddhists.
At breakneck speed Ashima knits sweater-vests for her father, her father-in-law, her
brother, her three favorite uncles. They are all the same, V-necked, pine green yarn,
knit five, purl two, on number-nine needles. The exception is her father's, done in a
double-seed stitch with two thick cables and buttons down the front; he prefers
cardigans to pullovers, and she remembers to put in pockets for the deck of cards he
always carries with him, to play patience at a moment's notice. In addition to the
sweater, she buys him three sable-haired paintbrushes from the Harvard Coop, sizes
he's requested by mail. Though they are wildly expensive, more so than anything else
she's ever bought in America, Ashoke says nothing when he sees the bill. One day
Ashima goes shopping in downtown Boston, spending hours in the basement of Jordan
Marsh as she pushes Gogol in his stroller, spending every last penny. She buys
mismatched teaspoons, percale pillowcases, colored candles, soaps on ropes. In a
drugstore she buys a Timex watch for her father-in-law, Bic pens for her cousins,
embroidery thread and thimbles for her mother and her aunts. On the train home she is
exhilarated, exhausted, nervous with anticipation of the trip. The train is crowded and at
first she stands, struggling to hang on to all the bags and the stroller and the overhead
strap, until a young girl asks if she'd like to sit down. Ashima thanks her, sinking
gratefully into the seat, pushing the bags protectively behind her legs. She is tempted to
sleep as Gogol does. She leans her head against the window and closes her eyes and
thinks of home. She pictures the black iron bars in the windows of her parents' flat, and
Gogol, in his American baby clothes and diapers, playing beneath the ceiling fan, on her
parents' four-poster bed. She pictures her father missing a tooth, lost after a recent fall,
her mother has written, on the stairs. She tries to imagine how it will feel when her
grandmother doesn't recognize her.
When she opens her eyes she sees that the train is standing still, the doors open at her
stop. She leaps up, her heart racing. "Excuse me, please," she says, pushing the
stroller and herself through the tightly packed bodies. "Ma'am," someone says as she
struggles past, about to step onto the platform, "your things." The doors of the subway
clamp shut as she realizes her mistake, and the train rolls slowly away. She stands
there watching until the rear car disappears into the tunnel, until she and Gogol are the
only people remaining on the platform. She pushes the stroller back down
Massachusetts Avenue, weeping freely, knowing that she can't possibly afford to go
back and buy it all again. For the rest of the afternoon she is furious with herself,
humiliated at the prospect of arriving in Calcutta empty-handed apart from the sweaters
and the paintbrushes. But when Ashoke comes home he calls the MBTA lost and found;
the following day the bags are returned, not a teaspoon missing. Somehow, this small
miracle causes Ashima to feel connected to Cambridge in a way she has not previously
thought possible, affiliated with its exceptions as well as its rules. She has a story to tell
at dinner parties. Friends listen, amazed at her luck. "Only in this country," Maya Nandi
says.
One night not long after, they are fast asleep when the telephone rings. The sound
rouses them instantly, their hearts hammering as if from the same frightening dream.
Ashima knows even before Ashoke answers that it's a call from India. A few months
ago, her family had asked in a letter for the phone number in Cambridge, and she had
sent it reluctantly in her reply, aware that it would only be a way for bad news to reach
her. As Ashoke sits up and takes the receiver, answering in a weary, weakened voice,
Ashima prepares herself. She pushes down the crib railing to comfort Gogol, who has
begun stirring as a result of the telephone's rings, and reviews the facts in her head. Her
grandmother is in her eighties, bedridden, all but senile, unable to eat or talk. The last
few months of her life, according to her parents' most recent letter, have been painful,
for her grandmother, for those who know her. It was no way to live. She pictures her
mother saying all this gently into the next-door neighbors' phone, standing in the
neighbors' sitting room. Ashima prepares herself for the news, to accept the fact that
Gogol will never meet his great-grandmother, the giver of his lost name.

The room is unpleasantly cold. She picks up Gogol and gets back into bed, under the
blanket. She presses the baby to her body for strength, puts him to her breast. She
thinks of the cream-colored cardigan bought with her grandmother in mind, sitting in a
shopping bag in the closet. She hears Ashoke speaking, saying soberly but loudly
enough so that she fears he will wake Alan and Judy upstairs, "Yes, all right, I see.
Don't worry, yes, I will." For a while he is silent, listening. "They want to talk to you," he
says to Ashima, briefly putting a hand to her shoulder. In the dark, he hands her the
phone, and after a moment's hesitation, he gets out of bed.
She takes the phone in order to hear the news for herself, to console her mother. She
can't help but wonder who will console her the day her own mother dies, if that news will
also come to her in this way, in the middle of the night, wresting her from dreams. In
spite of her dread she feels a thrill; this will be the first time she's heard her mother's
voice in nearly three years. The first time, since her departure from Dum Dum Airport,
that she will be called Monu. Only it isn't her mother but her brother, Rana, on the other
end. His voice sounds small, threaded into a wire, barely recognizable through the holes
of the receiver. Ashima's first question is what time it is there. She has to repeat the
question three times, shouting in order to be heard. Rana tells her it is lunchtime. "Are
you still planning to visit in December?" he asks.
She feels her chest ache, moved after all this time to hear her brother call her Didi, his
older sister, a term he alone in the world is entitled to use. At the same time she hears
water running in the Cambridge kitchen, her husband opening a cupboard for a glass.
"Of course we're coming," she says, unsettled when she hears her echo saying it faintly,
less convincingly, once again. "How is Dida? Has anything else happened to her?"
"Still alive," Rana says. "But still the same."
Ashima rests back on her pillow, limp with relief. She would see her grandmother, after
all, even if for one last time. She kisses Gogol on the top of his head, presses her cheek
to his. "Thank goodness. Put Ma on," she says, crossing her ankles. "Let me talk to
her."
"She's not at home now," Rana says after a static-filled pause.
"And Baba?"
A patch of silence follows before his voice returns. "Not here."
"Oh." She remembers the time difference—her father must be at work already at the
Desh offices, her mother at the market, a burlap bag in hand, buying vegetables and
fish.
"How is little Gogol?" Rana asks her. "Does he only speak English?"
She laughs. "He doesn't speak much of anything, at the moment." She begins to tell
Rana that she is teaching Gogol to say "Dida" and "Dadu" and "Mamu," to recognize his
grandparents and his uncle from photographs. But another burst of static, longer this
time, quiets her in midsentence.
"Rana? Can you hear me?"
"I can't hear you, Didi," Rana says, his voice growing fainter. "Can't hear. Let's speak
later."
"Yes," she says, "later. See you soon. Very soon. Write to me." She puts down the
phone, invigorated by the sound of her brother's voice. An instant later she is confused
and somewhat irritated. Why had he gone to the trouble of calling, only to ask an
obvious question? Why call while both her parents were out?
Ashoke returns from the kitchen, a glass of water in his hand. He sets down the water
and switches on the small lamp by the side of the bed.
"I'm awake," Ashoke says, though his voice is still small from fatigue.
"Me too."
"What about Gogol?"
"Asleep again." She gets up and puts him back in the crib, drawing the blanket to his
shoulders, then returns to bed, shivering. "I don't understand it," she says, shaking her
head at the rumpled sheet. "Why did Rana go to the trouble of calling just now? It's so

expensive. It doesn't make sense." She turns to look at Ashoke. "What did he say to
you, exactly?"
Ashoke shakes his head from side to side, his profile lowered.
"He told you something you're not telling me. Tell me, what did he say?"
He continues to shake his head, and then he reaches across to her side of the bed and
presses her hand so tightly that it is slightly painful. He presses her to the bed, lying on
top of her, his face to one side, his body suddenly trembling. He holds her this way for
so long that she begins to wonder if he is going to turn off the light and caress her.
Instead he tells her what Rana told him a few minutes ago, what Rana couldn't bear to
tell his sister, over the telephone, himself: that her father died yesterday evening, of a
heart attack, playing patience on his bed.

They leave for India six days later, six weeks before they'd planned. Alan and Judy,
waking the next morning to Ashima's sobs, then hearing the news from Ashoke, leave a
vase filled with flowers by the door. In those six days, there is no time to think of a good
name for Gogol. They get an express passport with "Gogol Ganguli" typed across the
United States of America seal, Ashoke signing on his son's behalf. The day before
leaving, Ashima puts Gogol in his stroller, puts the sweater she'd knit for her father and
the paintbrushes in a shopping bag, and walks to Harvard Square, to the subway
station. "Excuse me," she asks a gentleman on the street, "I must get on the train." The
man helps her carry down the stroller, and Ashima waits on the platform. When the train
comes she heads immediately back to Central Square. This time she is wide awake.
There are only a half-dozen people in the car, their faces hidden behind the Globe, or
looking down at paperback books, or staring straight through her, at nothing. As the
train slows to a halt she stands, ready to disembark. She does not turn back to look at
the shopping bag, left purposely beneath her seat. "Hey, the Indian lady forgot her
stuff," she hears as the doors shut, and as the train pulls away she hears a fist
pounding on glass, but she keeps walking, pushing Gogol along the platform.
The following evening they board a Pan Am flight to London, where after a five-hour
layover they will board a second flight to Calcutta, via Tehran and Bombay. On the
runway in Boston, her seat belt buckled, Ashima looks at her watch and calculates the
Indian time on her fingers. But this time no image of her family comes to mind. She
refuses to picture what she shall see soon enough: her mother's vermilion erased from
her part, her brother's thick hair shaved from his head in mourning. The wheels begin to
move, causing the enormous metal wings to flap gently up and down. Ashima looks at
Ashoke, who is double-checking to make sure their passports and green cards are in
order. She watches him adjust his watch in anticipation of their arrival, the pale silver
hands scissoring into place.
"I don't want to go," she says, turning toward the dark oval window. "I don't want to see
them. I can't."
Ashoke puts his hand over hers as the plane begins to gather speed. And then Boston
tilts away and they ascend effortlessly over a blackened Atlantic. The wheels retract and
the cabin shakes as they struggle upward, through the first layer of clouds. Though
Gogol's ears have been stuffed with cotton, he screams nevertheless in the arms of his
grieving mother as they climb farther still, as he flies for the first time in his life across
the world.

3
1971
The Gangulis have moved to a university town outside Boston. As far as they know,
they are the only Bengali residents. The town has a historic district, a brief strip of
colonial architecture visited by tourists on summer weekends. There is a white steepled
Congregational church, a stone courthouse with an adjoining jail, a cupolaed public
library, a wooden well from which Paul Revere is rumored to have drunk. In winter,
tapers burn in the windows of homes after dark. Ashoke has been hired as an assistant
professor of electrical engineering at the university. In exchange for teaching five
classes, he earns sixteen thousand dollars a year. He is given his own office, with his
name etched onto a strip of black plastic by the door. He shares, along with the other
members of his department, the services of an elderly secretary named Mrs. Jones,
who often puts a plate of homemade banana bread by the coffee percolator in the staff
room. Ashoke suspects that Mrs. Jones, whose husband used to teach in the English
department until his death, is about his own mother's age. Mrs. Jones leads a life that
Ashoke's mother would consider humiliating: eating alone, driving herself to work in
snow and sleet, seeing her children and grandchildren, at most, three or four times a
year.
The job is everything Ashoke has ever dreamed of. He has always hoped to teach in a
university rather than work for a corporation. What a thrill, he thinks, to stand lecturing
before a roomful of American students. What a sense of accomplishment it gives him to
see his name printed under "Faculty" in the university directory. What joy each time Mrs.
Jones says to him, "Professor Ganguli, your wife is on the phone." From his fourth-floor
office he has a sweeping view of the quadrangle, surrounded by vine-covered brick
buildings, and on pleasant days he takes his lunch on a bench, listening to the melody
of bells chiming from the campus clock tower. On Fridays, after he has taught his last
class, he visits the library, to read international newspapers on long wooden poles. He
reads about U.S. planes bombing Vietcong supply routes in Cambodia, Naxalites being
murdered on the streets of Calcutta, India and Pakistan going to war. At times he
wanders up to the library's sun-filled, unpopulated top floor, where all the literature is
shelved. He browses in the aisles, gravitating most often toward his beloved Russians,
where he is particularly comforted, each time, by his son's name stamped in golden
letters on the spines of a row of red and green and blue hardbound books.
For Ashima, migrating to the suburbs feels more drastic, more distressing than the
move from Calcutta to Cambridge had been. She wishes Ashoke had accepted the
position at Northeastern so that they could have stayed in the city. She is stunned that
in this town there are no sidewalks to speak of, no streetlights, no public transportation,
no stores for miles at a time. She has no interest in learning how to drive the new
Toyota Corolla it is now necessary for them to own. Though no longer pregnant, she
continues, at times, to mix Rice Krispies and peanuts and onions in a bowl. For being a
foreigner, Ashima is beginning to realize, is a sort of lifelong pregnancy—a perpetual
wait, a constant burden, a continuous feeling out of sorts. It is an ongoing responsibility,
a parenthesis in what had once been ordinary life, only to discover that that previous life
has vanished, replaced by something more complicated and demanding. Like
pregnancy, being a foreigner, Ashima believes, is something that elicits the same
curiosity from strangers, the same combination of pity and respect.
Her forays out of the apartment, while her husband is at work, are limited to the
university within which they live, and to the historic district that flanks the campus on
one edge. She wanders around with Gogol, letting him run across the quadrangle, or
sitting with him on rainy days to watch television in the student lounge. Once a week
she makes thirty samosas to sell at the international coffeehouse, for twenty-five cents
each, next to the linzer squares baked by Mrs. Etzold, and baklava by Mrs. Cassolis. On

Fridays she takes Gogol to the public library for children's story hour. After he turns four,
she drops him off and fetches him from the university-run nursery school three mornings
a week. For the hours that Gogol is at nursery school, finger-painting and learning the
English alphabet, Ashima is despondent, unaccustomed, all over again, to being on her
own. She misses her son's habit of always holding on to the free end of her sari as they
walk together. She misses the sound of his sulky, high-pitched little-boy voice, telling
her that he is hungry, or tired, or needs to go to the bathroom. To avoid being alone at
home she sits in the reading room of the public library, in a cracked leather armchair,
writing letters to her mother, or reading magazines or one of her Bengali books from
home. The room is cheerful, filled with light, with a tomato-colored carpet on the floor
and people reading the paper around a big, round wooden table with forsythias or
cattails arranged at its center. When she misses Gogol especially, she wanders into the
children's room; there, pinned to a bulletin board, is a picture of him in profile, sitting
cross-legged on a cushion during story hour, listening to the children's librarian, Mrs.
Aiken, reading The Cat in the Hat.
After two years in an overheated university-subsidized apartment, Ashima and Ashoke
are ready to purchase a home. In the evenings, after dinner, they set out in their car,
Gogol in the back seat, to look at houses for sale. They do not look in the historic
district, where the chairman of Ashoke's department lives, in an eighteenth-century
mansion to which he and Ashima and Gogol are invited once a year for Boxing Day tea.
Instead they look on ordinary roads where plastic wading pools and baseball bats are
left out on the lawns. All the houses belong to Americans. Shoes are worn inside, trays
of cat litter are placed in the kitchens, dogs bark and jump when Ashima and Ashoke
ring the bell. They learn the names of the different architectural styles: cape, saltbox,
raised ranch, garrison. In the end they decide on a shingled two-story colonial in a
recently built development, a house previously occupied by no one, erected on a
quarter acre of land. This is the small patch of America to which they lay claim. Gogol
accompanies his parents to banks, sits waiting as they sign the endless papers. The
mortgage is approved and the move is scheduled for spring. Ashoke and Ashima are
amazed, when moving by U-Haul to the new house, to discover how much they
possess; each of them had come to America with a single suitcase, a few weeks' worth
of clothes. Now there are enough old issues of the Globe stacked in the corners of the
apartment to wrap all their plates and glasses. There are whole years of Time magazine
to toss out.
The walls of the new house are painted, the driveway sealed with pitch, the shingles
and sun deck weatherproofed and stained. Ashoke takes photographs of every room,
Gogol standing somewhere in the frame, to send to relatives in India. There are pictures
of Gogol opening up the refrigerator, pretending to talk on the phone. He is a sturdily
built child, with full cheeks but already pensive features. When he poses for the camera
he has to be coaxed into a smile. The house is fifteen minutes from the nearest
supermarket, forty minutes from a mall. The address is 67 Pemberton Road. Their
neighbors are the Johnsons, the Mertons, the Aspris, the Hills. There are four modest
bedrooms, one and a half bathrooms, eight-foot ceilings, a one-car garage. In the living
room is a brick fireplace and a bay window overlooking the yard. In the kitchen there are
matching yellow appliances, a lazy Susan, linoleum made to look like tiles. A watercolor
by Ashima's father, of a caravan of camels in a desert in Rajasthan, is framed at the
local print shop and hung on the living room wall. Gogol has a room of his own, a bed
with a built-in drawer in its base, metal shelves that hold Tinkertoys, Lincoln Logs, a
View-Master, an Etch-A-Sketch. Most of Gogol's toys come from yard sales, as does
most of the furniture, and the curtains, and the toaster, and a set of pots and pans. At
first Ashima is reluctant to introduce such items into her home, ashamed at the thought
of buying what had originally belonged to strangers, American strangers at that. But
Ashoke points out that even his chairman shops at yard sales, that in spite of living in a
mansion an American is not above wearing a pair of secondhand pants, bought for fifty
cents.
When they first move into the house, the grounds have yet to be landscaped. No trees

grow on the property, no shrubs flank the front door, so that the cement of the
foundation is clearly visible to the eye. And so for the first few months, four-year-old
Gogol plays on an uneven, dirt-covered yard littered with stones and sticks, soiling his
sneakers, leaving footprints in his path. It is among his earliest memories. For the rest of
his life he will remember that cold, overcast spring, digging in the dirt, collecting rocks,
discovering black and yellow salamanders beneath an overturned slab of slate. He will
remember the sounds of the other children in the neighborhood, laughing and pedaling
their Big Wheels down the road. He will remember the warm, bright summer's day when
the top-soil was poured from the back of a truck, and stepping onto the sun deck a few
weeks later with both of his parents to see thin blades of grass emerge from the bald
black lawn.
In the beginning, in the evenings, his family goes for drives, exploring their new
environs bit by bit: the neglected dirt lanes, the shaded back roads, the farms where
one could pick pumpkins in autumn and buy berries sold in green cardboard boxes in
July. The back seat of the car is sheathed with plastic, the ashtrays on the doors still
sealed. They drive until it grows dark, without destination in mind, past hidden ponds
and graveyards, culs-de-sac and dead ends. Sometimes they drive out of the town
altogether, to one of the beaches along the North Shore. Even in summer, they never
go to swim or to turn brown beneath the sun. Instead they go dressed in their ordinary
clothes. By the time they arrive, the ticket collector's booth is empty, the crowds gone;
there is only a handful of cars in the parking lot, and the only other visitors are people
walking their dogs or watching the sun set or dragging metal detectors through the
sand. Together, as the Gangulis drive, they anticipate the moment the thin blue line of
ocean will come into view. On the beach Gogol collects rocks, digs tunnels in the sand.
He and his father wander barefoot, their pant legs rolled halfway up their calves. He
watches his father raise a kite within minutes into the wind, so high that Gogol must tip
his head back in order to see, a rippling speck against the sky. The wind whips around
their ears, turning their faces cold. Snowy gulls hover with wings spread, low enough to
touch. Gogol darts in and out of the ocean, making faint, temporary footprints, soaking
his rolled-up cuffs. His mother cries out, laughing, as she lifts her sari a few inches
above her ankles, her slippers in one hand, and places her feet in foaming, ice-cold
water. She reaches out to Gogol, takes his hand. "Not so far," she tells him. The waves
retract, gathering force, the soft, dark sand seeming to shift away instantly beneath their
feet, causing them to lose their balance. "I'm falling. It's pulling me in," she always says.

The August that Gogol turns five, Ashima discovers she is pregnant again. In the
mornings she forces herself to eat a slice of toast, only because Ashoke makes it for her
and watches her while she chews it in bed. Her head constantly spins. She spends her
days lying down, a pink plastic wastepaper basket by her side, the shades drawn, her
mouth and teeth coated with the taste of metal. She watches The Price Is Right and
Guiding Light and The $10,000 Pyramid on the television Ashoke moves in from the
living room to her side of the bed. Staggering out to the kitchen at lunchtime, to prepare
a peanut butter and jelly sandwich for Gogol, she is revolted by the odor of the fridge,
convinced that the contents of her vegetable drawers have been replaced with garbage,
that meat is rotting on the shelves. Sometimes Gogol lies beside her in his parents'
bedroom, reading a picture book, or coloring with crayons. "You're going to be an older
brother," she tells him one day. "There'll be someone to call you Dada. Won't that be
exciting?" Sometimes, if she is feeling energetic, she asks Gogol to go and get a photo
album, and together they look at pictures of Gogol's grandparents, and his uncles and
aunts and cousins, of whom, in spite of his one visit to Calcutta, he has no memory. She
teaches him to memorize a four-line children's poem by Tagore, and the names of the
deities adorning the ten-handed goddess Durga during pujo: Saraswati with her swan
and Kartik with his peacock to her left, Lakshmi with her owl and Ganesh with his
mouse to her right. Every afternoon Ashima sleeps, but before nodding off she switches
the television to Channel 2, and tells Gogol to watch Sesame Street and The Electric

Company, in order to keep up with the English he uses at nursery school.
In the evenings Gogol and his father eat together, alone, a week's worth of chicken
curry and rice, which his father cooks in two battered Dutch ovens every Sunday. As the
food reheats, his father tells Gogol to shut the bedroom door because his mother cannot
tolerate the smell. It is odd to see his father presiding in the kitchen, standing in his
mother's place at the stove. When they sit down at the table, the sound of his parents'
conversation is missing, as is the sound of the television in the living room, playing the
news. His father eats with his head bent over his plate, flipping through the latest issue
of Time, occasionally glancing at Gogol to make sure he is eating as well. Though his
father remembers to mix up the rice and curry for Gogol beforehand, he doesn't bother
to shape it into individual balls the way his mother does, lining them around his plate like
the numbers on a clockface. Gogol has already been taught to eat on his own with his
fingers, not to let the food stain the skin of his palm. He has learned to suck the marrow
from lamb, to extract the bones from fish. But without his mother at the table he does
not feel like eating. He keeps wishing, every evening, that she would emerge from the
bedroom and sit between him and his father, filling the air with her sari and cardigan
smell. He grows bored of eating the same thing day after day, and one evening he
discreetly pushes the remaining food to the side. With his index finger, in the traces of
leftover sauce, he begins to draw on his plate. He plays tic-tac-toe.
"Finish," his father says, glancing up from his magazine. "Don't play with food that way."
"I'm full, Baba."
"There's still some food on your plate."
"Baba, I can't."
His father's plate is polished clean, the chicken bones denuded of cartilage and chewed
to a pinkish pulp, the bay leaf and cinnamon stick as good as new. Ashoke shakes his
head at Gogol, disapproving, unyielding. Each day Ashoke is pained by the half-eaten
sandwiches people toss into garbage cans on campus, apples abandoned after one or
two bites. "Finish it, Gogol. At your age I ate tin."

Because his mother tends to vomit the moment she finds herself in a moving car, she is
unable to accompany her husband to take Gogol, in September of 1973, to his first day
of kindergarten at the town's public elementary school. By the time Gogol starts, it is
already the second week of the school year. But for the past week, Gogol has been in
bed, just like his mother, listless, without appetite, claiming to have a stomachache,
even vomiting one day into his mother's pink wastepaper basket. He doesn't want to go
to kindergarten. He doesn't want to wear the new clothes his mother has bought him
from Sears, hanging on a knob of his dresser, or carry his Charlie Brown lunch box, or
board the yellow school bus that stops at the end of Pemberton Road. The school,
unlike the nursery school, is several miles from the house, several miles from the
university. On numerous occasions he's been driven to see the building, a low, long,
brick structure with a perfectly flat roof and a flag that flaps at the top of a tall white pole
planted on the lawn.
There is a reason Gogol doesn't want to go to kindergarten. His parents have told him
that at school, instead of being called Gogol, he will be called by a new name, a good
name, which his parents have finally decided on, just in time for him to begin his formal
education. The name, Nikhil, is artfully connected to the old. Not only is it a perfectly
respectable Bengali good name, meaning "he who is entire, encompassing all," but it
also bears a satisfying resemblance to Nikolai, the first name of the Russian Gogol.
Ashoke had thought of it recently, staring mindlessly at the Gogol spines in the library,
and he had rushed back to the house to ask Ashima her opinion. He pointed out that it
was relatively easy to pronounce, though there was the danger that Americans,
obsessed with abbreviation, would truncate it to Nick. She told him she liked it well
enough, though later, alone, she'd wept, thinking of her grandmother, who had died
earlier in the year, and of the letter, forever hovering somewhere between India and

America, containing the good name she'd chosen for Gogol. Ashima still dreams of the
letter at times, discovering it after all these years in the mailbox on Pemberton Road,
opening it up only to find it blank.
But Gogol doesn't want a new name. He can't understand why he has to answer to
anything else. "Why do I have to have a new name?" he asks his parents, tears
springing to his eyes. It would be one thing if his parents were to call him Nikhil, too. But
they tell him that the new name will be used only by the teachers and children at school.
He is afraid to be Nikhil, someone he doesn't know. Who doesn't know him. His parents
tell him that they each have two names, too, as do all their Bengali friends in America,
and all their relatives in Calcutta. It's a part of growing up, they tell him, part of being a
Bengali. They write it for him on a sheet of paper, ask him to copy it over ten times.
"Don't worry," his father says. "To me and your mother, you will never be anyone but
Gogol."

At school, Ashoke and Gogol are greeted by the secretary, Mrs. McNab, who asks
Ashoke to fill out a registration form. He provides a copy of Gogol's birth certificate and
immunization record, which Mrs. McNab puts in a folder along with the registration.
"This way," Mrs. McNab says, leading them to the principal's office. CANDACE LAPIDUS,
the name on the door says. Mrs. Lapidus assures Ashoke that missing the first week of
kindergarten is not a problem, that things have yet to settle down. Mrs. Lapidus is a tall,
slender woman with short white-blond hair. She wears frosted blue eye shadow and a
lemon yellow suit. She shakes Ashoke's hand and tells him that there are two other
Indian children at the school, Jayadev Modi in the third grade and Rekha Saxena in fifth.
Perhaps the Gangulis know them? Ashoke tells Mrs. Lapidus that they do not. She
looks at the registration form and smiles kindly at the boy, who is clutching his father's
hand. Gogol is dressed in powder blue pants, red and white canvas sneakers, a striped
turtleneck top.
"Welcome to elementary school, Nikhil. I am your principal, Mrs. Lapidus."
Gogol looks down at his sneakers. The way the principal pronounces his new name is
different from the way his par ents say it, the second part of it longer, sounding like
"heel."
She bends down so that her face is level with his, and extends a hand to his shoulder.
"Can you tell me how old you are, Nikhil?"
When the question is repeated and there is still no response, Mrs. Lapidus asks, "Mr.
Ganguli, does Nikhil follow English?"
"Of course he follows," Ashoke says. "My son is perfectly bilingual."
In order to prove that Gogol knows English, Ashoke does something he has never done
before, and addresses his son in careful, accented English. "Go on, Gogol," he says,
patting him on the head. "Tell Mrs. Lapidus how old you are."
"What was that?" Mrs. Lapidus says.
"I beg your pardon, madam?"
"That name you called him. Something with a G."
"Oh that, that is what we call him at home only. But his good name should be—is"—he
nods his head firmly—"Nikhil."
Mrs. Lapidus frowns. "I'm afraid I don't understand. Good name?"
"Yes."
Mrs. Lapidus studies the registration form. She has not had to go through this confusion
with the other two Indian children. She opens up the folder and examines the
immunization record, the birth certificate. "There seems to be some confusion, Mr.
Ganguli," she says. "According to these documents, your son's legal name is Gogol."
"That is correct. But please allow me to explain—"
"That you want us to call him Nikhil."
"That is correct."

Mrs. Lapidus nods. "The reason being?"
"That is our wish."
"I'm not sure I follow you, Mr. Ganguli. Do you mean that Nikhil is a middle name? Or a
nickname? Many of the children go by nicknames here. On this form there is a space—"
"No, no, it's not a middle name," Ashoke says. He is beginning to lose patience. "He
has no middle name. No nickname. The boy's good name, his school name, is Nikhil."
Mrs. Lapidus presses her lips together and smiles. "But clearly he doesn't respond."
"Please, Mrs. Lapidus," Ashoke says. "It is very common for a child to be confused at
first. Please give it some time. I assure you he will grow accustomed."
He bends down and this time in Bengali, calmly and quietly, asks Gogol to please
answer when Mrs. Lapidus asks a question. "Don't be scared, Gogol," he says, raising
his son's chin with his finger. "You're a big boy now. No tears."
Though Mrs. Lapidus does not understand a word, she listens carefully, hears that
name again. Gogol. Lightly, in pencil, she writes it down on the registration form.
Ashoke hands over the lunch box, a windbreaker in case it gets cold. He thanks Mrs.
Lapidus. "Be good, Nikhil," he says in English. And then, after a moment's hesitation, he
is gone.
When they are alone, Mrs. Lapidus asks, "Are you happy to be entering elementary
school, Gogol?"
"My parents want me to have another name in school."
"And what about you, Gogol? Do you want to be called by another name?"
After a pause, he shakes his head.
"Is that a no?"
He nods. "Yes."
"Then it's settled. Can you write your name on this piece of paper?"
Gogol picks up a pencil, grips it tightly, and forms the letters of the only word he has
learned thus far to write from memory, getting the "L" backward due to nerves. "What
beautiful penmanship you have," Mrs. Lapidus says. She tears up the old registration
form and asks Mrs. McNab to type up a new one. Then she takes Gogol by the hand,
down a carpeted hallway with painted cement walls. She opens a door, and Go gol is
introduced to his teacher, Miss Watkins, a woman with hair in two braids, wearing
overalls and clogs. Inside the classroom it's a small universe of nicknames—Andrew is
Andy, Alexandra Sandy, William Billy, Elizabeth Lizzy. It is nothing like the schooling
Gogol's parents have known, fountain pens and polished black shoes and notebooks
and good names and sir or madam at a tender age. Here the only official ritual is
pledging allegiance first thing in the morning to the American flag. For the rest of the
day, they sit at a communal round table, drinking punch and eating cookies, taking naps
on little orange cushions on the floor. At the end of his first day he is sent home with a
letter to his parents from Mrs. Lapidus, folded and stapled to a string around his neck,
explaining that due to their son's preference he will be known as Gogol at school. What
about the parents' preference? Ashima and Ashoke wonder, shaking their heads. But
since neither of them feels comfortable pressing the issue, they have no choice but to
give in.
And so Gogol's formal education begins. At the top of sheets of scratchy pale yellow
paper he writes out his pet name again and again, and the alphabet in capitals and
lowercase. He learns to add and subtract, and to spell his first words. In the front covers
of the textbooks from which he is taught to read he leaves his legacy, writing his name
in number-two pencil below a series of others. In art class, his favorite hour of the week,
he carves his name with paper clips into the bottoms of clay cups and bowls. He pastes
uncooked pasta to cardboard, and leaves his signature in fat brush strokes below
paintings. Day after day he brings his creations home to Ashima, who hangs them
proudly on the refrigerator door. "Gogol G," he signs his work in the lower right-hand
corner, as if there were a need to distinguish him from any other Gogol in the school.

In May his sister is born. This time the labor happens quickly. They are thinking about
going to a yard sale in the neighborhood one Saturday morning, playing Bengali songs
on the stereo. Gogol is eating frozen waffles for breakfast, wishing his parents would
turn off the music so that he could hear the cartoons he is watching, when his mother's
water breaks. His father switches off the music and calls Dilip and Maya Nandi, who
now live in a suburb twenty minutes away and have a little boy of their own. Then he
calls the next-door neighbor, Mrs. Merton, who has offered to look after Gogol until the
Nandis arrive. Though his parents have prepared him for the event, when Mrs. Merton
shows up with her needlepoint he feels stranded, no longer in the mood for cartoons.
He stands on the front step, watching his father help his mother into the car, waving as
they pull away. To pass the time he draws a picture of himself and his parents and his
new sibling, standing in a row in front of their house. He remembers to put a dot on his
mother's forehead, glasses on his father's face, a lamppost by the flagstone path in front
of the house. "Well, if that's not the spitting image," Mrs. Merton says, looking over his
shoulder.
That evening Maya Nandi, whom he calls Maya Mashi, as if she were his own mother's
sister, his own aunt, is heating up the dinner she's brought over, when his father calls to
say the baby has arrived. The next day Gogol sees his mother sitting in an angled bed,
a plastic bracelet around her wrist, her stomach no longer as hard and round. Through a
big glass window, he sees his sister asleep, lying in a small glass bed, the only one of
the babies in the nursery to have a thick head of black hair. He is introduced to his
mother's nurses. He drinks the juice and eats the pudding off his mother's tray. Shyly he
gives his mother the picture he's drawn. Underneath the figures he's written his own
name, and Ma, and Baba. Only the space under the baby is blank. "I didn't know the
baby's name," Gogol says, which is when his parents tell him. This time, Ashoke and
Ashima are ready. They have the names lined up, for a boy or a girl. They've learned
their lesson after Gogol. They've learned that schools in America will ignore parents'
instructions and register a child under his pet name. The only way to avoid such
confusion, they have concluded, is to do away with the pet name altogether, as many of
their Bengali friends have already done. For their daughter, good name and pet name
are one and the same: Sonali, meaning "she who is golden."
Two days later, coming back from school, Gogol finds his mother at home again,
wearing a bathrobe instead of a sari, and sees his sister awake for the first time. She is
dressed in pink pajamas that conceal her hands and feet, with a pink bonnet tied around
her moon-shaped face. His father is home, too. His parents sit Gogol on the living room
sofa and place Sonali in his lap, telling him to hold her against his chest, a hand cupped
under her head, and his father takes pictures with a new Nikon 35-millimeter camera.
The shutter advances softly, repeatedly; the room is bathed in rich afternoon light. "Hi,
Sonali," Gogol says, sitting stiffly, looking down at her face, and then up at the lens.
Though Sonali is the name on her birth certificate, the name she will carry officially
through life, at home they begin to call her Sonu, then Sona, and finally Sonia. Sonia
makes her a citizen of the world. It's a Russian link to her brother, it's European, South
American. Eventually it will be the name of the Indian prime minister's Italian wife. At
first Gogol is disappointed by the fact that he can't play with her, that all she does is
sleep and soil her diapers and cry. But eventually she begins to respond to him,
cackling when he tickles her stomach, or pushes her in a swing operated by a noisy
crank, or when he cries out "Peekaboo." He helps his mother to bathe her, fetching the
towel and the shampoo. He entertains her in the back seat of the car when they drive on
the highway on Saturday evenings, on the way to dinner parties thrown by their parents'
friends. For by now all the Cambridge Bengalis have moved to places like Dedham and
Framingham and Lexington and Winchester, to houses with backyards and driveways.
They have met so many Bengalis that there is rarely a Saturday free, so that for the rest
of his life Gogol's childhood memories of Saturday evenings will consist of a single, re
peated scene: thirty-odd people in a three-bedroom suburban house, the children
watching television or playing board games in a basement, the parents eating and
conversing in the Bengali their children don't speak among themselves. He will

remember eating watered-down curry off paper plates, sometimes pizza or Chinese
ordered specially for the kids. There are so many guests invited to Sonia's rice
ceremony that Ashoke arranges to rent a building on campus, with twenty folding tables
and an industrial stove. Unlike her compliant older brother, Sonia, seven months old,
refuses all the food. She plays with the dirt they've dug up from the yard and threatens
to put the dollar bill into her mouth. "This one," one of the guests remarks, "this one is
the true American."

As their lives in New England swell with fellow Bengali friends, the members of that
other, former life, those who know Ashima and Ashoke not by their good names but as
Monu and Mithu, slowly dwindle. More deaths come, more telephone calls startle them
in the middle of the night, more letters arrive in the mailbox informing them of aunts and
uncles no longer with them. The news of these deaths never gets lost in the mail as
other letters do. Somehow, bad news, however ridden with static, however filled with
echoes, always manages to be conveyed. Within a decade abroad, they are both
orphaned; Ashoke's parents both dead from cancer, Ashima's mother from kidney
disease. Gogol and Sonia are woken by these deaths in the early mornings, their
parents screaming on the other side of thin bedroom walls. They stumble into their
parents' room, uncomprehending, embarrassed at the sight of their parents' tears,
feeling only slightly sad. In some senses Ashoke and Ashima live the lives of the
extremely aged, those for whom everyone they once knew and loved is lost, those who
survive and are consoled by memory alone. Even those family members who continue
to live seem dead somehow, always invisible, impossible to touch. Voices on the phone,
occasionally bearing news of births and weddings, send chills down their spines. How
could it be, still alive, still talking? The sight of them when they visit Calcutta every few
years feels stranger still, six or eight weeks passing like a dream. Once back on
Pemberton Road, in the modest house that is suddenly mammoth, there is nothing to
remind them; in spite of the hundred or so relatives they've just seen, they feel as if they
are the only Gangulis in the world. The people they have grown up with will never see
this life, of this they are certain. They will never breathe the air of a damp New England
morning, see smoke rising from a neighbor's chimney, shiver in a car waiting for the
glass to defrost and the engine to warm.
And yet to a casual observer, the Gangulis, apart from the name on their mailbox, apart
from the issues of India Abroad and Sangbad Bichitra that are delivered there, appear
no different from their neighbors. Their garage, like every other, contains shovels and
pruning shears and a sled. They purchase a barbecue for tandoori on the porch in
summer. Each step, each acquisition, no matter how small, involves deliberation,
consultation with Bengali friends. Was there a difference between a plastic rake and a
metal one? Which was preferable, a live Christmas tree or an artificial one? They learn
to roast turkeys, albeit rubbed with garlic and cumin and cayenne, at Thanksgiving, to
nail a wreath to their door in December, to wrap woolen scarves around snowmen, to
color boiled eggs violet and pink at Easter and hide them around the house. For the
sake of Gogol and Sonia they celebrate, with progressively increasing fanfare, the birth
of Christ, an event the children look forward to far more than the worship of Durga and
Saraswati. During pujos, scheduled for convenience on two Saturdays a year, Gogol
and Sonia are dragged off to a high school or a Knights of Columbus hall overtaken by
Bengalis, where they are required to throw marigold petals at a cardboard effigy of a
goddess and eat bland vegetarian food. It can't compare to Christmas, when they hang
stockings on the fireplace mantel, and set out cookies and milk for Santa Claus, and
receive heaps of presents, and stay home from school.
There are other ways in which Ashoke and Ashima give in. Though Ashima continues to
wear nothing but saris and sandals from Bata, Ashoke, accustomed to wearing tailormade pants and shirts all his life, learns to buy ready-made. He trades in fountain pens
for ballpoints, Wilkinson blades and his boar-bristled shaving brush for Bic razors
bought six to a pack. Though he is now a tenured full professor, he stops wearing

jackets and ties to the university. Given that there is a clock everywhere he turns, at the
side of his bed, over the stove where he prepares tea, in the car he drives to work, on
the wall opposite his desk, he stops wearing a wristwatch, resigning his Favre Leuba to
the depths of his sock drawer. In the supermarket they let Gogol fill the cart with items
that he and Sonia, but not they, consume: individually wrapped slices of cheese,
mayonnaise, tuna fish, hot dogs. For Gogol's lunches they stand at the deli to buy cold
cuts, and in the mornings Ashima makes sandwiches with bologna or roast beef. At his
insistence, she concedes and makes him an American dinner once a week as a treat,
Shake 'n Bake chicken or Hamburger Helper prepared with ground lamb.
Still, they do what they can. They make a point of driving into Cambridge with the
children when the Apu Trilogy plays at the Orson Welles, or when there is a Kathakali
dance performance or a sitar recital at Memorial Hall. When Gogol is in the third grade,
they send him to Bengali language and culture lessons every other Saturday, held in the
home of one of their friends. For when Ashima and Ashoke close their eyes it never fails
to unsettle them, that their children sound just like Americans, expertly conversing in a
language that still at times confounds them, in accents they are accustomed not to trust.
In Bengali class, Gogol is taught to read and write his ancestral alphabet, which begins
at the back of his throat with an unaspirated K and marches steadily across the roof of
his mouth, end ing with elusive vowels that hover outside his lips. He is taught to write
letters that hang from a bar, and eventually to cobble these intricate shapes into his
name. They read handouts written in English about the Bengali Renaissance, and the
revolutionary exploits of Subhas Chandra Bose. The children in the class study without
interest, wishing they could be at ballet or softball practice instead. Gogol hates it
because it keeps him from attending every other session of a Saturday-morning drawing
class he's enrolled in, at the suggestion of his art teacher. The drawing class is held on
the top floor of the public library; on nice days they are taken for walks through the
historic district, carrying large sketchpads and pencils, and told to draw the facade of
this building or that. In Bengali class they read from hand-sewn primers brought back by
their teacher from Calcutta, intended for five-year-olds, printed, Gogol can't help
noticing, on paper that resembles the folded toilet paper he uses at school.

As a young boy Gogol doesn't mind his name. He recognizes pieces of himself in road
signs: GO LEFT, GO RIGHT, GO SLOW. For birthdays his mother orders a cake on which his
name is piped across the white frosted surface in a bright blue sugary script. It all
seems perfectly normal. It doesn't bother him that his name is never an option on key
chains or metal pins or refrigerator magnets. He has been told that he was named after
a famous Russian author, born in a previous century. That the author's name, and
therefore his, is known throughout the world and will live on forever. One day his father
takes him to the university library, and shows him, on a shelf well beyond his reach, a
row of Gogol spines. When his father opens up one of the books to a random page, the
print is far smaller than in the Hardy Boys series Gogol has begun recently to enjoy. "In
a few years," his father tells him, "you'll be ready to read them." Though substitute
teachers at school always pause, looking apologetic when they arrive at his name on
the roster, forcing Gogol to call out, before even being summoned, "That's me,"
teachers in the school system know not to give it a second thought. After a year or two,
the students no longer tease and say "Giggle" or "Gargle." In the programs of the school
Christmas plays, the parents are accustomed to seeing his name among the cast.
"Gogol is an outstanding student, curious and cooperative," his teachers write year after
year on report cards. "Go, Gogol!" his classmates shout on golden autumn days as he
runs the bases or sprints in a dash.
As for his last name, GANGULI, by the time he is ten he has been to Calcutta three more
times, twice in summer and once during Durga pujo, and from the most recent trip he
still remembers the sight of it etched respectably into the whitewashed exterior of his
paternal grandparents' house. He remembers the astonishment of seeing six pages full
of Gangulis, three columns to a page, in the Calcutta telephone directory. He'd wanted

to rip out the page as a souvenir, but when he'd told this to one of his cousins, the
cousin had laughed. On taxi rides through the city, going to visit the various homes of
his relatives, his father had pointed out the name elsewhere, on the awnings of
confectioners, and stationers, and opticians. He had told Gogol that Ganguli is a legacy
of the British, an anglicized way of pronouncing his real surname, Gangopadhyay.
Back home on Pemberton Road, he helps his father paste individual golden letters
bought from a rack in the hardware store, spelling out ganguli on one side of their
mailbox. One morning, the day after Halloween, Gogol discovers, on his way to the bus
stop, that it has been shortened to GANG, with the word GREEN scrawled in pencil
following it. His ears burn at the sight, and he runs back into the house, sickened,
certain of the insult his father will feel. Though it is his last name, too, something tells
Gogol that the desecration is intended for his parents more than Sonia and him. For by
now he is aware, in stores, of cashiers smirking at his parents' accents, and of
salesmen who prefer to direct their conversation to Gogol, as though his parents were
either incompetent or deaf. But his father is unaffected at such moments, just as he is
unaffected by the mailbox. "It's only boys having fun," he tells Gogol, flicking the matter
away with the back of a hand, and that evening they drive back to the hardware store, to
buy the missing letters again.
Then one day the peculiarity of his name becomes apparent. He is eleven years old, in
the sixth grade, on a school field trip of some historical intent. They set off in their
school bus, two classes, two teachers, two chaperones along for the ride, driving
straight through the town and onto the highway. It is a chilly, spectacular November day,
the blue sky cloudless, the trees shedding bright yellow leaves that blanket the ground.
The children scream and sing and drink cans of soda wrapped in aluminum foil. First
they visit a textile mill somewhere in Rhode Island. The next stop is a small unpainted
wooden house with tiny windows, sitting on a large plot of land. Inside, after adjusting to
the diminished light, they stare at a desk with an inkwell at its top, a soot-stained
fireplace, a washtub, a short, narrow bed. It was once the home of a poet, they are told.
All the furniture is roped off from the center of the room, with little signs telling them not
to touch. The ceiling is so low that the teachers duck their heads as they walk from
darkened room to room. They look at the kitchen, with its iron stove and stone sink, and
file along a dirt path to look at the outhouse. The students shriek with disgust at the
sight of a tin pan hanging from the bottom of a wooden chair. In the gift shop, Gogol
buys a postcard of the house and a ballpoint pen disguised as a quill.
The final stop on the field trip, a short distance by bus from the poet's house, is a
graveyard where the writer lies buried. They take a few minutes wandering from stone
to stone, among thick and thin tablets, some leaning back as if pressed by a wind. The
stones are square and arched, black and gray, more often plain than shiny, caked with
lichen and moss. On many of the stones the inscriptions have faded. They find the
stone that bears the poet's name. "Line up," the teachers say, "it's time for a project."
The students are each given several sheets of newsprint and thick colored crayons
whose labels have been peeled. Gogol can't help but feel a chill. He's never set foot in a
graveyard before, only glimpsed them in passing, riding in cars. There is a large one on
the outskirts of their town; once, stuck in traffic, he and his family had witnessed a burial
from a distance, and ever since then, whenever they drive by, his mother always tells
them to avert their eyes.
To Gogol's surprise they are told not to draw the gravestones, but to rub their surfaces.
A teacher crouches down, one hand holding the newsprint in place, and shows them
how. The children begin to scamper between rows of the dead, over leathery leaves,
looking for their own names, a handful triumphant when they are able to claim a grave
they are related to. "Smith!" they holler. "Collins!" "Wood!" Gogol is old enough to know
that there is no Ganguli here. He is old enough to know that he himself will be burned,
not buried, that his body will occupy no plot of earth, that no stone in this country will
bear his name beyond life. In Calcutta, from taxis and once from the roof of his
grandparents' house, he has seen the dead bodies of strangers carried on people's
shoulders through streets, decked with flowers, wrapped in sheets.

He walks over to a slim, blackened stone with a pleasing shape, rounded at the top
before rising into a cross. He kneels on the grass and holds up the newsprint, then
begins to rub gently with the side of his crayon. The sun is already sinking and his
fingers are stiff with cold. The teachers and chaperones sit on the ground, legs
extended, leaning back against the headstones, the aroma of their menthol cigarettes
drifting through the air. At first nothing appears apart from a grainy, featureless wash of
midnight blue. But then, suddenly, the crayon meets with slight resistance, and letters,
one after another, emerge magically on the page: ABIJAH CRAVEN, 1701-45. Gogol has
never met a person named Abijah, just as, he now realizes, he has never met another
Gogol. He wonders how to pronounce Abijah, whether it's a man's or a woman's name.
He walks to another tombstone, less than a foot tall, and presses another sheet of
paper to its surface. This one says ANGUISH MATHER, A CHILD. He shudders, imagining
bones no larger than his below the ground. Some of the other children in the class,
already bored with the project, begin chasing one another around the stones, pushing
and teasing and snapping gum. But Gogol goes from grave to grave with paper and
crayon in hand, bringing to life one name after another. PEREGRINE WOTTON, D. 1699.
EZEKIEL AND URIAH LOCKWOOD, BROTHERS, R.I.P. He likes these names, likes their
oddness, their flamboyance. "Now those are some names you don't see very often
these days," one of the chaperones, passing by and looking down at his rubbings,
remarks. "Sort of like yours." Until now it has not occurred to Gogol that names die over
time, that they perish just as people do. On the ride back to school the rubbings made
by the other children are torn up, crumpled, tossed at one another's heads, abandoned
below the dark green seats. But Gogol is silent, his rubbings rolled up carefully like
parchment in his lap.
At home, his mother is horrified. What type of field trip was this? It was enough that they
applied lipstick to their corpses and buried them in silk-lined boxes. Only in America (a
phrase she has begun to resort to often these days), only in America are children taken
to cemeteries in the name of art. What's next, she demands to know, a trip to the
morgue? In Calcutta the burning ghats are the most forbidden of places, she tells
Gogol, and though she tries her best not to, though she was here, not there, both times
it happened, she sees her parents' bodies, swallowed by flames. "Death is not a
pastime," she says, her voice rising unsteadily, "not a place to make paintings." She
refuses to display the rubbings in the kitchen alongside his other creations, his charcoal
drawings and his magazine col lages, his pencil sketch of a Greek temple copied from
an encyclopedia, his pastel image of the public library's facade, awarded first place in a
contest sponsored by the library trustees. Never before has she rejected a piece of her
son's art. The guilt she feels at Gogol's deflated expression is leavened by common
sense. How can she be expected to cook dinner for her family with the names of dead
people on the walls?
But Gogol is attached to them. For reasons he cannot explain or necessarily
understand, these ancient Puritan spirits, these very first immigrants to America, these
bearers of unthinkable, obsolete names, have spoken to him, so much so that in spite of
his mother's disgust he refuses to throw the rubbings away. He rolls them up, takes
them upstairs, and puts them in his room, behind his chest of drawers, where he knows
his mother will never bother to look, and where they will remain, ignored but protected,
gathering dust for years to come.

4
1982
Gogol's fourteenth birthday. Like most events in his life, it is another excuse for his
parents to throw a party for their Bengali friends. His own friends from school were
invited the previous day, a tame affair, with pizzas that his father picked up on his way
home from work, a baseball game watched together on television, some Ping-Pong in
the den. For the first time in his life he has said no to the frosted cake, the box of
harlequin ice cream, the hot dogs in buns, the balloons and streamers taped to the
walls. The other celebration, the Bengali one, is held on the closest Saturday to the
actual date of his birth. As usual his mother cooks for days beforehand, cramming the
refrigerator with stacks of foil-covered trays. She makes sure to prepare his favorite
things: lamb curry with lots of potatoes, luchis, thick channa dal with swollen brown
raisins, pineapple chutney, sandeshes molded out of saffron-tinted ricotta cheese. All
this is less stressful to her than the task of feeding a handful of American children, half
of whom always claim they are allergic to milk, all of whom refuse to eat the crusts of
their bread.
Close to forty guests come from three different states. Women are dressed in saris far
more dazzling than the pants and polo shirts their husbands wear. A group of men sit in
a circle on the floor and immediately start a game of poker. These are his mashis and
meshos, his honorary aunts and uncles. They all bring their children; his parents' crowd
does not believe in baby-sitters. As usual, Gogol is the oldest child in the group. He is
too old to be playing hide-and-seek with eight-year-old Sonia and her ponytailed, gaptoothed friends, but not old enough to sit in the living room and discuss Reaganomics
with his father and the rest of the husbands, or to sit around the dining room table,
gossiping, with his mother and the wives. The closest person to him in age is a girl
named Moushumi, whose family recently moved to Massachusetts from England, and
whose thirteenth birthday was celebrated in a similar fashion a few months ago. But
Gogol and Moushumi have nothing to say to each other. Moushumi sits cross-legged on
the floor, in glasses with maroon plastic frames and a puffy polka-dotted headband
holding back her thick, chin-length hair. In her lap is a kelly green Bermuda bag with
pink piping and wooden handles; inside the bag is a tube of 7UP-flavored lip balm that
she draws from time to time across her mouth. She is reading a well-thumbed
paperback copy of Pride and Prejudice while the other children, Gogol included, watch
The Love Boat and Fantasy Island, piled together on top and around the sides of his
parents' bed. Occasionally one of the children asks Moushumi to say something,
anything, in her English accent. Sonia asks if she's ever seen Princess Diana on the
street. "I detest American television," Moushumi eventually declares to everyone's
delight, then wanders into the hallway to continue her reading.
Presents are opened when the guests are gone. Gogol receives several dictionaries,
several calculators, several Cross pen-and-pencil sets, several ugly sweaters. His
parents give him an Instamatic camera, a new sketchbook, colored pencils and the
mechanical pen he'd asked for, and twenty dollars to spend as he wishes. Sonia has
made him a card with Magic Markers, on paper she's ripped out of one of his own
sketchbooks, which says "Happy Birthday Goggles," the name she insists on calling him
instead of Dada. His mother sets aside the things he doesn't like, which is most
everything, to give to his cousins the next time they go to India. Later that night he is
alone in his room, listening to side 3 of the White Album on his parents' cast-off RCA
turntable. The album is a present from his American birthday party, given to him by one
of his friends at school. Born when the band was near death, Gogol is a passionate
devotee of John, Paul, George, and Ringo. In recent years he has collected nearly all
their albums, and the only thing tacked to the bulletin board on the back of his door is
Lennon's obituary, already yellow and brittle, clipped from the Boston Globe. He sits

cross-legged on the bed, hunched over the lyrics, when he hears a knock on the door.
"Come in," he hollers, expecting it to be Sonia in her pajamas, asking if she can borrow
his Magic 8 Ball or his Rubik's Cube. He is surprised to see his father, standing in
stocking feet, a small potbelly visible beneath his oat-colored sweater vest, his
mustache turning gray. Gogol is especially surprised to see a gift in his father's hands.
His father has never given him birthday presents apart from whatever his mother buys,
but this year, his father says, walking across the room to where Gogol is sitting, he has
something special. The gift is covered in red-and-green-and-gold-striped paper left over
from Christmas the year before, taped awkwardly at the seams. It is obviously a book,
thick, hardcover, wrapped by his father's own hands. Gogol lifts the paper slowly, but in
spite of this the tape leaves a scab. The Short Stories of Nikolai Gogol, the jacket says.
Inside, the price has been snipped away on the diagonal.
"I ordered it from the bookstore, just for you," his father says, his voice raised in order to
be heard over the music. "It's difficult to find in hardcover these days. It's a British
publication, a very small press. It took four months to arrive. I hope you like it."
Gogol leans over toward the stereo to turn the volume down a bit. He would have
preferred The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, or even another copy of The Hobbit to
replace the one he lost last summer in Calcutta, left on the rooftop of his father's house
in Alipore and snatched away by crows. In spite of his father's occasional suggestions,
he has never been inspired to read a word of Gogol, or any Russian writer, for that
matter. He has never been told why he was really named Gogol, doesn't know about
the accident that had nearly killed his father. He thinks his father's limp is the
consequence of an injury playing soccer in his teens. He's been told only half the truth
about Gogol: that his father is a fan.
"Thanks, Baba," Gogol says, eager to return to his lyrics. Lately he's been lazy,
addressing his parents in English though they continue to speak to him in Bengali.
Occasionally he wanders through the house with his running sneakers on. At dinner he
sometimes uses a fork.
His father is still standing there in his room, watching expectantly, his hands clasped
together behind his back, so Gogol flips through the book. A single picture at the front,
on smoother paper than the rest of the pages, shows a pencil drawing of the author,
sporting a velvet jacket, a billowy white shirt and cravat. The face is foxlike, with small,
dark eyes, a thin, neat mustache, an extremely large pointy nose. Dark hair slants
steeply across his forehead and is plastered to either side of his head, and there is a
disturbing, vaguely supercilious smile set into long, narrow lips. Gogol Ganguli is
relieved to see no resemblance. True, his nose is long but not so long, his hair dark but
surely not so dark, his skin pale but certainly not so pale. The style of his own hair is
altogether different—thick Beatle-like bangs that conceal his brows. Gogol Ganguli
wears a Harvard sweatshirt and gray Levi's corduroys. He has worn a tie once in his
life, to attend a friend's bar mitzvah. No, he concludes confidently, there is no
resemblance at all.
For by now, he's come to hate questions pertaining to his name, hates having
constantly to explain. He hates having to tell people that it doesn't mean anything "in
Indian." He hates having to wear a nametag on his sweater at Model United Nations
Day at school. He even hates signing his name at the bottom of his drawings in art
class. He hates that his name is both absurd and obscure, that it has nothing to do with
who he is, that it is neither Indian nor American but of all things Russian. He hates
having to live with it, with a pet name turned good name, day after day, second after
second. He hates seeing it on the brown paper sleeve of the National Geographic
subscription his parents got him for his birthday the year before and perpetually listed in
the honor roll printed in the town's newspaper. At times his name, an entity shapeless
and weightless, manages nevertheless to distress him physically, like the scratchy tag
of a shirt he has been forced permanently to wear. At times he wishes he could disguise
it, shorten it somehow, the way the other Indian boy in his school, Jayadev, had gotten
people to call him Jay. But Gogol, already short and catchy, resists mutation. Other
boys his age have begun to court girls already, asking them to go to the movies or the

pizza parlor, but he cannot imagine saying, "Hi, it's Gogol" under potentially romantic
circumstances. He cannot imagine this at all.
From the little he knows about Russian writers, it dismays him that his parents chose
the weirdest namesake. Leo or Anton, he could have lived with. Alexander, shortened to
Alex, he would have greatly preferred. But Gogol sounds ludicrous to his ears, lacking
dignity or gravity. What dismays him most is the irrelevance of it all. Gogol, he's been
tempted to tell his father on more than one occasion, was his father's favorite author,
not his. Then again, it's his own fault. He could have been known, at school at least, as
Nikhil. That one day, that first day of kindergarten, which he no longer remembers,
could have changed everything. He could have been Gogol only fifty percent of the
time. Like his parents when they went to Calcutta, he could have had an alternative
identity, a B-side to the self. "We tried," his parents explain to friends and relatives who
ask why their son lacks a good name, "but he would only respond to Gogol. The school
insisted." His parents would add, "We live in a country where a president is called
Jimmy. Really, there was nothing we could do."
"Thanks again," Gogol tells his father now. He shuts the cover and swings his legs over
the edge of the bed, to put the book away on his shelves. But his father takes the
opportunity to sit beside him on the bed. For a moment he rests a hand on Gogol's
shoulder. The boy's body, in recent months, has grown tall, nearly as tall as Ashoke's.
The childhood pudginess has vanished from his face. The voice has begun to deepen,
is slightly husky now. It occurs to Ashoke that he and his son probably wear the same
size shoe. In the glow of the bedside lamp, Ashoke notices a scattered down emerging
on his son's upper lip. An Adam's apple is prominent on his neck. The pale hands, like
Ashima's, are long and thin. Ashoke wonders how closely Gogol resembles himself at
this age. But there are no photographs to document Ashoke's childhood; not until his
passport, not until his life in America, does visual documentation exist. On the night
table Ashoke sees a can of deodorant, a tube of Clearasil. He lifts the book from where
it lies on the bed between them, running a hand protectively over the cover. "I took the
liberty of reading it first. It has been many years since I have read these stories. I hope
you don't mind."
"No problem," Gogol says.
"I feel a special kinship with Gogol," Ashoke says, "more than with any other writer. Do
you know why?"
"You like his stories."
"Apart from that. He spent most of his adult life outside his homeland. Like me."
Gogol nods. "Right."
"And there is another reason." The music ends and there is silence. But then Gogol flips
the record, turning the volume up on "Revolution 1."
"What's that?" Gogol says, a bit impatiently.
Ashoke looks around the room. He notices the Lennon obituary pinned to the bulletin
board, and then a cassette of classical Indian music he'd bought for Gogol months ago,
after a concert at Kresge, still sealed in its wrapper. He sees the pile of birthday cards
scattered on the carpet, and remembers a hot August day fourteen years ago in
Cambridge when he held his son for the first time. Ever since that day, the day he
became a father, the memory of his accident has receded, diminishing over the years.
Though he will never forget that night, it no longer lurks persistently in his mind, stalking
him in the same way. It no longer looms over his life, darkening it without warning as it
used to do. Instead, it is affixed firmly to a distant time, to a place far from Pemberton
Road. Today, his son's birthday, is a day to honor life, not brushes with death. And so,
for now, Ashoke decides to keep the explanation of his son's name to himself.
"No other reason. Good night," he says to Gogol, getting up from the bed. At the door
he pauses, turns around. "Do you know what Dostoyevsky once said?"
Gogol shakes his head.
"'We all came out of Gogol's overcoat.'"
"What's that supposed to mean?"

"It will make sense to you one day. Many happy returns of the day."
Gogol gets up and shuts the door behind his father, who has the annoying habit of
always leaving it partly open. He fastens the lock on the knob for good measure, then
wedges the book on a high shelf between two volumes of the Hardy Boys. He settles
down again with his lyrics on the bed when something occurs to him. This writer he is
named after—Gogol isn't his first name. His first name is Nikolai. Not only does Gogol
Ganguli have a pet name turned good name, but a last name turned first name. And so
it occurs to him that no one he knows in the world, in Russia or India or America or
anywhere, shares his name. Not even the source of his namesake.
***
The following year Ashoke is up for a sabbatical, and Gogol and Sonia are informed that
they will all be going to Calcutta for eight months. When his parents tell him, one
evening after dinner, Gogol thinks they're joking. But then they tell them that the tickets
have already been booked, the plans already made. "Think of it as a long vacation,"
Ashoke and Ashima say to their crestfallen children. But Gogol knows that eight months
is no vacation. He dreads the thought of eight months without a room of his own,
without his records and his stereo, without friends. In Gogol's opinion, eight months in
Calcutta is practically like moving there, a possibility that, until now, has never even
remotely crossed his mind. Besides, he's a sophomore now. "What about school?" he
points out. His parents remind him that in the past his teachers have never minded
Gogol missing school now and again. They've given him math and language workbooks
that he's ignored, and when he returns, a month or two later, they praise him for
keeping up with things. But Gogol's guidance counselor expresses concern when Gogol
informs him that he will be missing the entire second half of the tenth grade. A meeting
is called with Ashima and Ashoke to discuss the options. The guidance counselor asks
if it's possible to enroll Gogol in one of the American Schools in India. But the nearest
one is in Delhi, over eight hundred miles from Calcutta. The guidance counselor
suggests that perhaps Gogol could join his parents later, after the school year ends,
stay with a relative until June. "We have no relatives in this country," Ashima informs the
guidance counselor. "That is why we are going to India in the first place."
And so after barely four months of tenth grade, after an early supper of rice and boiled
potatoes and eggs that his mother insists they eat even though they will be served
another supper on the plane, he is off, geometry and U.S. history books packed into his
suitcase, which is locked, along with the others, with padlocks and bound with ropes,
labeled with the address of his father's house in Alipore. Gogol always finds the labels
unsettling, the sight of them making him feel that his family doesn't really live on
Pemberton Road. They depart Christmas Day, driving with their massive collection of
luggage to Logan when they should be home opening gifts. Sonia is morose, running a
slight fever from her typhoid shot, still expecting, when she enters the living room in the
morning, to see a tree trimmed with lights. But the only thing in the living room is debris:
price tags from all the gifts they've packed for their relatives, plastic hangers, cardboard
from shirts. They shiver as they leave the house, without coats or gloves; they won't
need them where they're going, and it will be August by the time they return. The house
has been rented to some American students his father has found through the university,
an unmarried couple named Barbara and Steve. In the airport Gogol stands in the
check-in line with his father, who is dressed in a jacket and tie, clothes he still thinks to
wear when riding on planes. "Four in the family," his father says when it is their turn,
producing two U.S. passports and two Indian ones. "Two Hindu meals, please."
On the plane Gogol is seated several rows behind his parents and Sonia, in another
section altogether. His parents are distressed by this, but Gogol is secretly pleased to
be on his own. When the stewardess approaches with her cart of beverages he tries his
luck and asks for a Bloody Mary, tasting the metallic bite of alcohol for the first time in
his life. They fly first to London, and then to Calcutta via Dubai. When they fly over the
Alps, his father gets out of his seat to take pictures of the snowcapped peaks through
the window. On past trips, it used to thrill Gogol that they were flying over so many
countries; again and again he would trace their itinerary on the map in the seat pocket

below his tray and feel somehow adventurous. But this time it frustrates him that it is to
Calcutta that they always go. Apart from visiting relatives there was nothing to do in
Calcutta. He's already been to the planetarium and the Zoo Gardens and the Victoria
Memorial a dozen times. They have never been to Disneyland or the Grand Canyon.
Only once, when their connecting flight in London was delayed, did they leave Heathrow
and take a double-decker bus tour of the city.
On the final leg of the trip there are only a few non-Indians left on the plane. Bengali
conversation fills the cabin; his mother has already exchanged addresses with the
family across the aisle. Before landing she slips into the bathroom and changes,
miraculously in that minuscule space, into a fresh sari. A final meal is served, an herbed
omelette topped with a slice of grilled tomato. Gogol savors each mouthful, aware that
for the next eight months nothing will taste quite the same. Through the window he sees
palm trees and banana trees, a damp, drab sky. The wheels touch the ground, the
aircraft is sprayed with disinfectant, and then they descend onto the tarmac of Dum
Dum Airport, breathing in the sour, stomach-turning, early morning air. They stop to
wave back at the row of relatives waving madly from the observation deck, little cousins
propped up on uncles' shoulders. As usual the Gangulis are relieved to learn that all
their luggage has arrived, together and unmolested, and relieved further still when
customs doesn't make a fuss. And then the frosted doors slide open and once again
they are officially there, no longer in transit, swallowed by hugs and kisses and pinched
cheeks and smiles. There are endless names Gogol and Sonia must remember to say,
not aunt this and uncle that but terms far more specific: mashi and pishi, mama and
maima, kaku and jethu, to signify whether they are related on their mother's or their
father's side, by marriage or by blood. Ashima, now Monu, weeps with relief, and
Ashoke, now Mithu, kisses his brothers on both cheeks, holds their heads in his hands.
Gogol and Sonia know these people, but they do not feel close to them as their parents
do. Within minutes, before their eyes Ashoke and Ashima slip into bolder, less
complicated versions of themselves, their voices louder, their smiles wider, revealing a
confidence Gogol and Sonia never see on Pemberton Road. "I'm scared, Goggles,"
Sonia whispers to her brother in English, seeking his hand and refusing to let go.
They are ushered into waiting taxis and down VIP Road, past a colossal landfill and into
the heart of North Calcutta. Gogol is accustomed to the scenery, yet he still stares, at
the short, dark men pulling rickshaws and the crumbling buildings side by side with
fretwork balconies, hammers and sickles painted on their facades. He stares at the
commuters who cling precariously to trams and buses, threatening at any moment to
spill onto the street, and at the families who boil rice and shampoo their hair on the
sidewalk. At his mother's flat on Amherst Street, where his uncle's family lives now,
neighbors look from their windows and roofs as Gogol and his family emerge from the
taxi. They stand out in their bright, expensive sneakers, American haircuts, backpacks
slung over one shoulder. Once inside, he and Sonia are given cups of Horlick's, plates
of syrupy, spongy rossogollas for which they have no appetite but which they dutifully
eat. They have their feet traced onto pieces of paper, and a servant is sent to Bata to
bring back rubber slippers for them to wear indoors. The suitcases are unlocked and
unbound and all the gifts are unearthed, admired, tried on for size.
In the days that follow they adjust once again to sleeping under a mosquito net, bathing
by pouring tin cups of water over their heads. In the mornings Gogol watches his
cousins put on their white and blue school uniforms and strap water bottles across their
chests. His aunt, Uma Maima, presides in the kitchen all morning, harassing the
servants as they squat by the drain scouring the dirty dishes with ash, or pound heaps
of spices on slabs that resemble tombstones. At the Ganguli house in Alipore, he sees
the room in which they would have lived had his parents remained in India, the ebony
four-poster bed on which they would have slept all together, the armoire in which they
would have stored their clothes.
Instead of renting an apartment of their own, they spend eight months with their various
relatives, shuttling from home to home. They stay in Ballygunge, Tollygunge, Salt Lake,
Budge Budge, ferried by endless bumpy taxi rides back and forth through the city. Every

few weeks there is a different bed to sleep in, another family to live with, a new
schedule to learn. Depending on where they are, they eat sitting on red clay or cement
or terrazzo floors, or at marble-topped tables too cold to rest their elbows on. Their
cousins and aunts and uncles ask them about life in America, about what they eat for
breakfast, about their friends at school. They look at the pictures of their house on
Pemberton Road. "Carpets in the bathroom," they say, "imagine that." His father keeps
busy with his research, delivering lectures at Jadavpur University. His mother shops in
New Market and goes to movies and sees her old school friends. For eight months she
does not set foot in a kitchen. She wanders freely around a city in which Gogol, in spite
of his many visits, has no sense of direction. Within three months Sonia has read each
of her Laura Ingalls Wilder books a dozen times. Gogol occasionally opens up one of
his textbooks, bloated from the heat. Though he's brought his sneakers with him, hoping
to keep up with cross-country training, it is impossible, on these cracked, congested,
chock-a-block streets, to run. The one day he tries, Uma Maima, watching from the
rooftop, sends a servant to follow him so that Gogol doesn't get lost.
It's easier to surrender to confinement. On Amherst Street, Gogol sits at his
grandfather's drawing table, poking through a tin full of dried-out nibs. He sketches what
he sees through the iron window bars: the crooked skyline, the courtyards, the
cobblestone square where he watches maids filling brass urns at the tube well, people
passing under the soiled canopies of rickshaws, hurrying home with parcels in the rain.
On the roof one day, with its view of Howrah Bridge in the distance, he smokes a bidi
tightly rolled in olive green leaves with one of the ser vants. Of all the people who
surround them at practically all times, Sonia is his only ally, the only person to speak
and sit and see as he does. While the rest of the household sleeps, he and Sonia fight
over the Walkman, over the melting collection of tapes Gogol recorded back in his room
at home. From time to time, they privately admit to excruciating cravings, for
hamburgers or a slice of pepperoni pizza or a cold glass of milk.
They are surprised, in the summer, to learn that their father has planned a trip for them,
first to Delhi to visit an uncle, and then to Agra to see the Taj Mahal. It will be Gogol and
Sonia's first journey outside of Calcutta, their first time on an Indian train. They depart
from Howrah, that immense, soaring, echoing station, where barefoot coolies in red
cotton shirts pile the Gangulis' Samsonite luggage on their heads, where entire families
sleep, covered, in rows on the floor. Gogol is aware of the dangers involved: his cousins
have told him about the bandits that lurk in Bihar, so that his father wears a special
garment under his shirt, with hidden pockets to carry cash, and his mother and Sonia
remove their gold jewels. On the platform they walk from compartment to compartment,
looking for their four names on the passenger list pasted to the outside wall of the train.
They settle onto their blue berths, the top two swinging down from the walls when it is
time to sleep and held in place by sliding latches during the day. A conductor gives
them their bedding, heavy white cotton sheets and thin woolen blankets. In the morning
they look at the scenery through the tinted window of their air-conditioned car. As a
result, the view, no matter how bright the day, is gloomy and gray.
They are unaccustomed, after all these months, to being just the four of them. For a few
days, in Agra, which is as foreign to Ashima and Ashoke as it is to Gogol and Sonia,
they are tourists, staying at a hotel with a swimming pool, sipping bottled water, eating
in restaurants with forks and spoons, paying by credit card. Ashima and Ashoke speak
in broken Hindi, and when young boys approach to sell postcards or marble trinkets
Gogol and Sonia are forced to say, "English, please." Gogol notices in certain
restaurants that they are the only Indians apart from the serving staff. For two days they
wander around the marble mausoleum that glows gray and yellow and pink and orange
depending on the light. They admire its perfect symmetry and pose for photographs
beneath the minarets from which tourists used to leap to their deaths. "I want a picture
here, just the two of us," Ashima says to Ashoke as they wander around the massive
plinth, and so under the blinding Agra sun, overlooking the dried-up Yamuna, Ashoke
teaches Gogol how to use the Nikon, how to focus and advance the film. A tour guide
tells them that after the Taj was completed, each of the builders, twenty-two thousand

men, had his thumbs cut off so that the structure could never be built again. That night
in the hotel Sonia wakes up screaming that her own thumbs are missing. "It's just
legend," her parents tell her. But the idea of it haunts Gogol as well. No other building
he's seen has affected him so powerfully. Their second day at the Taj he attempts to
sketch the dome and a portion of the facade, but the building's grace eludes him and he
throws the attempt away. Instead, he immerses himself in the guidebook, studying the
history of Mughal architecture, learning the succession of emperors' names: Babur,
Humayun, Akbar, Jahangir, Shah Jahan, Aurangzeb. At Agra Fort he and his family look
through the window of the room where Shah Jahan was imprisoned by his own son. At
Sikandra, Akbar's tomb, they gaze at gilded frescoes in the entryway, chipped,
ransacked, burned, the gems gouged out with penknives, graffiti etched into the stone.
At Fatehpur Sikri, Akbar's abandoned sandstone city, they wander among courtyards
and cloisters as parrots and hawks fly overhead, and in Salim Chishti's tomb Ashima
ties red threads for good luck to a marble lattice screen.
But bad luck trails them on the trip back to Calcutta. At Benares station, Sonia asks her
father to buy her a slice of jack-fruit, which makes her lips itch unbearably, then swell to
three times their size. Somewhere in Bihar, in the middle of the night, a businessman in
another compartment is stabbed in his sleep and robbed of three hundred thousand
rupees, and the train stops for five hours while the local police investigate. The Gangulis
learn the cause of the delay the following morning, as breakfast is being served, the
passengers agitated and horrified, all speaking of the same thing. "Wake up. Some guy
on the train got murdered," Gogol says to Sonia from his top berth to hers. No one is
more horrified than Ashoke, who privately recalls that other train, on that other night,
and that other field where he'd been stopped. This time he'd heard nothing. He'd slept
through the whole thing.
Upon returning to Calcutta, Gogol and Sonia both get terribly ill. It is the air, the rice, the
wind, their relatives casually remark; they were not made to survive in a poor country,
they say. They have constipation followed by the opposite. Doctors come to the house
in the evening with stethoscopes in black leather bags. They are given courses of
Entroquinol, ajowan water that burns their throats. And once they've recovered it's time
to go back: the day they were convinced would never come is just two weeks away.
Kashmiri pencil cups are bought for Ashoke to give to his colleagues at the university.
Gogol buys Indian comic books to give to his American friends. On the evening of their
departure he watches his parents standing in front of framed pictures of his dead
grandparents on the walls, heads bowed, weeping like children. And then the caravan of
taxis and Ambassadors comes to whisk them one last time across the city. Their flight is
at dawn and so they must leave in darkness, driving through streets so empty they are
unrecognizable, a tram with its small single headlight the only other thing that moves. At
the airport the row of people who had greeted them, have hosted and fed and fawned
over them for all these months, those with whom he shares a name if not his life,
assemble once more on the balcony, to wave good-bye. Gogol knows that his relatives
will stand there until the plane has drifted away, until the flashing lights are no longer
visible in the sky. He knows that his mother will sit silently, staring at the clouds, as they
journey back to Boston. But for Gogol, relief quickly replaces any lingering sadness.
With relief he peels back the foil covering his breakfast, extracts the silverware from its
sealed plastic packaging, asks the British Airways stewardess for a glass of orange
juice. With relief he puts on his headset to watch The Big Chill and listen to top-forty
songs all the way home.
Within twenty-four hours he and his family are back on Pemberton Road, the late
August grass in need of trimming, a quart of milk and some bread left by their tenants in
the refrigerator, four grocery bags on the staircase filled with mail. At first the Gangulis
sleep most of the day and are wide awake at night, gorging themselves on toast at three
in the morning, unpacking the suitcases one by one. Though they are home they are
disconcerted by the space, by the uncompromising silence that surrounds them. They
still feel somehow in transit, still disconnected from their lives, bound up in an alternate
schedule, an intimacy only the four of them share. But by the end of the week, after his

mother's friends come to admire her new gold and saris, after the eight suitcases have
been aired out on the sun deck and put away, after the chanachur is poured into
Tupperware and the smuggled mangoes eaten for breakfast with cereal and tea, it's as
if they've never been gone. "How dark you've become," his parents' friends say
regretfully to Gogol and Sonia. On this end, there is no effort involved. They retreat to
their three rooms, to their three separate beds, to their thick mattresses and pillows and
fitted sheets. After a single trip to the supermarket, the refrigerator and the cupboards fill
with familiar labels: Skippy, Hood, Bumble Bee, Land O' Lakes. His mother enters the
kitchen and prepares their meals once again; his father drives the car and mows the
lawn and returns to the university. Gogol and Sonia sleep for as long as they want,
watch television, make themselves peanut butter and jelly sandwiches at any time of
day. Once again they are free to quarrel, to tease each other, to shout and holler and
say shut up. They take hot showers, speak to each other in English, ride their bicycles
around the neighborhood. They call up their American friends, who are happy enough to
see them but ask them nothing about where they've been. And so the eight months are
put behind them, quickly shed, quickly forgotten, like clothes worn for a special
occasion, or for a season that has passed, suddenly cumbersome, irrelevant to their
lives.

In September, Gogol returns to high school to begin his junior year: honors biology,
honors U.S. history, advanced trigonometry, Spanish, honors English. In his English
class he reads Ethan Frome, The Great Gatsby, The Good Earth, The Red Badge of
Courage. He takes his turn at the podium and recites the "Tomorrow, and tomorrow,
and tomorrow" speech from Macbeth, the only lines of poetry he will know by heart for
the rest of his life. His teacher, Mr. Lawson, is a slight, wiry, shamelessly preppy man
with a surprisingly deep voice, reddish blond hair, smallish but penetrating green eyes,
horn-rimmed glasses. He is the subject of schoolwide speculation, and slight scandal,
having once been married to Ms. Sagan, who teaches French. He wears khakis and
Shetland sweaters in bright solid colors, kelly green and yellow and red, sips black
coffee continually from the same chipped blue mug, cannot survive the fifty-minute class
without excusing himself to go to the teachers' lounge for a cigarette. In spite of his
diminutive stature he has a commanding, captivating presence in the room. His
handwriting is famously illegible; student compositions are regularly returned stamped
with tan rings of coffee, sometimes golden rings of Scotch. Every year he gives
everyone either a D or an F on the first assignment, an analysis of Blake's "The Tiger."
A number of girls in the class insist that Mr. Lawson is indescribably sexy and have
raging crushes on him.
Mr. Lawson is the first of Gogol's teachers to know and to care about Gogol the author.
The first day of class he had looked up from the podium when he came to Gogol's name
on the roster, an expression of benign amazement on his face. Unlike other teachers he
did not ask, Was that really his name, was that the last name, was it short for something
else? He did not ask, as many foolishly did, "Wasn't he a writer?" Instead he called out
the name in a perfectly reasonable way, without pause, without doubt, without a
suppressed smile, just as he had called out Brian and Erica and Tom. And then: "Well,
we're going to have to read 'The Overcoat.' Either that or 'The Nose.'"
One January morning, the week after Christmas vacation, Gogol sits at his desk by the
window and watches a thin, sugary snow fall inconsistently from the sky. "We're going
to devote this quarter to the short story," Mr. Lawson announces, and instantly Gogol
knows. With growing dread and a feeling of slight nausea, he watches as Mr. Lawson
distributes the books piled on his desk, giving half a dozen well-worn copies of an
anthology, Short Story Classics, to each of the students at the front of the rows. Gogol's
copy is particularly battered, the corner blunted, the cover spotted as if by a whitish
mold. He looks at the table of contents, sees Gogol listed after Faulkner, before
Hemingway. The sight of it printed in capital letters on the crinkly page upsets him
viscerally. It's as though the name were a particularly unflattering snapshot of himself

that makes him want to say in his defense, "That's not really me." Gogol wants to
excuse himself, to raise his hand and take a trip to the lavatory, but at the same time he
wants to draw as little attention to himself as possible. And so he sits, avoiding eye
contact with any of his classmates, and pages through the book. A number of the
authors' names have been starred with penciled asterisks by previous readers, but
there is no sign or mark by Nikolai Gogol's name. A single story corresponds with each
author's name. The one by Gogol is called "The Overcoat." But for the rest of the class,
Mr. Lawson does not mention Gogol. Instead, to Gogol Ganguli's relief, they take turns
reading aloud from "The Necklace," by Guy de Maupassant. Perhaps, Gogol begins to
wonder hopefully, Mr. Lawson has no intention of assigning the Gogol story. Perhaps
he's forgotten about it. But as the bell rings, and the students rise collectively from their
desks, Mr. Lawson holds up a hand. "Read the Gogol for tomorrow," he hollers as they
shuffle through the door.
The following day, Mr. Lawson writes "Nikolai Vasilievich Gogol" in capital letters on the
board, draws a box around it, then writes the dates of the author's birth and death in
parentheses. Gogol opens the binder on his desk, reluctantly copies the information
down. He tells himself it isn't so strange; there is, after all, a William in the class, if not
an Ernest. Mr. Law-son's left hand guides the chalk rapidly across the board, but
Gogol's pen begins to lag. The loose-leaf pages remain blank as those of his
classmates fill up with facts on which he will most likely soon be quizzed: Born 1809 in
the province of Poltava to a family of Ukrainian Cossack gentry. Father a small
landowner who also wrote plays, died when Gogol was sixteen. Studied at the Lyceum
of Nezhin, went to St. Petersburg in 1828 where he entered, in 1829, the civil service, in
the Department of Public Works for the Ministry of the Interior. From 1830 to 1831,
transferred to the Court Ministry in the Department of Royal Estates, after which time he
became a teacher, lecturing on history at the Young Ladies' Institute, and later at the
University of St. Petersburg. At the age of twenty-two, established a close friendship
with Alexander Pushkin. In 1830, published his first short story. In 1836, a comic play,
The Government Inspector, was produced in St. Petersburg. Dismayed by the play's
mixed reception, left Russia. For the next twelve years lived abroad, in Paris, Rome,
and elsewhere, composing the first volume of Dead Souls, the novel considered to be
his finest work.
Mr. Lawson sits on the edge of his desk, crosses his legs, turns a few pages in a yellow
legal pad covered with notes. Beside the legal pad is a biography of the author, a thick
book called Divided Soul, the pages marked by numerous scraps of torn-up paper.
"Not your ordinary guy, Nikolai Gogol," Mr. Lawson says. "He is celebrated today as
one of Russia's most brilliant writers. But during his life he was understood by no one,
least of all himself. One might say he typified the phrase 'eccentric genius.' Gogol's life,
in a nutshell, was a steady decline into madness. The writer Ivan Turgenev described
him as an intelligent, queer, and sickly creature. He was reputed to be a hypochondriac
and a deeply paranoid, frustrated man. He was, in addition, by all accounts, morbidly
melancholic, given to fits of severe depression. He had trouble making friends. He never
married, fathered no children. It's commonly believed he died a virgin."
Warmth spreads from the back of Gogol's neck to his cheeks and his ears. Each time
the name is uttered, he quietly winces. His parents have never told him any of this. He
looks at his classmates, but they seem indifferent, obediently copying down the
information as Mr. Lawson continues to speak, looking over one shoulder, his sloppy
handwriting filling up the board. He feels angry at Mr. Lawson suddenly. Somehow he
feels betrayed.
"Gogol's literary career spanned a period of about eleven years, after which he was
more or less paralyzed by writer's block. The last years of his life were marked by
physical deterioration and emotional torment," Mr. Lawson says. "Desperate to restore
his health and creative inspiration, Gogol sought refuge in a series of spas and
sanatoriums. In 1848 he made a pilgrimage to Palestine. Eventually he returned to
Russia. In 1852, in Moscow, disillusioned and convinced of his failure as a writer, he
renounced all literary activity and burned the manuscript to the second volume of Dead

Souls. He then pronounced a death sentence on himself, and proceeded to commit
slow suicide by starvation."
"Gross," someone says from the back of the classroom. "Why would someone want to
do that to himself?"
A few people glance at Emily Gardener, rumored to have anorexia.
Mr. Lawson, holding up a finger, goes on. "In attempts to revive him on the day before
his death, doctors immersed him in a bath of broth while ice water was poured over his
head, and then affixed seven leeches to his nose. His hands were pinned down so that
he could not tear the worms away."
The class, all but one, begins to moan in unison, so that Mr. Lawson has to raise his
voice considerably in order to be heard. Gogol stares at his desk, seeing nothing. He is
convinced that the entire school is listening to Mr. Lawson's lecture. That it's on the PA.
He lowers his head over his desk, discreetly presses his hands against his ears. It's not
enough to block out Mr. Lawson: "By the following evening he was no longer fully
conscious, and so wasted that his spine could be felt through his stomach." Gogol shuts
his eyes. Please, stop, he wishes he could say to Mr. Lawson. Please stop, he says,
mouthing the words. And then, suddenly, there is silence. Gogol looks up, sees Mr.
Lawson drop his chalk on the blackboard ledge.
"I'll be right back," he says, and disappears to have a cigarette. The students,
accustomed to this routine, begin talking among themselves. They complain about the
story, saying that it's too long. They complain that it was hard to get through. There is
talk of the difficulty of Russian names, students confessing merely to skimming them.
Gogol says nothing. He has not read the story himself. He has never touched the Gogol
book his father gave him on his fourteenth birthday. And yesterday, after class, he'd
shoved the short story anthology deep into his locker, refusing to bring it home. To read
the story, he believes, would mean paying tribute to his namesake, accepting it
somehow. Still, listening to his classmates complain, he feels perversely responsible, as
if his own work were being attacked.
Mr. Lawson returns, sitting once more on his desk. Gogol hopes that perhaps the
biographical portion of the lecture is over. What else could he possibly have left to say?
But Mr. Lawson picks up Divided Soul. "Here is an account of his final moments," he
says, and, turning toward the end of the book, he reads:
"'His feet were icy. Tarasenkov slid a hot-water bottle into the bed, but it had no effect:
he was shivering. Cold sweat covered his emaciated face. Blue circles appeared under
his eyes. At midnight Dr. Klimentov relieved Dr. Tarasenkov. To ease the dying man, he
administered a dose of calomel and placed loaves of hot bread around his body. Gogol
began to moan again. His mind wandered, quietly, all night long. "Go on!" he whispered.
"Rise up, charge, charge the mill!" Then he became still weaker, his face hollowed and
darkened, his breathing became imperceptible. He seemed to grow calm; at least he
was no longer suffering. At eight in the morning of February 21, 1852, he breathed his
last. He was not yet forty-three years old.'"

Gogol does not date anyone in high school. He suffers quiet crushes, which he admits
to no one, on this girl or that girl with whom he is already friends. He does not attend
dances or parties. He and his group of friends, Colin and Jason and Marc, prefer to
listen to records together, to Dylan and Clapton and The Who, and read Nietzsche in
their spare time. His parents do not find it strange that their son doesn't date, does not
rent a tuxedo for his junior prom. They have never been on a date in their lives and
therefore they see no reason to encourage Gogol, certainly not at his age. Instead they
urge him to join the math team and maintain his A average. His father presses him to
pursue engineering, perhaps at MIT. Assured by his grades and his apparent
indifference to girls, his parents don't suspect Gogol of being, in his own fumbling way,
an American teenager. They don't suspect him, for instance, of smoking pot, which he
does from time to time when he and his friends get together to listen to records at one

another's homes. They don't suspect him, when he goes to spend the night at a friend's
house, of driving to a neighboring town to see The Rocky Horror Picture Show, or into
Boston to see bands in Kenmore Square.
One Saturday, soon before he is scheduled to take the SAT, his family drives to
Connecticut for the weekend, leaving Go gol at home alone overnight for the first time in
his life. It never crosses his parents' minds that instead of taking timed practice tests in
his room, Gogol will drive with Colin and Jason and Marc to a party. They are invited by
Colin's older brother, who is a freshman at the university where Gogol's father teaches.
He dresses for the party as he normally does, in Levi's and boat shoes and a checkered
flannel shirt. For all the times he's been to the campus, to visit his father at the
engineering department or for swimming lessons or to run laps around the track, he has
never been in a dorm before. They approach nervously, a bit giddy, afraid to be caught.
"If anyone asks, my brother said to say we're freshmen at Amherst," Colin advises them
in the car.
The party occupies an entire hallway, the doors of the individual rooms all open. They
enter the first room they can manage to, crowded, dark, hot. No one notices as Gogol
and his three friends make their way across the room to the keg. For a while, they stand
in a circle, holding their plastic cups of beer, shouting over the music in order to be
heard. But then Colin sees his brother in the hallway, and Jason needs to find a
bathroom, and Marc needs another beer already. Gogol drifts into the hallway as well.
Everyone seems to know everyone else, embroiled in conversations that are impossible
to join. Music playing from the different rooms mingles unpleasantly in Gogol's ears. He
feels too wholesome in this ripped jeans and T-shirt crowd, fears his hair was too
recently washed and is too neatly combed. And yet it doesn't seem to matter, no one
seems to care. At the end of the hallway, he climbs a set of stairs, and at the top there
is another hallway, equally crowded and loud. In the corner he sees a couple kissing,
pressed up against the wall. Instead of pushing his way through to the other end of the
hallway, he decides to climb another set of stairs. This time the hallway is deserted, an
expanse of dark blue carpeting and white wooden doors. The only presence in the
space is the sound of muffled music and voices coming from below. He is about to turn
back down the staircase when one of the doors opens and a girl emerges, a pretty,
slender girl wearing a but-toned-up polka-dotted thrift store dress and scuffed Doc
Martens. She has short, dark brown hair, curving in toward her cheeks and cut in a high
fringe over her brows. Her face is heart-shaped, her lips painted a glamorous red.
"Sorry," Gogol says. "Am I not supposed to be up here?"
"Well, it's technically a girls' floor," the girl says. "But that's never stopped a guy before."
She studies him thoughtfully, as no other girl has looked at him. "You don't go here, do
you?"
"No," he says, his heart pounding. And then he remembers his surreptitious identity for
the evening: "I'm a freshman at Amherst."
"That's cool," the girl says, walking toward him. "I'm Kim."
"Nice to meet you." He extends his hand, and Kim shakes it, a bit longer than
necessary. For a moment she looks at him expectantly, then smiles, revealing two front
teeth that are slightly overlapping.
"Come on," she says. "I can show you around." They walk together down the staircase.
She leads him to a room where she gets herself a beer and he pours himself another.
He stands awkwardly at her side as she pauses to say hello to friends. They work their
way to a common area where there is a television, a Coke machine, a shabby sofa, and
an assortment of chairs. They sit on the sofa, slouching, a considerable space between
them. Kim notices a stray pack of cigarettes on the coffee table and lights one.
"Well?" she says, turning to look at him, somewhat suspiciously this time.
"What?"
"Aren't you going to introduce yourself to me?"
"Oh," he says. "Yeah." But he doesn't want to tell Kim his name. He doesn't want to
endure her reaction, to watch her lovely blue eyes grow wide. He wishes there were

another name he could use, just this once, to get him through the eve ning. It wouldn't
be so terrible. He's lied to her already, about being at Amherst. He could introduce
himself as Colin or Jason or Marc, as anybody at all, and their conversation could
continue, and she would never know or care. There were a million names to choose
from. But then he realizes there's no need to lie. Not technically. He remembers the
other name that had once been chosen for him, the one that should have been.
"I'm Nikhil," he says for the first time in his life. He says it tentatively, his voice sounding
strained to his ears, the statement turning without his meaning it to into a question. He
looks at Kim, his eyebrows furrowed, prepared for her to challenge him, to correct him,
to laugh in his face. He holds his breath. His face tingles, whether from triumph or terror
he isn't sure.
But Kim accepts it gladly. "Nikhil," she says, blowing a thin plume of smoke toward the
ceiling. Again she turns to him and smiles. "Nikhil," she repeats. "I've never heard that
before. That's a lovely name."
They sit awhile longer, the conversation continuing, Gogol stunned at how easy it is. His
mind floats; he only half listens as Kim talks about her classes, about the town in
Connecticut where she's from. He feels at once guilty and exhilarated, protected as if by
an invisible shield. Because he knows he will never see her again, he is brave that
evening, kissing her lightly on the mouth as she is talking to him, his leg pressing gently
against her leg on the sofa, briefly running a hand through her hair. It is the first time
he's kissed anyone, the first time he's felt a girl's face and body and breath so close to
his own. "I can't believe you kissed her, Gogol," his friends exclaim as they drive home
from the party. He shakes his head in a daze, as astonished as they are, elation still
welling inside him. "It wasn't me," he nearly says. But he doesn't tell them that it hadn't
been Gogol who'd kissed Kim. That Gogol had had nothing to do with it.

5
Plenty of people changed their names: actors, writers, revolutionaries, transvestites. In
history class, Gogol has learned that European immigrants had their names changed at
Ellis Island, that slaves renamed themselves once they were emancipated. Though
Gogol doesn't know it, even Nikolai Gogol renamed himself, simplifying his surname at
the age of twenty-two from Gogol-Yanovsky to Gogol upon publication in the Literary
Gazette. (He had alsoo published under the name Yanov, and once signed his work
"OOOO" in honor of the four o's in his full name.)
One day in the summer of 1986, in the frantic weeks before moving away from his
family, before his freshman year at Yale is about to begin, Gogol Ganguli does the
same. He rides the commuter rail into Boston, switching to the Green Line at North
Station, getting out at Lechmere. The area is somewhat familiar: he has been to
Lechmere countless times with his family, to buy new televisions and vacuum cleaners,
and he has been to the Museum of Science on field trips from school. But he has never
been to this neighborhood on his own, and in spite of the directions he's written on a
sheet of paper he gets briefly lost on his way to the Middlesex Probate and Family
Court. He wears a blue oxford shirt, khakis, a camel-colored corduroy blazer bought for
his college interviews that is too warm for the sultry day. Knotted around his neck is his
only tie, maroon with yellow stripes on the diagonal. By now Gogol is just shy of six feet
tall, his body slender, his thick brown-black hair slightly in need of a cut. His face is lean,
intelligent, suddenly handsome, the bones more prominent, the pale gold skin cleanshaven and clear. He has inherited Ashima's eyes, large, penetrating, with bold, elegant
brows, and shares with Ashoke the slight bump at the very top of his nose.
The courthouse is an imposing, old, pillared brick building occupying a full city block, but
the entrance is off to the side, down a set of steps. Inside, Gogol empties his pockets
and steps through a metal detector, as if he were at an airport, about to embark on a
journey. He is soothed by the chill of the air-conditioning, by the beautifully carved
plaster ceiling, by the voices that echo pleasantly in the marbled interior. He had
pictured a setting far less grand. And yet this is a place, he gathers, that people come to
seek divorces, dispute wills. A man at the information booth tells him to wait upstairs, in
an area filled with round tables, where people sit eating their lunch. Gogol sits
impatiently, one long leg jiggling up and down. He has forgotten to bring a book to read
and so he picks up a discarded section of the Globe, skimming an article in the "Arts"
section about Andrew Wyeth's Helga paintings. Eventually he begins to practice his new
signature in the margins of the paper. He tries it in various styles, his hand
unaccustomed to the angles of the N, the dotting of the two i's. He wonders how many
times he has written his old name, at the tops of how many tests and quizzes, how
many homework assignments, how many yearbook inscriptions to friends. How many
times does a person write his name in a lifetime—a million? Two million?
The idea to change his name had first occurred to him a few months ago. He was sitting
in the waiting room of his dentist, flipping through an issue of Reader's Digest. He'd
been turning the pages at random until he came to an article that caused him to stop.
The article was called "Second Baptisms." "Can you identify the following famous
people?" was written beneath the headline. A list of names followed and, at the bottom
of the page, printed in tiny letters upside down, the famous personalities they
corresponded to. The only one he guessed correctly was Robert Zimmerman, Bob
Dylan's real name. He had no idea that Molière had been born Jean-Baptiste Poquelin
and that Leon Trotsky was born Lev Davidovich Bronstein. That Gerald Ford's name
was Leslie Lynch King, Jr., and that Engelbert Humperdinck's was Arnold George
Dorsey. They had all renamed themselves, the article said, adding that it was a right
belonging to every American citizen. He read that tens of thousands of Americans had
their names changed each year. All it took was a legal petition, the article had said. And
suddenly he envisioned "Gogol" added to the list of names, "Nikhil" printed in tiny letters

upside down.
That night at the dinner table, he brought it up with his parents. It was one thing for
Gogol to be the name penned in calligraphy on his high school diploma, and printed
below his picture in the yearbook, he'd begun. It was one thing, even, for it to be typed
on his applications to five Ivy League colleges, as well as to Stanford and Berkeley. But
engraved, four years from now, on a bachelor of arts degree? Written at the top of a
résumé? Centered on a business card? It would be the name his parents picked out for
him, he assured them, the good name they'd chosen for him when he was five.
"What's done is done," his father had said. "It will be a hassle. Gogol has, in effect,
become your good name."
"It's too complicated now," his mother said, agreeing. "You're too old."
"I'm not," he persisted. "I don't get it. Why did you have to give me a pet name in the
first place? What's the point?"
"It's our way, Gogol," his mother maintained. "It's what Bengalis do."
"But it's not even a Bengali name."
He told his parents what he'd learned in Mr. Lawson's class, about Gogol's lifelong
unhappiness, his mental instability, about how he'd starved himself to death. "Did you
know all this stuff about him?" he asked.
"You forgot to mention that he was also a genius," his father said.
"I don't get it. How could you guys name me after someone so strange? No one takes
me seriously," Gogol said.
"Who? Who does not take you seriously?" his father wanted to know, lifting his fingers
from his plate, looking up at him.
"People," he said, lying to his parents. For his father had a point; the only person who
didn't take Gogol seriously, the only person who tormented him, the only person
chronically aware of and afflicted by the embarrassment of his name, the only person
who constantly questioned it and wished it were otherwise, was Gogol. And yet he'd
continued, saying that they should be glad, that his official name would be Bengali, not
Russian.
"I don't know, Gogol," his mother had said, shaking her head. "I really don't know." She
got up to clear the dishes. Sonia slinked away, up to her room. Gogol remained at the
table with his father. They sat there together, listening to his mother scraping the plates,
the water running in the sink.
"Then change it," his father said simply, quietly, after a while.
"Really?"
"In America anything is possible. Do as you wish."
And so he had obtained a Commonwealth of Massachusetts change-of-name form, to
submit along with a certified copy of his birth certificate and a check to the Middlesex
Probate and Family Court. He'd brought the form to his father, who had glanced at it
only briefly before signing his consent, with the same resignation with which he signed a
check or a credit card receipt, his eyebrows slightly raised over his glasses, inwardly
calculating the loss. He'd filled out the rest of the form in his room, late at night when his
family was asleep. The application consisted of a single side of a cream-colored sheet,
and yet it had taken him longer to fill out than his applications for college. On the first
line he filled out the name he wished to change, and his place and date of birth. He
wrote in the new name he wished to adopt, then signed the form with his old signature.
Only one part of the form had given him pause: in approximately three lines, he was
asked to provide a reason for seeking the change. For nearly an hour he'd sat there,
wondering what to write. He'd left it blank in the end.
At the appointed time, his case is called. He enters a room and sits on an empty
wooden bench at the back. The judge, a middle-aged, heavyset black woman wearing
half-moon glasses, sits opposite, on a dais. The clerk, a thin young woman with bobbed
hair, asks for his application, reviewing it before handing it to the judge. There is nothing
decorating the room apart from the Massachusetts state and American flags and an oil

portrait of a judge. "Gogol Ganguli," the clerk says, motioning for Gogol to approach the
dais, and as eager as he is to go through with it, he is aware, with a twinge of sadness,
that this is the last time in his life he will hear that name uttered in an official context. In
spite of his parents' sanction he feels that he is overstepping them, correcting a mistake
they've made.
"What is the reason you wish to change your name, Mr. Ganguli?" the judge asks.
The question catches him off-guard, and for several seconds he has no idea what to
say. "Personal reasons," he says eventually.
The judge looks at him, leaning forward, her chin cupped in her hand. "Would you care
to be more specific?"
At first he says nothing, unprepared to give any further explanation. He wonders
whether to tell the judge the whole convoluted story, about his great-grandmother's
letter that never made it to Cambridge, and about pet names and good names, about
what had happened on the first day of kinder garten. But instead he takes a deep breath
and tells the people in the courtroom what he has never dared admit to his parents. "I
hate the name Gogol," he says. "I've always hated it."
"Very well," the judge says, stamping and signing the form, then returning it to the clerk.
He is told that notice of the new name must be given to all other agencies, that it's his
responsibility to notify the Registry of Motor Vehicles, banks, schools. He orders three
certified copies of the name change decree, two for himself, and one for his parents to
keep in their safe-deposit box. No one accompanies him on this legal rite of passage,
and when he steps out of the room no one is waiting to commemorate the moment with
flowers and Polaroid snapshots and balloons. In fact the procedure is entirely
unmomentous, and when he looks at his watch he sees that from the time he'd entered
the courtroom it had taken all of ten minutes. He emerges into the muggy afternoon,
perspiring, still partly convinced it is a dream. He takes the T across the river to Boston.
He walks with his blazer clasped by a finger over his shoulder, across the Common,
through the Public Garden, over the bridges and along the curving paths that rim the
lagoon. Thick clouds conceal the sky, which appears only here and there like the small
lakes on a map, and the air threatens rain.
He wonders if this is how it feels for an obese person to become thin, for a prisoner to
walk free. "I'm Nikhil," he wants to tell the people who are walking their dogs, pushing
children in their strollers, throwing bread to the ducks. He wanders up Newbury Street
as drops begin to fall. He dashes into New-bury Comics, buys himself London Calling
and Talking Heads: 77 with his birthday money, a Che poster for his dorm room. He
pockets an application for a student American Express card, grateful that his first credit
card will not say Gogol in raised letters at the bottom. "I'm Nikhil," he is tempted to tell
the attractive, nose-ringed cashier with dyed black hair and skin as pale as paper. The
cashier hands him his change and looks past him to the next customer, but it doesn't
matter; instead he thinks of how many more women he can now approach, for the rest
of his life, with this same unobjectionable, uninteresting fact. Still, for the next three
weeks, even though his new driver's license says "Nikhil," even though he's sliced up
the old one with his mother's sewing scissors, even though he's ripped out the pages in
front of his favorite books in which he'd written his name until now, there's a snag:
everyone he knows in the world still calls him Gogol. He is aware that his parents, and
their friends, and the children of their friends, and all his own friends from high school,
will never call him anything but Gogol. He will remain Gogol during holidays and in
summer; Gogol will revisit him on each of his birthdays. Everyone who comes to his
going-away-to-college party writes "Good Luck, Gogol" on the cards.

It isn't until his first day in New Haven, after his father and teary mother and Sonia are
heading back up 95 toward Boston, that he begins to introduce himself as Nikhil. The
first people to call him by his new name are his suitemates, Brandon and Jonathan,
both of whom had been notified by mail over the summer that his name is Gogol.

Brandon, lanky and blond, grew up in Massachusetts not far from Gogol, and went to
An-dover. Jonathan, who is Korean and plays the cello, comes from L.A.
"Is Gogol your first name or your last?" Brandon wants to know.
Normally that question agitates him. But today he has a new answer. "Actually, that's
my middle name," Gogol says by way of explanation, sitting with them in the common
room to their suite. "Nikhil is my first name. It got left out for some reason."
Jonathan nods in acceptance, distracted by the task of setting up his stereo
components. Brandon nods, too. "Hey, Nikhil," Brandon says awhile later, after they
have arranged the furniture in the common room to their liking. "Want to smoke a
bowl?" Since everything else is suddenly so new, going by a new name doesn't feel so
terribly strange to Gogol. He lives in a new state, has a new telephone number. He eats
his meals off a tray in Commons, shares a bathroom with a floor full of people, showers
each morning in a stall. He sleeps in a new bed, which his mother had insisted on
making before she left.
He spends the days of orientation rushing around campus, back and forth along the
intersecting flagstone path, past the clock tower, and the turreted, crenelated buildings.
He is too harried, at first, to sit on the grass in Old Campus as the other students do,
perusing their course catalogues, playing Frisbee, getting to know one another among
the verdigris-covered statues of robed, seated men. He makes a list of all the places he
has to go, circling the buildings on his campus map. When he is alone in his room he
types out a written request on his Smith Corona, notifying the registrar's office of his
name change, providing examples of his former and current signatures side by side. He
gives these documents to a secretary, along with a copy of the change-of-name form.
He tells his freshman counselor about his name change; he tells the person in charge of
processing his student ID and his library card. He corrects the error in stealth, not
bothering to explain to Jonathan and Brandon what he's so busy doing all day, and then
suddenly it is over. After so much work it is no work at all. By the time the
upperclassmen arrive and classes begin, he's paved the way for a whole university to
call him Nikhil: students and professors and TAs and girls at parties. Nikhil registers for
his first four classes: Intro to the History of Art, Medieval History, a semester of Spanish,
Astronomy to fulfill his hard science requirement. At the last minute he registers for a
drawing class in the evenings. He doesn't tell his parents about the drawing class,
something they would consider frivolous at this stage of his life, in spite of the fact that
his own grandfather was an artist. They are already distressed that he hasn't settled on
a major and a profession. Like the rest of their Bengali friends, his parents expect him to
be, if not an engineer, then a doctor, a lawyer, an economist at the very least. These
were the fields that brought them to America, his father repeatedly reminds him, the
professions that have earned them security and respect.
But now that he's Nikhil it's easier to ignore his parents, to tune out their concerns and
pleas. With relief, he types his name at the tops of his freshman papers. He reads the
telephone messages his suitemates leave for Nikhil on assorted scraps in their rooms.
He opens up a checking account, writes his new name into course books. "Me llamo
Nikhil," he says in his Spanish class. It is as Nikhil, that first semester, that he grows a
goatee, starts smoking Camel Lights at parties and while writing papers and before
exams, discovers Brian Eno and Elvis Costello and Charlie Parker. It is as Nikhil that he
takes Metro-North into Manhattan one weekend with Jonathan and gets himself a fake
ID that allows him to be served liquor in New Haven bars. It is as Nikhil that he loses his
virginity at a party at Ezra Stiles, with a girl wearing a plaid woolen skirt and combat
boots and mustard tights. By the time he wakes up, hung-over, at three in the morning,
she has vanished from the room, and he is unable to recall her name.
There is only one complication: he doesn't feel like Nikhil. Not yet. Part of the problem is
that the people who now know him as Nikhil have no idea that he used to be Gogol.
They know him only in the present, not at all in the past. But after eighteen years of
Gogol, two months of Nikhil feel scant, inconsequential. At times he feels as if he's cast
himself in a play, acting the part of twins, indistinguishable to the naked eye yet
fundamentally different. At times he still feels his old name, painfully and without

warning, the way his front tooth had unbearably throbbed in recent weeks after a filling,
threatening for an instant to sever from his gums when he drank coffee, or iced water,
and once when he was riding in an elevator. He fears being discovered, having the
whole charade somehow unravel, and in nightmares his files are exposed, his original
name printed on the front page of the Yale Daily News. Once, he signs his old name by
mistake on a credit card slip at the college bookstore. Occasionally he has to hear Nikhil
three times before he answers.
Even more startling is when those who normally call him Gogol refer to him as Nikhil.
For example, when his parents call on Saturday mornings, if Brandon or Jonathan
happens to pick up the phone, they ask if Nikhil is there. Though he has asked his
parents to do precisely this, the fact of it troubles him, making him feel in that instant
that he is not related to them, not their child. "Please come to our home with Nikhil one
weekend," Ashima says to his roommates when she and Ashoke visit campus during
parents weekend in October, the suite hastily cleared of liquor bottles and ashtrays and
Brandon's bong for the occasion. The substitution sounds wrong to Gogol, correct but
off-key, the way it sounds when his parents speak English to him instead of Bengali.
Stranger still is when one of his parents addresses him, in front of his new friends, as
Nikhil directly: "Nikhil, show us the buildings where you have your classes," his father
suggests. Later that evening, out to dinner with Jonathan at a restaurant on Chapel
Street, Ashima slips, asking, "Gogol, have you decided yet what your major will be?"
Though Jonathan, listening to something his father is saying, doesn't hear, Gogol feels
helpless, annoyed yet unable to blame his mother, caught in the mess he's made.

During his first semester, obediently but unwillingly, he goes home every other
weekend, after his last Friday class. He rides Amtrak to Boston and then switches to a
commuter rail, his duffel bag stuffed with course books and dirty laundry. Somewhere
along the two-and-a-half-hour journey, Nikhil evaporates and Gogol claims him again.
His father comes to the station to fetch him, always calling ahead to check whether the
train is on time. Together they drive through the town, along the familiar tree-lined
roads, his father asking after his studies. Between Friday night and Sunday afternoon
the laundry, thanks to his mother, gets done, but the course books are neglected; in
spite of his intentions, Gogol finds himself capable of doing little at his parents' but eat
and sleep. The desk in his room feels too small. He is distracted by the telephone
ringing, by his parents and Sonia talking and moving through the house. He misses
Sterling Library, where he studies every night after dinner, and the nocturnal schedule
of which he is now a part. He misses being in his suite in Farnam, smoking one of
Brandon's cigarettes, listening to music with Jonathan, learning how to tell the classical
composers apart.
At home he watches MTV with Sonia as she doctors her jeans, cutting inches off the
bottoms and inserting zippers at the newly narrowed ankles. One weekend, the washing
machine is occupied because Sonia is in the process of dyeing the vast majority of her
clothing black. She is in high school now, taking Mr. Lawson's English class, going to
the dances Gogol never went to himself, already going to parties at which both boys
and girls are present. Her braces have come off her teeth, revealing a confident,
frequent, American smile. Her formerly shoulder-length hair has been chopped
asymmetrically by one of her friends. Ashima lives in fear that Sonia will color a streak
of it blond, as Sonia has threatened on more than one occasion to do, and that she will
have additional holes pierced in her earlobes at the mall. They argue violently about
such things, Ashima crying, Sonia slamming doors. Some weekends his parents are
invited to parties, and they insist that both Gogol and Sonia go with them. The host or
hostess shows him to a room where he can study alone while the party thunders below,
but he always ends up watching television with Sonia and the other children, just as he
has done all his life. "I'm eighteen," he says once to his parents as they drive back from
a party, a fact that makes no difference to them. One weekend Gogol makes the
mistake of referring to New Haven as home. "Sorry, I left it at home," he says when his

father asks if he remembered to buy the Yale decal his parents want to paste to the rear
window of their car. Ashima is outraged by the remark, dwelling on it all day. "Only three
months, and listen to you," she says, telling him that after twenty years in America, she
still cannot bring herself to refer to Pemberton Road as home.
But now it is his room at Yale where Gogol feels most comfortable. He likes its oldness,
its persistent grace. He likes that so many students have occupied it before him. He
likes the solidity of its plaster walls, its dark wooden floorboards, however battered and
stained. He likes the dormer window he sees first thing in the mornings when he opens
his eyes and looking at Battell Chapel. He has fallen in love with the Gothic architecture
of the campus, always astonished by the physical beauty that surrounds him, that roots
him to his environs in a way he had never felt growing up on Pemberton Road. For his
drawing class, in which he is required to make half a dozen sketches every week, he is
inspired to draw the details of buildings: flying buttresses, pointed archways filled with
flowing tracery, thick rounded doorways, squat columns of pale pink stone. In the spring
semester he takes an introductory class in architecture. He reads about how the
pyramids and Greek temples and Medieval cathedrals were built, studying the plans of
churches and palaces in his textbook. He learns the endless terms, the vocabulary that
classifies the details of ancient buildings, writing them on separate index cards and
making illustrations on the back: architrave, entablature, tympanum, voussoir. Together
the words form another language he longs to know. He files these index cards in a
shoebox, reviews them before the exam, memorizing far more terms than he needs to,
keeping the box of cards even after the exam is done, adding to them in his spare time.

In the autumn of his sophomore year, he boards a particularly crowded train at Union
Station. It is the Wednesday before Thanksgiving. He edges through the compartments,
his duffel bag heavy with books for his Renaissance architecture class, for which he has
to write a paper over the next five days. Passengers have already staked out parts of
the vestibule, sitting glumly on their luggage. "Standing room only," the conductor
hollers. "I want my money back," a passenger complains. Gogol keeps walking, from
one compartment to the next, looking for an uncrowded vestibule in which he might sit.
In the very last car of the train he sees an empty seat. A girl is seated next to the
window, reading a folded-back issue of The New Yorker. Arranged on the seat beside
her is a chocolate brown, shearling-lined suede coat, which is what had caused the
person in front of Gogol to move on. But something tells Gogol the coat belongs to the
girl, and so he stops and says, "Is that yours?"
She lifts up her narrow body and in a single, swift motion arranges the coat beneath her
buttocks and legs. It's a face he recognizes from campus, someone he's crossed paths
with in the corridors of buildings as he walks to and from class. He remembers that
freshman year she'd had hair dyed an emphatic shade of cranberry red, cut to her jaw.
She's grown it to her shoulders now, and allowed it to resume what appears to be its
natural shade, light brown with bits of blond here and there. It is parted just off-center, a
bit crooked at the base. The hair of her eyebrows is darker, lending her otherwise
friendly features a serious expression. She wears a pair of nicely faded jeans, brown
leather boots with yellow laces and thick rubber soles. A cabled sweater the same
flecked gray of her eyes is too large for her, the sleeves coming partway up her hands.
A man's billfold bulges prominently from the front pocket of her jeans.
"Hi, I'm Ruth," she says, recognizing him in that same vague way.
"I'm Nikhil." He sits, too exhausted to put his duffel bag away in the luggage rack
overhead. He shoves it as best he can under his seat, his long legs bent awkwardly,
aware that he is perspiring. He unzips his blue down parka. He massages his fingers,
crisscrossed with welts from the leather straps of the bag.
"Sorry," Ruth says, watching him. "I guess I was just trying to put off the inevitable."
Still seated, he pries his arms free of the parka. "What do you mean?"
"Making it look like someone was sitting here. With the coat."

"It's pretty brilliant, actually. Sometimes I pretend to fall asleep for the same reason," he
admits. "No one wants to sit next to me if I'm sleeping."
She laughs softly, putting a strand of her hair behind her ear. Her beauty is direct,
unassuming. She wears no make-up apart from something glossy on her lips; two small
brown moles by her right cheekbone are the only things that distract from the pale
peach of her complexion. She has slim, small hands with unpolished nails and ragged
cuticles. She leans over to put the magazine away and get a book from the bag at her
feet, and he briefly glimpses the skin above her waistband.
"Are you going to Boston?" he asks.
"Maine. That's where my dad lives. I have to switch to a bus at South Station. It's
another four hours from there. What college are you in?"
"J.E."
He learns that she is in Silliman, that she is planning to be an English major. Comparing
notes of their experiences at college so far, they discover that they had both taken
Psychology 110 the previous spring. The book in her hands is a paperback copy of
Timon of Athens, and though she keeps a finger marking her page she never reads a
word of it. Nor does he bother to open up the volume on perspective he's pulled out of
his duffel. She tells him she was raised on a commune in Vermont, the child of hippies,
educated at home until the seventh grade. Her parents are divorced now. Her father
lives with her stepmother, raising llamas on a farm. Her mother, an anthropologist, is
doing fieldwork on midwives in Thailand.
He cannot imagine coming from such parents, such a background, and when he
describes his own upbringing it feels bland by comparison. But Ruth expresses interest,
asking about his visits to Calcutta. She tells him her parents went to India once, to an
ashram somewhere, before she was born. She asks what the streets are like, and the
houses, and so on the blank back page of his book on perspective Gogol draws a floor
plan of his maternal grandparents' flat, navigating Ruth along the verandas and the
terrazzo floors, telling her about the chalky blue walls, the narrow stone kitchen, the
sitting room with cane furniture that looked as if it belonged on a porch. He draws with
confidence, thanks to the drafting course he is taking this term. He shows her the room
where he and Sonia sleep when they visit, and describes the view of the tiny lane lined
with corrugated tin-roofed businesses. When he is finished, Ruth takes the book from
him and looks at the drawing he's made, trailing her finger through the rooms. "I'd love
to go," she says, and suddenly he imagines her face and arms tan, a backpack
strapped to her shoulders, walking along Chowringhee as other Western tourists do,
shopping in New Market, staying at the Grand.
As they are talking a woman across the aisle reprimands them; she's been trying to
take a nap, she says. This only goads them into talking further, in lowered voices, their
heads leaning in toward each other. Gogol is unaware of which state they are in, which
stations they've passed. The train rumbles over a bridge; the setting sun is feverishly
beautiful, casting a striking pink glow on the facades of the clapboard houses that dot
the water's edge. In minutes these shades fade, replaced by the pallor that precedes
dusk. When it is dark he sees that their images are reflected at an angle in the glass,
hovering as if outside the train. Their throats are parched from talking and at one point
he offers to go to the café car. She asks him to get her a bag of potato chips and a cup
of tea with milk. He likes that she doesn't bother to pull the billfold out of her jeans, that
she allows him to buy them for her. He returns with a coffee for himself, and the chips
and the tea, along with a paper cup of milk the bartender has given him instead of the
regulation container of cream. They continue talking, Ruth eating the chips, brushing the
salt from around her lips with the back of her hand. She offers some to Gogol, pulling
them out for him one by one. He tells her about the meals he'd eaten on Indian trains
the time he traveled with his family to Delhi and Agra, the rotis and slightly sour dal
ordered at one station and delivered hot at the next, the thick vegetable cutlets served
with bread and butter for breakfast. He tells her about the tea, how it was bought
through the window from men on the platform who poured it from giant aluminum

kettles, the milk and sugar already mixed in, and how it was drunk in crude clay cups
that were smashed afterward on the tracks. Her appreciation for these details flatters
him; it occurs to him that he has never spoken of his experiences in India to any
American friend.
They part suddenly, Gogol working up the nerve to ask for her number at the last
minute, writing it into the same book where he'd drawn her the floor plan. He wishes he
could wait with her at South Station for her bus to Maine, but he has a commuter train to
catch in ten minutes to take him to the suburbs. The days of the holiday feel endless; all
he can think of is getting back to New Haven and calling Ruth. He wonders how many
times they've crossed paths, how many meals they've unwittingly shared in Commons.
He thinks back to Psychology 110, wishing his memory would yield some image of her,
taking notes on the other side of the law school auditorium, her head bent over her
desk. Most often he thinks of the train, longs to sit beside her again, imagines their
faces flushed from the heat of the compartment, their bodies cramped in the same way,
her hair shining from the yellow lights overhead. On the ride back he looks for her,
combing each and every compartment, but she is nowhere and he ends up sitting next
to an elderly nun with a brown habit and prominent white down on her upper lip, who
snores all the way.
The following week, back at Yale, Ruth agrees to meet him for coffee at the Atticus
bookshop. She is a few minutes late and dressed in the same jeans and boots and
chocolate suede coat she'd worn when they met. Again she asks for tea. At first he
senses an awkwardness he hadn't felt on the train. The café feels loud and hectic, the
table between them too wide. Ruth is quieter than before, looking down at her cup and
playing with the sugar packets, her eyes occasionally wandering to the books that line
the walls. But soon enough they are conversing easily, as they had before, exchanging
tales of their respective holidays. He tells her about how he and Sonia occupied the
kitchen on Pemberton Road for a day, stuffing a turkey and rolling out dough for pies,
things his mother did not particularly like to do. "I looked for you on my way back," he
admits to her, telling her about the snoring nun. Afterward they walk together through
the Center for British Art; there is an exhibit of Renaissance works on paper, which
they've both been meaning to see. He walks her back to Silliman, and they arrange to
have coffee a few days later. After saying good night, Ruth lingers by the gate, looking
down at the books pressed up to her chest, and he wonders if he should kiss her, which
is what he's been wanting to do for hours, or whether, in her mind, they are only friends.
She starts walking backward toward her entryway, smiling at him, taking an impressive
number of steps before giving a final wave and turning away.
He begins to meet her after her classes, remembering her schedule, looking up at the
buildings and hovering casually under the archways. She always seems pleased to see
him, stepping away from her girlfriends to say hello. "Of course she likes you," Jonathan
tells Gogol, patiently listening to a minute account of their acquaintance one night in the
dining hall. A few days later, following Ruth back to her room because she's forgotten a
book she needs for a class, he places his hand over hers as she reaches for the
doorknob. Her roommates are out. He waits for her on the sofa in the common room as
she searches for the book. It is the middle of the day, overcast, lightly raining. "Found
it," she says, and though they both have classes, they remain in the room, sitting on the
sofa and kissing until it is too late to bother going.
Every evening they study together at the library, sitting at either end of a table to keep
from whispering. She takes him to her dining hall, and he to hers. He takes her to the
sculpture garden. He thinks of her constantly, while leaning over the slanted board in his
drafting class, under the strong white lights of the studio, and in the darkened lecture
hall of his Renaissance architecture class, as images of Palladian villas flash onto the
screen from a slide projector. Within weeks the end of the semester is upon them, and
they are besieged by exams and papers and hundreds of pages of reading. Far more
than the amount of work he faces, he dreads the month of separation they will have to
endure at winter break. One Saturday afternoon, just before exams, she mentions to
him in the library that both her roommates will be out all day. They walk together

through Cross Campus, back to Silliman, and he sits with her on her unmade bed. The
room smells as she does, a powdery floral smell that lacks the acridness of perfume.
Postcards of authors are taped to the wall over her desk, Oscar Wilde and Virginia
Woolf. Their lips and faces are still numb from the cold, and at first they still keep their
coats on. They lie together against the shearling lining of hers, and she guides his hand
beneath her bulky sweater. It had not been like this the first time, the only other time,
that he'd been with a girl. He recalled nothing from that episode, only being thankful,
afterward, that he was no longer a virgin.
But this time he is aware of everything, the warm hollow of Ruth's abdomen, the way
her lank hair rests in thick strands on the pillow, the way her features change slightly
when she is lying down. "You're great, Nikhil," she whispers as he touches small breasts
set wide apart, one pale nipple slightly larger than the other. He kisses them, kisses the
moles scattered on her stomach as she arcs gently toward him, feels her hands on his
head and then on his shoulders, guiding him between her parted legs. He feels inept,
clumsy, as he tastes and smells her there, and yet he hears her whispering his name,
telling him it feels wonderful. She knows what to do, unzipping his jeans, standing up at
one point and getting a diaphragm case from her bureau drawer.
A week later he is home again, helping Sonia and his mother decorate the tree,
shoveling the driveway with his father, going to the mall to buy last-minute gifts. He
mopes around the house, restless, pretending to be coming down with a cold. He
wishes he could simply borrow his parents' car and drive up to Maine to see Ruth after
Christmas, or that she could visit him. He was perfectly welcome, she'd assured him,
her father and stepmother wouldn't mind. They'd put him in the guest room, she'd said;
at night he'd creep into her bed. He imagines himself in the farmhouse she's described
to him, waking up to eggs frying in a skillet, walking with her through snowy, abandoned
fields. But such a trip would require telling his parents about Ruth, something he has no
desire to do. He has no patience for their surprise, their nervousness, their quiet
disappointment, their questions about what Ruth's parents did and whether or not the
relationship was serious. As much as he longs to see her, he cannot picture her at the
kitchen table on Pemberton Road, in her jeans and her bulky sweater, politely eating his
mother's food. He cannot imagine being with her in the house where he is still Gogol.
He speaks to her when his family is asleep, quietly in the empty kitchen, charging the
calls to his telephone at school. They arrange to meet one day in Boston and spend the
day together in Harvard Square. There is a foot of snow on the ground, and the sky is a
piercing blue. They go first to a movie at the Brattle, buying tickets for whatever is about
to begin, sitting at the back of the balcony and kissing, causing people to turn back and
stare. They have lunch at Cafe Pamplona, eating pressed ham sandwiches and bowls
of garlic soup off in a corner. They exchange presents: she gives him a small used book
of drawings by Goya, and he gives her a pair of blue woolen mittens and a mixed tape
of his favorite Beatles songs. They discover a store just above the café that sells
nothing but architecture books, and he browses the aisles, treating himself to a
paperback edition of Le Corbusier's Journey to the East, for he is thinking of declaring
himself an architecture major in the spring. Afterward they wander hand in hand, kissing
now and then against a building, along the very streets he was pushed up and down in
his stroller as a child. He shows her the American professor's house where he and his
parents once lived, a time before Sonia was born, years that he has no memory of. He's
seen the house in pictures, knows from his parents the name of the street. Whoever
lives there now appears to be away; the snow hasn't been cleared from the porch steps,
and a number of rolled-up newspapers have collected on the doormat. "I wish we could
go inside," he says. "I wish we could be alone together." Looking at the house now, with
Ruth at his side, her mittened hand in his, he feels strangely helpless. Though he was
only an infant at the time, he feels nevertheless betrayed by his inability to know then
that one day, years later, he would return to the house under such different
circumstances, and that he would be so happy.

By the following year his parents know vaguely about Ruth. Though he has been to the
farmhouse in Maine twice, meeting her father and her stepmother, Sonia, who secretly
has a boyfriend these days, is the only person in his family to have met Ruth, during a
weekend when Sonia came to New Haven. His parents have expressed no curiosity
about his girlfriend. His relationship with her is one accomplishment in his life about
which they are not in the least bit proud or pleased. Ruth tells him she doesn't mind his
parents' disapproval, that she finds it romantic. But Gogol knows it isn't right. He wishes
his parents could simply accept her, as her family accepts him, without pressure of any
kind. "You're too young to get involved this way," Ashoke and Ashima tell him. They've
even gone so far as to point out examples of Bengali men they know who've married
Americans, marriages that have ended in divorce. It only makes things worse when he
says that marriage is the last thing on his mind. At times he hangs up on them. He pities
his parents when they speak to him this way, for having no experience of being young
and in love. He suspects that they are secretly glad when Ruth goes away to Oxford for
a semester. She'd mentioned her interest in going there long ago, in the first weeks of
their courtship, when the spring of junior year had felt like a remote speck on the
horizon. She'd asked him if he minded if she applied, and though the idea of her being
so far had made him queasy he'd said no, of course not, that twelve weeks would go
like that.
He is lost that spring without her. He spends all his time in the studio, especially the
Friday nights and weekends he would normally have been with her, the two of them
eating at Naples and going to see movies in the law school auditorium. He listens to the
music she loves: Simon and Garfunkel, Neil Young, Cat Stevens, buying himself brandnew copies of the albums she'd inherited from her parents. It sickens him to think of the
physical distance between them, to think that when he is asleep at night she is leaning
over a sink somewhere, brushing her teeth and washing her face to start the next day.
He longs for her as his parents have longed, all these years, for the people they love in
India—for the first time in his life, he knows this feeling. But his parents refuse to give
him the money to fly to England on his spring break. He spends what little money he
has from working in the dining hall on transatlantic phone calls to Ruth twice a week.
Twice a day he checks his campus mailbox for letters and postcards stamped with the
multicolored profiles of the queen. He carries these letters and postcards wherever he
goes, stuck into his books. "My Shakespeare class is the best I've ever taken," she's
written in violet-colored ink. "The coffee is undrinkable. Everyone constantly says
'cheers.' I think of you all the time."
One day he attends a panel discussion about Indian novels written in English. He feels
obligated to attend; one of the presenters on the panel, Amit, is a distant cousin who
lives in Bombay, whom Gogol has never met. His mother has asked him to greet Amit
on her behalf. Gogol is bored by the panelists, who keep referring to something called
"marginality," as if it were some sort of medical condition. For most of the hour, he
sketches portraits of the panelists, who sit hunched over their papers along a
rectangular table. "Teleologically speaking, ABCDs are unable to answer the question
'Where are you from?'" the sociologist on the panel declares. Gogol has never heard
the term ABCD. He eventually gathers that it stands for "American-born confused
deshi." In other words, him. He learns that the C could also stand for "conflicted." He
knows that deshi, a generic word for "countryman," means "Indian," knows that his
parents and all their friends always refer to India simply as desh. But Gogol never thinks
of India as desh. He thinks of it as Americans do, as India.
Gogol slouches in his seat and ponders certain awkward truths. For instance, although
he can understand his mother tongue, and speak it fluently, he cannot read or write it
with even modest proficiency. On trips to India his American-accented English is a
source of endless amusement to his relatives, and when he and Sonia speak to each
other, aunts and uncles and cousins always shake their heads in disbelief and say, "I
didn't understand a word!" Living with a pet name and a good name, in a place where
such distinctions do not exist—surely that was emblematic of the greatest confusion of
all. He searches the audience for someone he knows, but it isn't his crowd—lots of lit

majors with leather satchels and gold-rimmed glasses and fountain pens, lots of people
Ruth would have waved to. There are also lots of ABCDs. He has no idea there are this
many on campus. He has no ABCD friends at college. He avoids them, for they remind
him too much of the way his parents choose to live, befriending people not so much
because they like them, but because of a past they happen to share. "Gogol, why aren't
you a member of the Indian association here?" Amit asks later when they go for a drink
at the Anchor. "I just don't have the time," Gogol says, not telling his well-meaning
cousin that he can think of no greater hypocrisy than joining an organization that
willingly celebrates occasions his parents forced him, throughout his childhood and
adolescence, to attend. "I'm Nikhil now," Gogol says, suddenly depressed by how many
more times he will have to say this, asking people to remember, reminding them to
forget, feeling as if an errata slip were perpetually pinned to his chest.

Thanksgiving of his senior year he takes the train, alone, up to Boston. He and Ruth are
no longer together. Instead of coming back from Oxford after those twelve weeks, she'd
stayed on to do a summer course, explaining that a professor she admired would be
retiring after that. Gogol had spent the summer on Pemberton Road. He had had an
unpaid internship at a small architecture firm in Cambridge, where he'd run errands at
Charrette for the designers, been sent to photograph nearby sites, lettered a few
drawings. To make money he worked nights washing dishes at an Italian restaurant in
his parents' town. Late in August he'd gone to Logan to welcome Ruth home. He had
waited for her at the arrival gate, taken her to a hotel for one night, paying for it with the
money he'd made at the restaurant. The room overlooked the Public Garden, its walls
covered with thickly striped pink-and-cream paper. They'd made love for the first time in
a double bed. They'd gone out for their meals, neither of them able to afford the items
on the room service menu. They walked up Newbury Street and went to a Greek
restaurant with tables on the sidewalk. The day was blazing hot. Ruth looked the same,
but her speech was peppered with words and phrases she'd picked up in England, like
"I imagine" and "I suppose" and "presumably." She spoke of her semester and how
much she'd liked England, the traveling she'd done in Barcelona and Rome. She
wanted to go back to England for graduate school, she said. "I imagine they've got good
architecture schools," she'd added. "You could come as well." The next morning he'd
put her on the bus to Maine. But within days of being together again in New Haven, in
an apartment he'd rented on Howe Street with friends, they'd begun fighting, both
admitting in the end that something had changed.
They avoid each other now, when they happen to cross paths in the library and on the
streets. He's scratched out her phone number and the addresses he'd written down for
her at Oxford and in Maine. But boarding the train it is impossible not to think of the
afternoon, two years ago, they'd met. As usual the train is incredibly crowded, and this
time he sits for half the journey in the vestibule. After Westerly he finds a seat, and
settles down with the course selection guide for next semester. But he feels distracted
for some reason, gloomy, impatient to be off the train; he does not bother to remove his
coat, does not bother to go to the café car for something to drink even though he is
thirsty. He puts away the course guide and opens up a library book that might be helpful
for his senior thesis project, a comparison between Renaissance Italian and Mughal
palace design. But after a few paragraphs he closes this book as well. His stomach
growls and he wonders what there will be for dinner at home, what his father has
prepared. His mother and Sonia have gone to India for three weeks, to attend a cousin's
wedding, and this year Gogol and his father will spend Thanksgiving at the home of
friends.
He angles his head against the window and watches the autumnal landscape pass: the
spewing pink and purple waters of a dye mill, electrical power stations, a big ballshaped water tank covered with rust. Abandoned factories, with rows of small square
windows partly bashed in, ravaged as if by moths. On the trees the topmost branches
are bare, the remaining leaves yellow, paper-thin. The train moves more slowly than

usual, and when he looks at his watch he sees that they are running well behind
schedule. And then, somewhere outside Providence, in an abandoned, grassy field, the
train stops. For over an hour they stand there as a solid, scarlet disk of sun sinks into
the tree-lined horizon. The lights turn off, and the air inside the train turns uncomfortably
warm. The conductors rush anxiously through the compartments. "Probably a broken
wire," the gentleman sitting beside Gogol remarks. Across the aisle a gray-haired
woman reads, a coat clutched like a blanket to her chest. Behind him two students
discuss the poems of Ben Jonson. Without the sound of the engine Gogol can hear an
opera playing faintly on someone's Walkman. Through the window he admires the
darkening sapphire sky. He sees spare lengths of rusted rails heaped in piles. It isn't
until they start moving again that an announcement is made on the loudspeaker about a
medical emergency. But the truth, overheard by one of the passengers from a
conductor, quickly circulates: a suicide had been committed, a person had jumped in
front of the train.
He is shocked and discomfited by the news, feeling bad about his irritation and
impatience, wondering if the victim had been a man or a woman, young or old. He
imagines the person consulting the same schedule that's in his backpack, determining
exactly when the train would be passing through. The approach of the train's headlights.
As a result of the delay he misses his commuter rail connection in Boston, waits another
forty minutes for the next one. He puts a call through to his parents' house, but no one
answers. He tries his father's department at the university, but there too the phone rings
and rings. At the station he sees his father waiting on the darkened platform, wearing
sneakers and corduroys, anxiousness in his face. A trench coat is belted around his
waist, a scarf knitted by Ashima wrapped at his throat, a tweed cap on his head.
"Sorry I'm late," Gogol says. "How long have you been waiting?"
"Since quarter to six," his father says. Gogol looks at his watch. It is nearly eight.
"There was an accident."
"I know. I called. What happened? Were you hurt?"
Gogol shakes his head. "Someone jumped onto the tracks. Somewhere in Rhode
Island. I tried to call you. They had to wait for the police, I think."
"I was worried."
"I hope you haven't been standing out in the cold all this time," Gogol says, and from his
father's lack of response he knows that this is exactly what he has done. Gogol wonders
what it is like for his father to be without his mother and Sonia. He wonders if he is
lonely. But his father is not the type to admit such things, to speak openly of his desires,
his moods, his needs. They walk to the parking lot, get into the car, and begin the short
drive home.
The night is windy, so much so that the car jostles slightly from time to time, and brown
leaves as large as human feet fly across the road in the headlights' glare. Normally on
these rides back from the station his father asks questions, about his classes, about his
finances, about his plans after graduation. But tonight they are silent, Ashoke
concentrating on driving. Gogol fidgets with the radio, switching from the AM news
station to NPR.
"I want to tell you something," his father says when the piece ends, once they have
already turned onto Pemberton Road.
"What?" Gogol asks.
"It's about your name."
Gogol looks at his father, puzzled. "My name?"
His father shuts off the radio. "Gogol."
These days he is called Gogol so seldom that the sound of it no longer upsets him as it
used to. After three years of being Nikhil the vast majority of the time, he no longer
minds.
"There is a reason for it, you know," his father continues.
"Right, Baba. Gogol's your favorite author. I know."

"No," his father says. He pulls into the driveway and switches off the engine, then the
headlights. He undoes his seat belt, guiding it with his hand as it retracts, back behind
his left shoulder. "Another reason."
And as they sit together in the car, his father revisits a field 209 kilometers from
Howrah. With his fingers lightly grasping the bottom of the steering wheel, his gaze
directed through the windshield at the garage door, he tells Gogol the story of the train
he'd ridden twenty-eight years ago, in October 1961, on his way to visit his grandfather
in Jamshedpur. He tells him about the night that had nearly taken his life, and the book
that had saved him, and about the year afterward, when he'd been unable to move.
Gogol listens, stunned, his eyes fixed on his father's profile. Though there are only
inches between them, for an instant his father is a stranger, a man who has kept a
secret, has survived a tragedy, a man whose past he does not fully know. A man who is
vulnerable, who has suffered in an inconceivable way. He imagines his father, in his
twenties as Gogol is now, sitting on a train as Gogol had just been, reading a story, and
then suddenly nearly killed. He struggles to picture the West Bengal countryside he has
seen on only a few occasions, his father's mangled body, among hundreds of dead
ones, being carried on a stretcher, past a twisted length of maroon compartments.
Against instinct he tries to imagine life without his father, a world in which his father
does not exist.
"Why don't I know this about you?" Gogol says. His voice sounds harsh, accusing, but
his eyes well with tears. "Why haven't you told me this until now?"
"It never felt like the right time," his father says.
"But it's like you've lied to me all these years." When his father doesn't respond, he
adds, "That's why you have that limp, isn't it?"
"It happened so long ago. I didn't want to upset you."
"It doesn't matter. You should have told me."
"Perhaps," his father concedes, glancing briefly in Gogol's direction. He removes the
keys from the ignition. "Come, you must be hungry. The car is getting cold."
But Gogol doesn't move. He sits there, still struggling to absorb the information, feeling
awkward, oddly ashamed, at fault. "I'm sorry, Baba."
His father laughs softly. "You had nothing to do with it."
"Does Sonia know?"
His father shakes his head. "Not yet. I'll explain it to her one day. In this country, only
your mother knows. And now you. I've always meant for you to know, Gogol."
And suddenly the sound of his pet name, uttered by his father as he has been
accustomed to hearing it all his life, means something completely new, bound up with a
catastrophe he has unwittingly embodied for years. "Is that what you think of when you
think of me?" Gogol asks him. "Do I remind you of that night?"
"Not at all," his father says eventually, one hand going to his ribs, a habitual gesture that
has baffled Gogol until now. "You remind me of everything that followed."

6
1994
He lives in New York now. In May he graduated from the architecture program at
Columbia. He's been working since then for a firm in midtown, with celebrated largescale commissions to its name. It's not the sort of job he'd envisioned for himself as a
student; designing and renovating private residences was what he'd wanted to do. That
might come later, his advisers have told him; for now, it was important to apprentice with
the big names. And so, facing the tawny brick wall of a neighboring building across the
air shaft, he works with a team on designs for hotels and museums and corporate
headquarters in cities he's never seen: Brussels, Buenos Aires, Abu Dhabi, Hong Kong.
His contributions are incidental, and never fully his own: a stairwell, a skylight, a
corridor, an air-conditioning duct. Still, he knows that each component of a building,
however small, is nevertheless essential, and he finds it gratifying that after all his years
of schooling, all his crits and unbuilt projects, his efforts are to have some practical end.
He typically works late into his evenings, and on most of his weekends, drawing designs
on the computer, drafting plans, writing specifications, building Styrofoam and
cardboard models to scale. He goes home to a studio in Morningside Heights, with two
windows facing west, on Amsterdam Avenue. The entrance is easy to miss, a
scratched-up glass door between a newsstand and a nail salon. It's the first apartment
he has to himself, after an evolving chain of roommates all through college and
graduate school. There is so much street noise that when he is on the phone and the
windows are open, people often ask if he is calling from a pay phone. The kitchen is
built into what should have been an entryway, a space so small that the refrigerator
stands several feet away, over by the bathroom door. On the stove sits a teakettle he
has never filled with water, and on the countertop a toaster he's never plugged in.
His parents are distressed by how little money he makes, and occasionally his father
sends him checks in the mail to help him with his rent, his credit card bills. They had
been disappointed that he'd gone to Columbia. They'd hoped he would choose MIT, the
other architecture program to which he'd been accepted. But after four years in New
Haven he didn't want to move back to Massachusetts, to the one city in America his
parents know. He didn't want to attend his father's alma mater, and live in an apartment
in Central Square as his parents once had, and revisit the streets about which his
parents speak nostalgically. He didn't want to go home on the weekends, to go with
them to pujos and Bengali parties, to remain unquestionably in their world.
He prefers New York, a place which his parents do not know well, whose beauty they
are blind to, which they fear. He'd come to know the city slightly during his years at
Yale, on visits with architecture classes. He'd been to a few parties at Columbia.
Sometimes he and Ruth would ride in on Metro-North, and they would go to museums,
or to the Village, or to browse for books at the Strand. But as a child he'd been to New
York only once with his family, a trip that had given him no sense of what the city was
like. They had gone one weekend to visit Bengali friends who lived in Queens. The
friends had given his family a tour of Manhattan. Gogol had been ten years old, Sonia
four. "I want to see Sesame Street," Sonia had said, believing that it was an actual
landmark in the city, and she had cried when Gogol had laughed at her, saying it didn't
exist. On the tour they were driven past sites like Rockefeller Center and Central Park
and the Empire State Building, and Gogol had ducked his head below the car's window
to try to see how tall the buildings were. His parents had remarked endlessly at the
amount of traffic, the pedestrians, the noise. Calcutta was no worse, they had said. He
remembered wanting to get out and go to the top of one of the skyscrapers, the way his
father had once taken him to the top of the Prudential Center in Boston when he was
little. But they were allowed out of the car only once they got to Lexington Avenue, to
eat lunch at an Indian restaurant and then to buy Indian groceries, and polyester saris

and 220-volt appliances to give to relatives in Calcutta. This, to his parents, was what
one came to Manhattan to do. He remembered wishing that his parents would walk
through the park, take him to the Museum of Natural History to see the dinosaurs, ride
the subway even. But they had had no interest in such things.

One night, Evan, one of the draftsmen at work with whom he is friendly, talks him into
going to a party. Evan tells Gogol that it's an apartment worth seeing, a Tribeca loft that
happens to be designed by one of the partners at the firm. The host of the party,
Russell, an old friend of Evan, works for the UN and has spent several years in Kenya,
and as a result the loft is filled with an impressive collection of African furniture and
sculpture and masks. Gogol imagines that it will be a party of hundreds filling up a vast
space, the sort of party where he might arrive and leave undetected. But by the time
Gogol and Evan get there, the party is nearly over, and there are only a dozen or so
people sitting around a low coffee table surrounded by cushions, eating picked-over
grapes and cheese. At one point Russell, who is diabetic, raises his shirt and injects
himself in the stomach with insulin. Beside Russell is a woman Gogol can't stop looking
at. She is kneeling on the floor at Russell's side, spreading a generous amount of brie
on a cracker, paying no attention to what Russell is doing. Instead she is arguing with a
man on the other side of the coffee table about a movie by Buñuel. "Oh, come on," she
keeps saying, "it was brilliant." At once strident and flirtatious, she is a little bit drunk.
She has dirty blond hair gathered sloppily into a bun, strands falling randomly,
attractively, around her face. Her forehead is high and smooth, her jawbones sloping
and unusually long. Her eyes are greenish, the irises encased by thin rings of black.
She is dressed in silk capri pants and a sleeveless white shirt that shows off her tan.
"What did you think of it?" she asks Gogol, drawing him without warning into the
discussion. When he tells her he hasn't seen the film she looks away.
She approaches him again as he is standing idle, looking up at an imposing wooden
mask that hangs above a suspended metal staircase, the hollow diamond-shaped eyes
and mouth of the mask revealing the white brick wall behind it. "There's an even scarier
one in the bedroom," she says, making a face, shuddering. "Imagine opening your eyes
and seeing something like that first thing in the morning." The way she says this makes
him wonder if she speaks from experience, if she's Russell's lover, or ex-lover, if that is
what she is implying.
Her name is Maxine. She asks him about the program at Columbia, mentioning that
she'd gone to Barnard for college, majoring in art history. She leans back against a
column as she speaks, smiling at him easily, drinking a glass of champagne. At first he
assumes she is older than he is, closer to thirty than twenty. He is surprised to learn that
she'd graduated from college the year after he started graduate school, that for a year
they overlapped at Columbia, living just three blocks away from each other, and that
they have in all likelihood crossed paths on Broadway or walking up the steps of Low
Library or in Avery. It reminds him of Ruth, of the way they, too, had once lived in such
close proximity as strangers. Maxine tells him she works as an assistant editor for a
publisher of art books. Her current project is a book on Andrea Mantegna, and he
impresses her, remembering correctly that his frescoes are in Mantua, in the Palazzo
Ducale. They speak in that slightly strained, silly way that he associates now with
flirtation—the exchange feels desperately arbitrary, fleeting. It is the sort of conversation
he might have had with anybody, but Maxine has a way of focusing her attention on him
completely, her pale, watchful eyes holding his gaze, making him feel, for those brief
minutes, the absolute center of her world.
The next morning she calls, waking him; at ten on a Sunday he is still in bed, his head
aching from the Scotch and sodas he'd consumed throughout the evening. He answers
gruffly, a bit impatiently, expecting it to be his mother calling to ask how his week has
been. He has the feeling, from the tone of Maxine's voice, that she's been up for hours,
that her breakfast has already been eaten, her Times thoroughly read. "It's Maxine.
From last night," she says, not bothering to apologize for waking him. She tells him

she'd found his number in the phone book, though he doesn't remember telling her his
last name. "God, your apartment's noisy," she remarks. Then, without awkwardness or
pause, she invites him to dinner at her place. She specifies the evening, a Friday, tells
him the address, somewhere in Chelsea. He assumes it will be a dinner party, asks if
there's anything he can bring, but she says no, it will be just him.
"I should probably warn you that I live with my parents," she adds.
"Oh." This unexpected piece of information deflates him, confuses him. He asks if her
parents will mind his coming over, if perhaps they should meet at a restaurant instead.
But she laughs at this suggestion in a way that makes him feel vaguely foolish. "Why on
earth would they mind?"
***
He takes a cab from his office to her neighborhood, getting out at a liquor store to buy a
bottle of wine. It is a cool evening in September, raining steadily, the summer's leaves
still plentiful on the trees. He turns onto a remote, tranquil block between Ninth and
Tenth Avenues. It is his first date in a long time; with the exception of a few forgettable
affairs at Columbia he's been with no one seriously since Ruth. He doesn't know what to
make of the whole arrangement with Maxine, but as odd as the terms of the invitation
seem he'd been unable to refuse. He is curious about her, attracted, flattered by the
boldness of her pursuit.
He is stunned by the house, a Greek Revival, admiring it for several minutes like a
tourist before opening the gate. He notes the pedimented window lintels, the Doric
pilasters, the bracketed entablature, the black cruciform paneled door. He climbs a low
stoop with cast-iron railings. The name below the bell is Ratliff. Several minutes after he
presses it, enough to make him double-check the address on the scrap of paper in his
jacket pocket, Maxine arrives. She kisses him on the cheek, leaning toward him on one
foot, the other leg extended, slightly raised behind her. She is barefoot, wearing flowing
black wool pants and a thin beige cardigan. As far as he can tell she wears nothing
under the cardigan apart from her bra. Her hair is done up in the same careless way.
His raincoat is draped on a coat rack, his folding umbrella dropped into a stand. He
glimpses himself quickly in a mirror in the foyer, smoothing his hair and his tie.
She leads him down a flight of stairs to a kitchen that appears to occupy an entire floor
of the house, with a large farmhouse table at one end, and beyond that French doors
leading to a garden. The walls are adorned with prints of roosters and herbs and an
arrangement of copper skillets. Ceramic plates and platters are displayed on open
shelves, along with what seem to be hundreds of cookbooks, food encyclopedias, and
volumes of essays about eating. A woman stands at a butcher-block island by the
appliances, snipping the ends of a pile of green beans with a pair of scissors.
"This is my mother, Lydia," Maxine says. "And this is Silas," she tells him, pointing to a
reddish brown cocker spaniel dozing under the table.
Lydia is tall and slender like her daughter, with straight iron-colored hair cut youthfully to
frame her face. She is carefully dressed, with gold jewelry at her ears and throat, a navy
apron wrapped around her waist, gleaming black leather shoes. Though her face is
lined and her complexion a bit splotchy, she is more beautiful even than Maxine, her
features more regular, the cheekbones higher, the eyes more elegantly defined.
"Lovely to meet you, Nikhil," she says, smiling brightly, and though she looks at him with
interest, she does not pause in her work or offer to shake his hand.
Maxine pours him a glass of wine, not asking if perhaps he might prefer something else.
"Come on," she says, "I'll show you the house." She leads him up five flights of
uncarpeted stairs that creak noisily beneath their combined weight. The plan of the
house is simple, two immense rooms per floor, each of which, he is certain, is larger
than his own apartment. Politely he admires the plaster cove moldings, the ceiling
medallions, the marble mantelpieces, things he knows how to speak intelligently and at
length about. The walls are painted in flamboyant colors: hibiscus pink, lilac, pistachio,
and are crowded with clusters of paintings and drawings and photographs. In one room
he sees an oil portrait of a small girl he assumes is Maxine, sitting in the lap of a

stunning, youthful Lydia, wearing a yellow sleeveless dress. Along the hallways on
every floor shelves ascend to the ceiling, crammed with all the novels one should read
in a lifetime, biographies, massive monographs of every artist, all the architecture books
Gogol has ever coveted. Alongside the clutter there is a starkness about the place that
appeals to him: the floors are bare, the woodwork stripped, many of the windows
without curtains to highlight their generous proportions.
Maxine has the top floor to herself: a peach-colored bedroom with a sleigh bed at the
back, a long black and red bath room. The shelf above the sink is full of different creams
for her neck, her throat, her eyes, her feet, daytime, nighttime, sun and shade. Through
the bedroom is a gray sitting room she treats as a closet, her shoes and handbags and
clothes scattered across the floor, piled on a fainting couch, spilling over the backs of
chairs. These patches of disorder make no difference—it is a house too spectacular to
suffer distraction, forgiving of oversight and mess.
"Lovely frieze-band windows," he comments, looking toward the ceiling.
She turns to him, puzzled. "What?"
"That's what those are called," he explains, pointing. "They're fairly common in houses
from this period."
She looks up, and then at him, seeming impressed. "I never knew that."
He sits with Maxine on the fainting couch, leafing through a coffee table book she'd
helped to edit on eighteenth-century French wallpapers, one side of the book resting on
each of their knees. She tells him this is the house she's grown up in, mentioning
casually that she'd moved back six months ago after living with a man in Boston, an
arrangement that had not worked out. When he asks if she plans to look for a place of
her own she says it hasn't occurred to her. "It's such a bother renting a place in the city,"
she says. "Besides, I love this house. There's really nowhere else I'd rather live." For all
her sophistication he finds the fact that she's moved back with her parents after a love
affair has soured endearingly old-fashioned; it is something he cannot picture himself
doing at this stage in his life.
At dinner he meets her father, a tall, good-looking man with luxuriant white hair,
Maxine's pale green-gray eyes, thin rectangular glasses perched halfway down his
nose. "How do you do. I'm Gerald," he says, nodding, shaking Gogol's hand. Gerald
gives him a bunch of cutlery and cloth napkins and asks him to set the table. Gogol
does as he is told, aware that he is touching the everyday possessions of a family he
barely knows. "You'll sit here, Nikhil," Gerald says, pointing to a chair once the
silverware is laid. Gogol takes his place on one side of the table, across from Maxine.
Gerald and Lydia are at either end. Gogol had skipped lunch that day in order to leave
the office in time for the date with Maxine, and already the wine, at once heavier and
smoother than what he is used to drinking, has gone to his head. He feels a pleasant
ache at his temples, and a sudden gratitude for the day and where it has brought him.
Maxine lights a pair of candles. Gerald tops off the wine. Lydia serves the food on broad
white plates: a thin piece of steak rolled into a bundle and tied with string, sitting in a
pool of dark sauce, the green beans boiled so that they are still crisp. A bowl of small,
round, roasted red potatoes is passed around, and afterward a salad. They eat
appreciatively, commenting on the tenderness of the meat, the freshness of the beans.
His own mother would never have served so few dishes to a guest. She would have
kept her eyes trained on Maxine's plate, insisting she have seconds and then thirds.
The table would have been lined with a row of serving bowls so that people could help
themselves. But Lydia pays no attention to Gogol's plate. She makes no announcement
indicating that there is more. Silas sits at Lydia's feet as they eat, and at one point Lydia
slices off a generous portion of her meat and feeds it to him off of her palm.
The four of them go quickly through two bottles of wine, then move on to a third. The
Ratliffs are vociferous at the table, opinionated about things his own parents are
indifferent to: movies, exhibits at museums, good restaurants, the design of everyday
things. They speak of New York, of stores and neighborhoods and buildings they either
despise or love, with an intimacy and ease that make Gogol feel as if he barely knows

the city. They speak about the house, which Gerald and Lydia bought back in the
seventies, when no one wanted to live in the area, about the history of the
neighborhood, and about Clement Clarke Moore, who Gerald explains was a professor
of classics at the seminary across the street. "He was the person responsible for local
residential zoning," Gerald says. "That and writing ''Twas the Night Before Christmas,' of
course." Gogol is unaccustomed to this sort of talk at mealtimes, to the indulgent ritual
of the lingering meal, and the pleasant aftermath of bottles and crumbs and empty
glasses that clutter the table. Something tells him that none of this is for his benefit, that
this is the way the Ratliffs eat every night. Gerald is a lawyer. Lydia is a curator of
textiles at the Met. They are at once satisfied and intrigued by his background, by his
years at Yale and Columbia, his career as an architect, his Mediterranean looks. "You
could be Italian," Lydia remarks at one point during the meal, regarding him in the
candle's glow.
Gerald remembers a bar of French chocolate he bought on his way home, and this is
unwrapped, broken apart, and passed around the table. Eventually the talk turns to
India. Gerald asks questions about the recent rise of Hindu fundamentalism, a topic
Gogol knows little about. Lydia talks at length about Indian carpets and miniatures,
Maxine about a college class she'd once taken on Buddhist stupas. They have never
known a person who has been to Calcutta. Gerald has an Indian colleague at work who
just went to India for his honeymoon. He'd brought back spectacular photographs, of a
palace built on a lake. Was that in Calcutta?
"That's Udaipur," Gogol tells them. "I've never been there. Calcutta's in the east, closer
to Thailand."
Lydia peers into the salad bowl, fishing out a stray piece of lettuce and eating it with her
fingers. She seems more relaxed now, quicker to smile, her cheeks rosy from the wine.
"What's Calcutta like? Is it beautiful?"
The question surprises him. He is accustomed to people asking about the poverty,
about the beggars and the heat. "Parts of it are beautiful," he tells her. "There's a lot of
lovely Victorian architecture left over from the British. But most of it's decaying."
"That sounds like Venice," Gerald says. "Are there canals?"
"Only during monsoons. That's when the streets flood. I guess that's the closest it
comes to resembling Venice."
"I want to go to Calcutta," Maxine says, as if this has been a thing denied to her all her
life. She gets up and walks over to the stove. "I feel like tea. Who wants tea?"
But Gerald and Lydia decide against tea tonight; there is an I, Claudius video they want
to watch before bed. Without tending to the dishes they stand up, Gerald taking their
two glasses and the rest of the wine. "Good night, dear," Lydia says, kissing Gogol
lightly on the cheek. And then their footsteps creak noisily up the stairs.
"I suppose you've never been subjected to someone's parents on the first date before,"
Maxine says once they are alone, sipping milky cups of Lapsang Souchong from heavy
white mugs.
"I enjoyed meeting them. They're charming."
"That's one way of putting it."
They remain awhile at the table, talking, the sound of the rain echoing quietly in the
enclosed space behind the house. The candles shrink to stubs, and specks of wax drip
onto the table. Silas, who has been softly pacing on the floor, comes and presses his
head against Gogol's leg, looking up at him, wagging his tail. Gogol bends over, pats
him tentatively.
"You've never had a dog, have you?" Maxine says, observing him.
"No."
"Didn't you ever want one?"
"When I was a kid. But my parents never wanted the responsibility. Plus we had to go to
India every couple of years."
He realizes it's the first time he's mentioned his parents to her, his past. He wonders if

perhaps she'll ask him more about these things. Instead she says, "Silas likes you. He's
very picky."
He looks at her, watching as she undoes her hair, letting it hang loose for a moment
over her shoulders before wrapping it thoughtlessly around her hand. She looks back at
him, smiling. Once again he is aware of her nakedness beneath the cardigan.
"I should go," he says. But he is glad that she accepts his offer to help her clean up
before leaving. They loiter over the task, loading the dishwasher, wiping down the table
and the butcher-block island, washing and drying the pots and pans. They agree to go
to the Film Forum on Sunday afternoon, to see the Antonioni double feature that Lydia
and Gerald have recently been to and recommended over dinner.
"I'll walk you to the subway," Maxine says when they are finished, putting a leash
around Silas. "He needs to go out." They go up to the parlor level, put on their coats. He
hears the sound of a television faintly through the ceiling. He pauses at the foot of the
stairs. "I forgot to thank your parents," he says.
"For what?"
"For having me over. For dinner."
She links elbows with him. "You can thank them next time."

From the very beginning he feels effortlessly incorporated into their lives. It is a different
brand of hospitality from what he is used to; for though the Ratliffs are generous, they
are people who do not go out of their way to accommodate others, assured, in his case
correctly, that their life will appeal to him. Gerald and Lydia, busy with their own
engagements, keep out of the way. Gogol and Maxine come and go as they please,
from movies and dinners out. He goes shopping with her on Madison Avenue at stores
they must be buzzed into, for cashmere cardigans and outrageously expensive English
colognes that Maxine buys without deliberation or guilt. They go to darkened, humblelooking restaurants downtown where the tables are tiny, the bills huge. Almost without
fail they wind up back at her parents' place. There is always some delicious cheese or
pâté to snack on, always some good wine to drink. It is in her claw-footed tub that they
soak together, glasses of wine or single-malt Scotch on the floor. At night he sleeps with
her in the room she grew up in, on a soft, sagging mattress, holding her body, as warm
as a furnace, through the night, making love to her in a room just above the one in
which Gerald and Lydia lie. On nights he has to stay late at work he simply comes over;
Maxine keeps dinner waiting for him, and then they go upstairs to bed. Gerald and Lydia
think nothing, in the mornings, when he and Maxine join them downstairs in the kitchen,
their hair uncombed, seeking bowls of café au lait and toasted slices of French bread
and jam. The first morning he'd slept over he'd been mortified to face them, showering
beforehand, putting on his wrinkled shirt and trousers from the day before, but they'd
merely smiled, still in their bathrobes, and offered him warm sticky buns from their
favorite neighborhood bakery and sections of the paper.
Quickly, simultaneously, he falls in love with Maxine, the house, and Gerald and Lydia's
manner of living, for to know her and love her is to know and love all of these things. He
loves the mess that surrounds Maxine, her hundreds of things always covering her floor
and her bedside table, her habit, when they are alone on the fifth floor, of not shutting
the door when she goes to the bathroom. Her unkempt ways, a challenge to his
increasingly minimalist taste, charm him. He learns to love the food she and her parents
eat, the polenta and risotto, the bouillabaisse and osso buco, the meat baked in
parchment paper. He comes to expect the weight of their flatware in his hands, and to
keep the cloth napkin, still partially folded, on his lap. He learns that one does not grate
Parmesan cheese over pasta dishes containing seafood. He learns not to put wooden
spoons in the dishwasher, as he had mistakenly done one evening when he was
helping to clean up. The nights he spends there, he learns to wake up earlier than he is
used to, to the sound of Silas barking downstairs, wanting to be taken for his morning
walk. He learns to anticipate, every evening, the sound of a cork emerging from a fresh

bottle of wine.
Maxine is open about her past, showing him photographs of her ex-boyfriends in the
pages of a marble-papered album, speaking of those relationships without
embarrassment or regret. She has the gift of accepting her life; as he comes to know
her, he realizes that she has never wished she were anyone other than herself, raised
in any other place, in any other way. This, in his opinion, is the biggest difference
between them, a thing far more foreign to him than the beautiful house she'd grown up
in, her education at private schools. In addition, he is continually amazed by how much
Maxine emulates her parents, how much she respects their tastes and their ways. At
the dinner table she argues with them about books and paintings and people they know
in common the way one might argue with a friend. There is none of the exasperation he
feels with his own parents. No sense of obligation. Unlike his parents, they pressure her
to do nothing, and yet she lives faithfully, happily, at their side.
She is surprised to hear certain things about his life: that all his parents' friends are
Bengali, that they had had an arranged marriage, that his mother cooks Indian food
every day, that she wears saris and a bindi. "Really?" she says, not fully believing him.
"But you're so different. I would never have thought that." He doesn't feel insulted, but
he is aware that a line has been drawn all the same. To him the terms of his parents'
marriage are something at once unthinkable and unremarkable; nearly all their friends
and relatives had been married in the same way. But their lives bear no resemblance to
that of Gerald and Lydia: expensive pieces of jewelry presented on Lydia's birthday,
flowers brought home for no reason at all, the two of them kissing openly, going for
walks through the city, or to dinner, just as Gogol and Maxine do. Seeing the two of
them curled up on the sofa in the evenings, Gerald's head resting on Lydia's shoulder,
Gogol is reminded that in all his life he has never witnessed a single moment of physical
affection between his parents. Whatever love exists between them is an utterly private,
uncelebrated thing. "That's so depressing," Maxine says when he confesses this fact to
her, and though it upsets him to hear her reaction, he can't help but agree. One day
Maxine asks him if his parents want him to marry an Indian girl. She poses the question
out of curiosity, without hoping for a particular response. He feels angry at his parents
then, wishing they could be otherwise, knowing in his heart what the answer is. "I don't
know," he tells her. "I guess so. It doesn't matter what they want."
She visits him infrequently; she and Gogol are never close to his neighborhood for any
reason, and even the absolute privacy they would have had there is of no appeal. Still,
some nights when her parents have a dinner party she has no interest in, or simply to
be fair, she appears, quickly filling up the small space with her gardenia perfume, her
coat, her big brown leather bag, her discarded clothes, and they make love on his futon
as the traffic rumbles below. He is nervous to have her in his place, aware that he has
put nothing up on his walls, that he has not bothered to buy lamps to replace the dismal
glow of the ceiling light. "Oh, Nikhil, it's too awful," she eventually says on one of these
occasions, barely three months after they've met. "I won't let you live here." When his
mother had said more or less the same thing, the first time his parents had visited the
apartment, he'd argued with her, hotly defending the merits of his spartan, solitary
existence. But when Maxine says it, adding "you should just stay with me," he is quietly
thrilled. By then he knows enough about her to know that she is not one to offer things if
she doesn't mean them. Still, he demurs; what would her parents think? She shrugs.
"My parents love you," she says matter-of-factly, definitively, just as she says everything
else. And so he moves in with her in a way, bringing a few bags of his clothes, nothing
else. His futon and his table, his kettle and toaster and television and the rest of his
things, remain on Amsterdam Avenue. His answering machine continues to record his
messages. He continues to receive his mail there, in a nameless metal box.
***
Within six months he has the keys to the Ratliffs' house, a set of which Maxine presents
to him on a silver Tiffany chain. Like her parents, he has come to call her Max. He drops
off his shirts at the dry cleaner around the corner from her place. He keeps a toothbrush
and razor on her cluttered pedestal sink. In the mornings a few times a week he gets up

early and goes running before work with Gerald along the Hudson, down to Battery Park
City and back. He volunteers to take Silas out for walks, holding the leash as the dog
sniffs and pokes at trees, and he picks up Silas's warm shit with a plastic bag. He
spends entire weekends holed up in the house, reading books from Gerald and Lydia's
shelves, admiring the sunlight that filters through the enormous unadorned windows
during the course of the day. He comes to prefer certain sofas and chairs to others;
when he is not there, he can conjure the paintings and photographs arrayed on the
walls. He has to make a point of going to his studio, of resetting the tape on his
answering machine, paying his rent check and his bills.
Often, on weekends, he helps to shop and prepare for Gerald and Lydia's dinner
parties, peeling apples and deveining shrimp with Lydia, helping to shuck oysters, going
down to the cellar with Gerald to bring up the extra chairs, the wine. He has fallen the
tiniest bit in love with Lydia and with the understated, unflustered way she entertains.
He is always struck by these dinners: only a dozen or so guests sitting around the
candlelit table, a carefully selected mix of painters, editors, academics, gallery owners,
eating the meal course by course, talking intelligently until the evening's end. How
different they are from his own parents' parties, cheerfully unruly evenings to which
there were never fewer than thirty people invited, small children in tow. Fish and meat
served side by side, so many courses that people had to eat in shifts, the food still in the
pans they were cooked in crowding the table. They sat where they could, in the different
rooms of the house, half the people having finished before the other half began. Unlike
Gerald and Lydia, who preside at the center of their dinners, his parents behaved more
like caterers in their own home, solicitous and watchful, waiting until most of their
guests' plates were stacked by the sink in order finally to help themselves. At times, as
the laughter at Gerald and Lydia's table swells, and another bottle of wine is opened,
and Gogol raises his glass to be filled yet again, he is conscious of the fact that his
immersion in Maxine's family is a betrayal of his own. It isn't simply the fact that his
parents don't know about Maxine, that they have no idea how much time he spends
with her and Gerald and Lydia. Instead it is his knowledge that apart from their
affluence, Gerald and Lydia are secure in a way his parents will never be. He cannot
imagine his parents sitting at Lydia and Gerald's table, enjoying Lydia's cooking,
appreciating Gerald's selection of wine. He cannot imagine them contributing to one of
their dinner party conversations. And yet here he is, night after night, a welcome
addition to the Ratliffs' universe, doing just that.

In June, Gerald and Lydia disappear to their lake house in New Hampshire. It is an
unquestioned ritual, a yearly migration to the town where Gerald's parents live yearround. For a few days a series of canvas tote bags accumulate in the hallway,
cardboard boxes full of liquor, shopping bags full of food, cases of wine. Their departure
reminds Gogol of his family's preparations for Calcutta every few years, when the living
room would be crowded with suitcases that his parents packed and repacked, fitting in
as many gifts as possible for their relatives. In spite of his parents' excitement, there
was always a solemnity accompanying these preparations, Ashima and Ashoke at once
apprehensive and eager, steeling themselves to find fewer faces at the airport in
Calcutta, to confront the deaths of relatives since the last time they were there. No
matter how many times they'd been to Calcutta, his father was always anxious about
the job of transporting the four of them such a great distance. Gogol was aware of an
obligation being fulfilled; that it was, above all else, a sense of duty that drew his
parents back. But it is the call of pleasure that summons Gerald and Lydia to New
Hampshire. They leave without fanfare, in the middle of the day, when Gogol and
Maxine are both at work. In Gerald and Lydia's wake, certain things are missing: Silas,
some of the cookbooks, the food processor, novels and CDs, the fax machine so that
Gerald can keep in touch with his clients, the red Volvo station wagon they keep parked
on the street. A note is left on the island in the kitchen: "We're off!" Lydia has written,
followed by X's and O's.

Suddenly Gogol and Maxine have the house in Chelsea to themselves. They stray to
the lower stories, making love on countless pieces of furniture, on the floor, on the
island in the kitchen, once even on the pearl gray sheets of Gerald and Lydia's bed. On
weekends they wander naked from room to room, up and down the five flights of stairs.
They eat in different places according to their moods, spreading an old cotton quilt on
the floor, sometimes eating take-out on Gerald and Lydia's finest china, falling asleep at
odd hours as the strong summer light of the lengthened days pours through the
enormous windows onto their bodies. As the days grow warmer, they stop cooking
complicated things. They live off sushi and salads and cold poached salmon. They
switch from red wine to white. Now that it is just the two of them it seems to him, more
than ever, that they are living together. And yet for some reason it is dependence, not
adulthood, he feels. He feels free of expectation, of responsibility, in willing exile from
his own life. He is responsible for nothing in the house; in spite of their absence, Gerald
and Lydia continue to lord, however blindly, over their days. It is their books he reads,
their music he listens to. Their front door he unlocks when he gets back from work.
Their telephone messages he takes down.
He learns that the house, for all its beauty, has certain faults in the summer months, so
that it makes all the more sense that it is a place Gerald and Lydia annually avoid. It
lacks air-condi tioning, something Gerald and Lydia have never bothered to install
because they are never there when it's hot, and the enormous windows lack screens.
As a result, the rooms are sweltering during the day, and at night, because it is
necessary to leave the windows wide open, he is ambushed by mosquitoes that shriek
in his ears and leave angry, lumpen welts between his toes, on his arms and thighs. He
longs for a mosquito net to drape over Maxine's bed, remembers the filmy blue nylon
boxes that he and Sonia would sleep inside of on their visits to Calcutta, the corners
hooked onto the four posts of the bed, the edges tucked tightly beneath the mattress,
creating a temporary, tiny, impenetrable room for the night. There are times when he
cannot bear it, turning on the light and standing on the bed, looking for them, a rolled-up
magazine or a slipper in his hand, as Maxine, unbothered and unbitten, begs him to get
back to sleep. He sees them sometimes against the peach-colored paint on the wall,
faint specks engorged with his blood, just inches below the ceiling, always too high up
to kill.

With work as an excuse he does not go home to Massachusetts all summer. The firm is
entering a competition, submitting designs for a new five-star hotel to be built in Miami.
At eleven at night, he is still there, along with most of the other designers on his team,
all rushing to finish drawings and models by the month's end. When his phone rings, he
hopes it's Maxine, calling to coax him into leaving the office. Instead it's his mother.
"Why are you calling me here so late?" he asks her, distracted, his eyes still focused on
the computer screen.
"Because you are not at your apartment," his mother says. "You are never at your
apartment, Gogol. In the middle of the night I have called and you are not there."
"I am, Ma," he lies. "I need my sleep. I shut off the phone."
"I cannot imagine why anyone would want to have a phone only to shut it off," his
mother says.
"So, is there a reason you're calling me?"
She asks him to visit the following weekend, the Saturday before his birthday.
"I can't," he says. He tells her he has a deadline at work, but it's not true—that's the day
that he and Maxine are leaving for New Hampshire, for two weeks. But his mother
insists; his father is leaving for Ohio the following day—doesn't Gogol want to go with
them to the airport, to see him off?
He knows vaguely of his father's plans to spend nine months at a small university
somewhere outside Cleveland, that he and a colleague have received a grant funded by
the colleague's university, to direct research for a corporation there. His father had sent

him a clipping about the grant printed in the campus newspaper, with a photograph of
his father standing outside the engineering building: "Prestigious grant for Professor
Ganguli," the caption read. At first it was assumed that his parents would shut up the
house, or rent it out to students, and that his mother would go too. But then his mother
had surprised them, pointing out that there would be nothing for her to do in Ohio for
nine months, that his father would be busy all day at the lab, and that she preferred to
stay in Massachusetts, even if it meant staying in the house alone.
"Why do I have to see him off?" Gogol asks his mother now. He knows that for his
parents, the act of travel is never regarded casually, that even the most ordinary of
journeys is seen off and greeted at either end. And yet he continues, "Baba and I
already live in different states. I'm practically as far from Ohio as I am from Boston."
"That's no way to think," his mother says. "Please, Gogol. You haven't been home since
May."
"I have a job, Ma. I'm busy. Besides, Sonia's not coming."
"Sonia lives in California. You are so close."
"Listen, I can't come home that weekend," he says. The truth seeps out of him slowly.
He knows it's his only defense at this point. "I'm going on a vacation. I've already made
plans."
"Why do you wait to tell us these things at the last minute?" his mother asks. "What sort
of vacation? What plans?"
"I'm going to spend a couple of weeks in New Hampshire."
"Oh," his mother says. She sounds at once unimpressed and relieved. "Why do you
want to go there, of all places? What's the difference between New Hampshire and
here?"
"I'm going with a girl I'm seeing," he tells her. "Her parents have a place there."
Though she says nothing for a while, he knows what his mother is thinking, that he is
willing to go on vacation with someone else's parents but not see his own.
"Where is this place, exactly?"
"I don't know. Somewhere in the mountains."
"What's her name?"
"Max."
"That's a boy's name."
He shakes his head. "No, Ma. It's Maxine."

And so, on the way to New Hampshire, they stop off at Pemberton Road for lunch,
which is what, in the end, he has agreed to. Maxine doesn't mind, it's on their way, after
all, and she is curious by now to meet his parents. They drive up from New York in a
rented car, the trunk packed with more supplies that Gerald and Lydia have asked them
for on the back of a postcard: wine, bags of a particular imported pasta, a large tin of
olive oil, thick wedges of Parmesan and Asiago cheese. When he asks Maxine why
these things are necessary, she explains that they are going to the middle of nowhere,
that if they were to depend on the general store they would have nothing to live on but
potato chips and Wonder bread and Pepsi. On the way to Massachusetts, he tells her
things he figures she should know in advance—that they will not be able to touch or kiss
each other in front of his parents, that there will be no wine with lunch.
"There's plenty of wine in the trunk of the car," Maxine points out.
"It doesn't matter," he tells her. "My parents don't own a corkscrew."
The restrictions amuse her; she sees them as a single afternoon's challenge, an
anomaly never to be repeated. She does not associate him with his parents' habits; she
still cannot believe that she is to be the first girlfriend he's ever brought home. He feels
no excitement over this prospect, wants simply to be done with it. Once they get off at
his parents' exit he senses that the landscape is foreign to her: the shopping plazas, the
sprawling brick-faced public high school from which he and Sonia graduated, the

shingled houses, uncomfortably close to one another, on their grassy quarter-acre plots.
The sign that says CHILDREN AT PLAY. He knows that this sort of life, one which is such a
proud accomplishment for his own parents, is of no relevance, no interest, to her, that
she loves him in spite of it.
A van from a company that installs security systems blocks his parents' driveway, and
so he parks on the street, by the mailbox on the edge of the lawn. He leads Maxine up
the flagstone path, ringing the bell because his parents always keep the front door
locked. His mother opens the door. He can tell she is nervous, dressed in one of her
better saris, wearing lipstick and perfume, in contrast to the khakis and T-shirts and soft
leather moccasins Gogol and Maxine both wear.
"Hi, Ma," he says, leaning over, giving his mother a quick kiss. "This is Maxine. Max,
this is my mother. Ashima."
"It's so nice to finally meet you, Ashima," Maxine says, leaning over and giving his
mother a kiss as well. "These are for you," she says, handing Ashima a cellophanewrapped basket full of tinned pâtés and jars of cornichons and chutneys that Gogol
knows his parents will never open or enjoy. And yet when Maxine had shopped for the
things to put in the basket, at Dean and DeLuca, he'd said nothing to dissuade her. He
walks in with his shoes on instead of changing into a pair of flip-flops that his parents
keep in the hall closet. They follow his mother across the living room and around the
corner into the kitchen. His mother returns to the stove, where she is deep-frying a
batch of samosas, filling the air with a haze of smoke.
"Nikhil's father is upstairs," his mother says to Maxine, lifting out a samosa with a slotted
spatula and putting it on a paper-towel-lined plate. "With the man from the alarm
company. Sorry, lunch will be ready in a minute," she adds. "I was not expecting you to
arrive for another half an hour."
"Why on earth are we getting a security system?" Gogol wants to know.
"It was your father's idea," his mother says, "now that I will be on my own." She says
that there have been two burglaries recently in the neighborhood, both of them in the
middle of the afternoon. "Even in good areas like this, these days there are crimes," she
says to Maxine, shaking her head.
His mother offers them glasses of frothy pink lassi, thick and sweet-tasting, flavored
with rose water. They sit in the formal living room, where they normally never sit.
Maxine sees the school pictures of Sonia and him in front of blue-gray backgrounds
arranged on the mantel of the brick fireplace, the family portraits from Olan Mills. She
looks at his childhood photo albums with his mother. She admires the material of his
mother's sari, mentioning that her mother curates textiles at the Met.
"The Met?"
"The Metropolitan Museum of Art," Maxine explains.
"You've been there, Ma," Gogol says. "It's the big museum on Fifth Avenue. With all the
steps. I took you there to see the Egyptian temple, remember?"
"Yes, I remember. My father was an artist," she tells Maxine, pointing to one of his
grandfather's watercolors on the wall.
They hear footsteps coming down the stairs, and then his father enters the living room,
along with a uniformed man holding a clipboard. Unlike his mother, his father is not
dressed up at all. He wears a pair of thin brown cotton pants, an untucked, slightly
wrinkled short-sleeved shirt, and flip flops. His gray hair looks more sparse than the last
time Gogol remembers, his potbelly more pronounced. "Here's your copy of the receipt.
Any problems, you just call the eight hundred number," the uniformed man says. He
and his father shake hands. "Have a nice day," the man calls out before leaving.
"Hi, Baba," Gogol says. "I'd like you to meet Maxine."
"Hello," his father says, putting up a hand, looking as if he is about to take an oath. He
does not sit down with them. Instead he asks Maxine, "That is your car outside?"
"It's a rental," she says.
"Better to put it in the driveway," his father tells her.

"It doesn't matter," Gogol says. "It's fine where it is."
"But better to be careful," his father persists. "The neighborhood children, they are not
very careful. One time my car was on the road and a baseball went through the window.
I can park it for you if you like."
"I'll do it," Gogol says, getting up, irritated by his parents' perpetual fear of disaster.
When he returns to the house, the lunch is set out, too rich for the weather. Along with
the samosas, there are breaded chicken cutlets, chickpeas with tamarind sauce, lamb
biryani, chutney made with tomatoes from the garden. It is a meal he knows it has taken
his mother over a day to prepare, and yet the amount of effort embarrasses him. The
water glasses are already filled, plates and forks and paper napkins set on the dining
room table they use only for special occasions, with uncomfortable high-backed chairs
and seats upholstered in gold velvet.
"Go ahead and start," his mother says, still hovering between the dining room and the
kitchen, finishing up the last of the samosas.
His parents are diffident around Maxine, at first keeping their distance, not boisterous as
they typically are around their Bengali friends. They ask where she went to college,
what it is her parents do. But Maxine is immune to their awkwardness, drawing them
out, devoting her attention to them fully, and Gogol is reminded of the first time he'd met
her, when she'd seduced him in the same way. She asks his father about his research
project in Cleveland, his mother about her part-time job at the local public library, which
she's recently begun. Gogol is only partly attentive to the conversation. He is overly
aware that they are not used to passing things around the table, or to chewing food with
their mouths fully closed. They avert their eyes when Maxine accidentally leans over to
run her hand through his hair. To his relief she eats generously, asking his mother how
she made this and that, telling her it's the best Indian food she's ever tasted, accepting
his mother's offer to pack them some extra cutlets and samosas for the road.
When his mother confesses that she is nervous to be in the house alone, Maxine tells
her she'd be nervous, too. She mentions a break-in at her parents' once when she was
by herself. When she tells them that she lives with her parents, Ashima says, "Really? I
thought no one did that in America." When she tells them she was born and raised in
Manhattan, his father shakes his head. "New York is too much," he says, "too many
cars, too many tall buildings." He tells the story of the time they'd driven in for Gogol's
graduation from Columbia, the trunk of the car broken into in just five minutes, their
suitcase stolen, having to attend the commencement without a jacket and tie.
"It's a pity you can't stay for dinner," his mother says as the meal comes to an end.
But his father urges them to get going. "Better not to drive in the dark," he says.
Afterward there is tea, and bowls of payesh made in honor of his birthday. He receives
a Hallmark card signed by both of his parents, a check for one hundred dollars, a navy
blue cotton sweater from Filene's.
"He'll need that where we're going," Maxine says approvingly. "The temperature can
really drop at night."
In the driveway there are hugs and kisses good-bye, initi ated by Maxine, his parents
reciprocating clumsily. His mother invites Maxine to please come again. He is given a
piece of paper with his father's new phone number in Ohio, and the date on which it will
be activated.
"Have a good trip to Cleveland," he tells his father. "Good luck with the project."
"Okay," his father says. He pats Gogol on the shoulder. "I'll miss you," he says. In
Bengali he adds, "Remember to check in on your mother now and again."
"Don't worry, Baba. See you at Thanksgiving."
"Yes, see you," his father says. And then: "Drive safely, Gogol."
At first he's unaware of the slip. But as soon as they're in the car, buckling their seat
belts, Maxine says, "What did your dad just call you?"
He shakes his head. "It's nothing. I'll explain it later." He turns on the ignition and begins
to back out of the driveway, away from his parents, who stand there, waving, until the

last possible moment. "Call to let us know you've arrived there safely," his mother says
to Gogol in Bengali. But he waves and drives off, pretending not to hear.

It's a relief to be back in her world, heading north across the state border. For a while it's
nothing different, the same expanse of sky, the same strip of highway, large liquor
stores and fast-food chains on either side. Maxine knows the way, so there is no need
to consult a map. He has been to New Hampshire once or twice with his family, to see
the leaves, driving for the day to places one could pull off the road and take pictures of
and admire the view. But he's never been so far north. They pass farms, spotted cows
grazing in fields, red silos, white wooden churches, barns with rusted tin roofs. Small,
scattered towns. The names of the towns mean nothing to him. They leave the highway
behind and drive on steep, slender, two-lane ribbons of road, the mountains appearing
like enormous milky waves suspended against the sky. Wisps of cloud hang low over
the summits, like smoke rising from the trees. Other clouds cast broad shadows across
the valley. Eventually there are only a few cars on the road, no signs for tourist facilities
or campgrounds, just more farms and woods, the roadsides full of blue and purple
flowers. He has no idea where he is, or how far they've traveled. Maxine tells him they
aren't far from Canada, that if they're motivated they could drive into Montreal for the
day.
They turn down a long dirt road in the middle of a forest, dense with hemlock and birch.
There is nothing to mark where they turned, no mailbox or sign. At first there is no
house visible, nothing but large lime-colored ferns covering the ground. Small stones
spray wildly under the tires and the trees throw patterns of shade onto the hood of the
car. They come to a partial clearing, to a humble house covered with bleached brown
shingles and surrounded by a low wall of flat stones. Gerald and Lydia's Volvo is parked
on the grass because there is no driveway. Gogol and Maxine step out, and he is led by
the hand to the back of the house, his limbs stiff from the hours in the car. Though the
sun is beginning to set, its warmth is still palpable, the air lazy and mild. As they
approach he sees that after a certain expanse the yard falls away, and then he sees the
lake, a blue a thousand times deeper, more brilliant, than the sky and girded by pines.
The mountains rise up behind them. The lake is bigger than he'd expected, a distance
he cannot imagine swimming across.
"We're here," Maxine calls out, waving, her arms in a V. They walk toward her parents,
who are sitting on Adirondack chairs on the grass, their legs and feet bare, drinking
cocktails and admiring the view. Silas comes bounding toward them, barking across the
lawn. Gerald and Lydia are tanner, leaner, a bit scantily dressed, Lydia in a white tank
top and a denim wrap skirt, Gerald in wrinkled blue shorts, a green polo shirt faded with
use. Lydia's arms are nearly as dark as his own. Gerald has burned. Discarded books
lie at their feet, facedown on the grass. A turquoise dragonfly hovers above them, then
darts crookedly away. They turn their heads in greeting, shielding their eyes from the
sun's glare. "Welcome to paradise," Gerald says.

It is the opposite of how they live in New York. The house is dark, a bit musty, full of
primitive, mismatched furniture. There are exposed pipes in the bathrooms, wires
stapled over doorsills, nails protruding from beams. On the walls are clusters of local
butterflies, mounted and framed, a map of the region on thin white paper, photographs
of the family at the lake over the years. Checkered cotton curtains hang in the windows
on thin white rods. Instead of staying with Gerald and Lydia, he and Maxine sleep in an
unheated cabin down a path from the main house. No bigger than a cell, the space was
originally built for Maxine to play in when she was a girl. There is a small chest of
drawers, a crude night table between two twin beds, a lamp with a plaid paper shade,
two wooden chests in which extra quilts are stored. The beds are covered with ancient
electric blankets. In the corner is a device whose hum is supposed to keep the bats
away. Hairy, unfinished logs hold up the roof, and there is a gap between where the

floor ends and the wall begins, so that one can see a thin line of grass. There are insect
carcasses everywhere, squashed against the windowpanes and walls, languishing in
pools of water behind the taps of the sink. "It's sort of like being at camp," Maxine says
as they unpack their things, but Gogol has never been to camp, and though he is only
three hours away from his parents' house, this is an unknown world to him, a kind of
holiday he's never been on.
During the days he sits with Maxine's family on a thin strip of beach, looking out onto
the glittering jade lake, surrounded by other homes, overturned canoes. Long docks jut
into the water. Tadpoles dart close to shore. He does as they do, sitting on a folding
chair, a cotton cap on his head, applying sunblock at intervals to his arms, reading,
falling asleep after barely a page. He wades into the water and swims to the dock when
his shoulders grow too warm, the sand free of stones or growth, smooth and yielding
under his feet. Occasionally they are joined by Maxine's grandparents, Hank and Edith,
who live on the lake several houses away. Hank, a retired professor of classical
archaeology, always brings a small volume of Greek poetry to read, his long sunspotted fingers curling over the tops of the pages. At some point he gets up, laboriously
removing his shoes and socks, and walks calf-deep into the water, regarding the
surroundings with his hands on his hips, his chin thrust pridefully into the air. Edith is
small and thin, proportioned like a girl, her white hair cut in a bob and her face deeply
wrinkled. They have traveled a bit of the world together, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Iran. "We
never got as far as India," Edith tells him. "We would certainly have loved to have seen
that."
All day he and Maxine walk about the property barefoot in their bathing suits. Gogol
goes for runs around the lake with Gerald, arduous laps along steep hilly dirt roads, so
infrequently traveled that they can occupy the dead center. Halfway around is a small
private graveyard where members of the Ratliff family lie buried, where Gerald and
Gogol always stop to catch their breath. Where Maxine will be buried one day. Gerald
spends most of his time in his vegetable garden, his nails permanently blackened from
his careful cultivation of lettuce and herbs. One day, Gogol and Maxine swim over to
Hank and Edith's for lunch, for egg salad sandwiches and canned tomato soup. Some
nights, when it's too warm in the cabin, he and Maxine take a flashlight and walk to the
lake in their pajamas to go skinny-dipping. They swim in the dark water, under the
moonlight, weeds catching their limbs, out to the neighboring dock. The unfamiliar
sensation of the water surrounding his unclothed body arouses Gogol, and when they
come back to shore they make love on the grass that is wet from their bodies. He looks
up at her, and behind her, at the sky, which holds more stars than he ever has seen at
one time, crowded together, a mess of dust and gems.
In spite of the fact that there is nothing in particular to do, the days assume a pattern.
There is a certain stringency to life, a willful doing without. In the mornings they wake
early to the frenzied chirping of birds, when the eastern sky is streaked with the thinnest
of pink clouds. Breakfast is eaten by seven, on the screened-in porch overlooking the
lake where they have all their meals, homemade preserves slathered on thick slices of
bread. Their news of the world comes from the thin local paper Gerald brings back each
day from the general store. In the late afternoons, they shower and dress for dinner.
They sit with their drinks on the lawn, eating pieces of the cheese Gogol and Maxine
brought from New York, and watch the sun set behind the mountains, bats darting
between the pines that soar as tall as ten-story buildings, all the bathing suits hung to
dry on a line. Dinners are simple: boiled corn from a farm stand, cold chicken, pasta
with pesto, tomatoes from the garden sliced and salted on a plate. Lydia bakes pies and
cobblers with berries picked by hand. Occasionally she disappears for the day, to go
antiquing in the surrounding towns. There is no television to watch in the evenings, just
an old stereo on which they sometimes play a symphony or jazz. On the first rainy day
Gerald and Lydia teach him to play cribbage. They are often in bed by nine. The phone,
in the main house, seldom rings.
He grows to appreciate being utterly disconnected from the world. He grows used to the
quiet, the scent of sun-warmed wood. The only sounds are the occasional motorboat

cutting across the water, screen doors snapping shut. He presents Gerald and Lydia
with a sketch of the main house done one afternoon down at the beach, the first thing
he's drawn in years that hasn't been for work. They set it atop the crowded mantel of the
stone fireplace, next to piles of books and photographs, promise to have it framed. The
family seems to possess every piece of the landscape, not only the house itself but
every tree and blade of grass. Nothing is locked, not the main house, or the cabin that
he and Maxine sleep in. Anyone could walk in. He thinks of the alarm system now
installed in his parents' house, wonders why they cannot relax about their physical
surroundings in the same way. The Ratliffs own the moon that floats over the lake, and
the sun and the clouds. It is a place that has been good to them, as much a part of them
as a member of the family. The idea of returning year after year to a single place
appeals to Gogol deeply. Yet he cannot picture his family occupying a house like this,
playing board games on rainy afternoons, watching shooting stars at night, all their
relatives gathered neatly on a small strip of sand. It is an impulse his parents have
never felt, this need to be so far from things. They would have felt lonely in this setting,
remarking that they were the only Indians. They would not want to go hiking, as he and
Maxine and Gerald and Lydia do almost every day, up the rocky mountain trails, to
watch the sun set over the valley. They would not care to cook with the fresh basil that
grows rampant in Gerald's garden or to spend a whole day boiling blueberries for jam.
His mother would not put on a bathing suit or swim. He feels no nostalgia for the
vacations he's spent with his family, and he realizes now that they were never really
true vacations at all. Instead they were overwhelming, disorienting expeditions, either
going to Calcutta, or sightseeing in places they did not belong to and intended never to
see again. Some summers there had been road trips with one or two Bengali families, in
rented vans, going to Toronto or Atlanta or Chicago, places where they had other
Bengali friends. The fathers would be huddled at the front, taking turns at the wheel,
consulting maps highlighted by AAA. All the children would sit in the back with plastic
tubs of aloo dum and cold flattened luchis wrapped in foil, fried the day before, which
they would stop in state parks to eat on picnic tables. They had stayed in motels, slept
whole families to a single room, swum in pools that could be seen from the road.
***
One day they canoe across the lake. Maxine teaches him how to paddle properly,
angling the oar and drawing it back through the still, gray water. She speaks reverently
of her summers here. This is her favorite place in the world, she tells him, and he
understands that this landscape, the water of this particular lake in which she first
learned to swim, is an essential part of her, even more so than the house in Chelsea.
This was where she lost her virginity, she confesses, when she was fourteen years old,
in a boathouse, with a boy whose family once summered here. He thinks of himself at
fourteen, his life nothing like it is now, still called Gogol and nothing else. He remembers
Maxine's reaction to his telling her about his other name, as they'd driven up from his
parents' house. "That's the cutest thing I've ever heard," she'd said. And then she'd
never mentioned it again, this essential fact about his life slipping from her mind as so
many others did. He realizes that this is a place that will always be here for her. It
makes it easy to imagine her past, and her future, to picture her growing old. He sees
her with streaks of gray in her hair, her face still beautiful, her long body slightly widened
and slack, sitting on a beach chair with a floppy hat on her head. He sees her returning
here, grieving, to bury her parents, teaching her children to swim in the lake, leading
them with two hands into the water, showing them how to dive cleanly off the edge of
the dock.

It is here that his twenty-seventh birthday is celebrated, the first birthday in his life that
he hasn't spent with his own parents, either in Calcutta or on Pemberton Road. Lydia
and Maxine plan a special dinner, curling up with cookbooks for days beforehand on the
beach. They decide to make a paella, drive to Maine for the mussels and clams. An
angel food cake is baked from scratch. They bring the dining table out onto the lawn, a

few card tables added on to make room for everyone. In addition to Hank and Edith, a
number of friends from around the lake are invited. The women arrive in straw hats and
linen dresses. The front lawn fills up with cars, and small children scamper among them.
There is talk of the lake, the temperature dropping, the water turning cooler, summer
coming to an end. There are complaints about motorboats, gossip about the owner of
the general store, whose wife has run off with another man and is seeking a divorce.
"Here's the architect Max brought up with her," Gerald says at one point, leading him
over to a couple interested in building an addition to their cottage. Gogol speaks to the
couple about their plans, promises to come down and have a look at their place before
he leaves. At dinner he is asked by his neighbor, a middle-aged woman named Pamela,
at what age he moved to America from India.
"I'm from Boston," he says.
It turns out Pamela is from Boston as well, but when he tells her the name of the suburb
where his parents live Pamela shakes her head. "I've never heard of that." She goes on,
"I once had a girlfriend who went to India."
"Oh? Where did she go?"
"I don't know. All I remember is that she came back thin as a rail, and that I was horribly
envious of her." Pamela laughs. "But you must be lucky that way."
"What do you mean?"
"I mean, you must never get sick."
"Actually, that's not true," he says, slightly annoyed. He looks over at Maxine, trying to
catch her eye, but she's speaking intently with her neighbor. "We get sick all the time.
We have to get shots before we go. My parents devote the better part of a suitcase to
medicine."
"But you're Indian," Pamela says, frowning. "I'd think the climate wouldn't affect you,
given your heritage."
"Pamela, Nick's American," Lydia says, leaning across the table, rescuing Gogol from
the conversation. "He was born here." She turns to him, and he sees from Lydia's
expression that after all these months, she herself isn't sure. "Weren't you?"
Champagne is poured with the cake. "To Nikhil," Gerald announces, raising his glass.
Everybody sings "Happy Birthday," this group who has known him for only one evening.
Who will forget him the next day. It is in the midst of the laughter of these drunken
adults, and the cries of their children running barefoot, chasing fireflies on the lawn, that
he remembers that his father left for Cleveland a week ago, that by now he is there, in a
new apartment, alone. That his mother is alone on Pemberton Road. He knows he
should call to make sure his father has arrived safely, and to find out how his mother is
faring on her own. But such concerns make no sense here among Maxine and her
family. That night, lying in the cabin beside Maxine, he is woken by the sound of the
phone ringing persistently in the main house. He gets out of bed, convinced that it's his
parents calling to wish him a happy birthday, mortified that it will wake Gerald and Lydia
from sleep. He stumbles onto the lawn, but when his bare feet strike the cold grass
there is silence, and he realizes the ringing he'd heard had been a dream. He returns to
bed, squeezing in beside Maxine's warm, sleeping body, and drapes his arm around her
narrow waist, fits his knees behind hers. Through the window he sees that dawn is
creeping into the sky, only a handful of stars still visible, the shapes of the surrounding
pines and cabins growing distinct. A bird begins to call. And then he remembers that his
parents can't possibly reach him: he has not given them the number, and the Ratliffs are
unlisted. That here at Maxine's side, in this cloistered wilderness, he is free.

7
Ashima sits at the kitchen table on Pemberton Road, addressing Christmas cards. A
cup of Lipton tea grows slowly cold by her hand. Three different address books are
open before her, along with some calligraphy pens she's found in the desk drawer in
Gogol's room, and the stack of cards, and a bit of dampened sponge to seal the
envelopes with. The oldest of the address books, bought twenty-eight years ago at a
stationery store in Harvard Square, has a pebbly black cover and blue pages, bound
together by a rubber band. The other two are larger, prettier, the alphabetical tabs still
intact. One has a padded dark green cover and pages edged in gilt. Her favorite, a
birthday gift from Gogol, features paintings that hang in the Museum of Modern Art. On
the endpapers of all these books are phone numbers corresponding to no one, and the
800 numbers of all the airlines they've flown back and forth to Calcutta, and reservation
numbers, and her ballpoint doodles as she was kept on hold.
Having three separate address books makes her current task a bit complicated. But
Ashima does not believe in crossing out names, or consolidating them into a single
book. She prides herself on each entry in each volume, for together they form a record
of all the Bengalis she and Ashoke have known over the years, all the people she has
had the fortune to share rice with in a foreign land. She remembers the day she bought
the oldest book, soon after arriving in America, one of her first trips out of the apartment
without Ashoke at her side, the five-dollar bill in her purse feeling like a fortune. She
remembers selecting the smallest and cheapest style, saying "I would like to buy this
one, please" as she placed the item on the counter, her heart pounding for fear that she
would not be understood. The salesperson had not even glanced at her, had said
nothing other than the price. She had come back to the apartment and written into the
book's blank blue pages her parents' address in Calcutta, on Amherst Street, and then
her in-laws' in Alipore, and finally her own, the apartment in Central Square, so that she
would remember it. She had written in Ashoke's extension at MIT, conscious of writing
his name for the first time in her life, writing his last name as well. That had been her
world.
She has made her own Christmas cards this year, an idea she picked up from a book in
the crafts section of the library. Normally she buys boxes of cards, marked fifty percent
off at department stores in January, always forgetting, by the following winter, exactly
where in the house she's put them. She is careful to choose ones that say "Happy
Holidays" or "Season's Greetings" as opposed to "Merry Christmas," to avoid angels or
nativity scenes in favor of what she considers firmly secular images—a sleigh being
pulled through a snow-covered field, or skaters on a pond. This year's card is a drawing
she has done herself, of an elephant decked with red and green jewels, glued onto
silver paper. The elephant is a replica of a drawing her father had done for Gogol over
twenty-seven years ago, in the margins of an aerogramme. She has saved her dead
parents' letters on the top shelf of her closet, in a large white purse she used to carry in
the seventies until the strap broke. Once a year she dumps the letters onto her bed and
goes through them, devoting an entire day to her parents' words, allowing herself a
good cry. She revisits their affection and concern, conveyed weekly, faithfully, across
continents—all the bits of news that had had nothing to do with her life in Cambridge but
which had sustained her in those days nevertheless. Her ability to reproduce the
elephant has surprised her. She has not drawn a thing since she was a child, has
assumed she'd long forgotten what her father had once taught her, and what her son
has inherited, about holding the pen with confidence and making bold, swift strokes.
She spent a whole day redoing the drawing on different sheets of paper, coloring it in,
trimming it to size, taking it to the university copy center. For an entire evening she had
driven herself to different stationery stores in the town, looking for red envelopes that
the cards would fit into.
She has time to do things like this now that she is alone. Now that there is no one to

feed or entertain or talk to for weeks at a time. At forty-eight she has come to
experience the solitude that her husband and son and daughter already know, and
which they claim not to mind. "It's not such a big deal," her children tell her. "Everyone
should live on their own at some point." But Ashima feels too old to learn such a skill.
She hates returning in the evenings to a dark, empty house, going to sleep on one side
of the bed and waking up on another. At first she was wildly industrious, cleaning out
closets and scrubbing the insides of kitchen cupboards and scraping the shelves of the
refrigerator, rinsing out the vegetable bins. In spite of the security system she would sit
up startled in the middle of the night by a sound somewhere in the house, or the rapid
taps that traveled through the baseboards when heat flowed through the pipes. For
nights on end, she would double-check all the window locks, making sure that they were
fastened tightly. There was the night she'd been roused by a repetitive banging outside
the front door and called Ashoke in Ohio. With the cordless phone pressed to her ear,
she'd gone downstairs and looked through the peephole, and when she'd finally opened
the door she saw that it was only the screen door, which she'd forgotten to latch,
swinging wildly in the wind.
Now she does the laundry once a month. She no longer dusts, or notices dust, for that
matter. She eats on the sofa, in front of the television, simple meals of buttered toast
and dal, a single pot lasting her a week and an omelette to go with it if she has energy
to bother. Sometimes she eats the way Gogol and Sonia do when they visit, standing in
front of the refrigerator, not bothering to heat up the food in the oven or to put it on a
plate. Her hair is thinning, graying, still parted in the middle, worn in a bun instead of a
braid. She's been fitted for bifocals recently, and they hang against the folds of her sari
on a chain around her neck. Three afternoons a week and two Saturdays a month, she
works at the public library, just as Sonia had done when she was in high school. It is
Ashima's first job in America, the first since before she was married. She signs her
small paychecks over to Ashoke, and he deposits them for her at the bank into their
account. She works at the library to pass the time—she has been going regularly for
years, taking her children to story hour when they were young and checking out
magazines and books of knitting patterns for herself, and one day Mrs. Buxton, the
head librarian, asked if she would be interested in a part-time position. At first her
responsibilities were the same as those of the high school girls, shelving the books that
people returned, making sure that sections of shelves were in precise alphabetical
order, sometimes running a feather duster along the spines. She mended old books, put
protective covers on new arrivals, organized monthly displays on subjects such as
gardening, presidential biographies, poetry, African-American history. Lately she's
begun to work at the main desk, greeting the regular patrons by name as they walk
through the doors, filling out forms for interlibrary loans. She is friendly with the other
women who work at the library, most of them also with grown children. A number of
them live alone, as Ashima does now, because they are divorced. They are the first
American friends she has made in her life. Over tea in the staff room, they gossip about
the patrons, about the per ils of dating in middle age. On occasion she has her library
friends over to the house for lunch, goes shopping with them on weekends to outlet
stores in Maine.
Every three weekends her husband comes home. He arrives by taxi—though she is
willing to drive herself around their town, she is not willing to get on the highway and
drive to Logan. When her husband is in the house, she shops and cooks as she used
to. If there is a dinner invitation at friends', they go together, driving along the highway
without the children, sadly aware that Gogol and Sonia, now both grown, will never sit
with them in the back seat again. During his visits, Ashoke keeps his clothes in his
suitcase, his shaving things in a bag by the sink. He does the things she still doesn't
know how to do. He pays all the bills, and rakes the leaves on the lawn, and puts gas
from the self-service station into her car. His visits are too short to make a difference,
and, within hours it seems, Sunday comes, and she is on her own again. When they are
apart, they speak by phone every night, at eight o'clock. Sometimes, not knowing what
to do with herself after dinner, she is already in bed by then, in her nightgown, watching

the small black-and-white television they've owned for decades that lives on her side of
the bed, the picture gradually disappearing, a rim of black perpetually framing the
screen. If there is nothing decent on television she leafs through books she takes out of
the library, books that occupy the space Ashoke normally does on the bed.
Now it is three in the afternoon, the sun's strength already draining from the sky. It is the
sort of day that seems to end minutes after it begins, defeating Ashima's intentions to
spend it fruitfully, the inevitability of nightfall distracting her. The sort of day when
Ashima craves her dinner by five. It's one of the things she's always hated about life
here: these chilly, abbreviated days of early winter, darkness descending mere hours
after noon. She expects nothing of days such as this, simply waits for them to end. She
is resigned to warming dinner for herself in a little while, changing into her nightgown,
switching on the electric blanket on her bed. She takes a sip of her tea, now stone cold.
She gets up to refill the kettle, make another cup. The petunias in her window box,
planted Memorial Day weekend, the last time Gogol and Sonia were home together,
have withered to shuddering brown stalks that she's been meaning, for weeks, to root
from the soil. Ashoke will do it, she thinks to herself, and when the phone rings, and her
husband says hello, this is the first thing she tells him. She hears noises in the
background, people speaking. "Are you watching television?" she asks him.
"I'm in the hospital," he tells her.
"What's happened?" She turns off the whistling kettle, startled, her chest tightening,
terrified that he's been in some sort of accident.
"My stomach's been bothering me since morning." He tells Ashima it's probably
something he's eaten, that he'd been invited the previous evening to the home of some
Bengali students he'd met in Cleveland who are still teaching themselves to cook,
where he was subjected to a suspicious-looking chicken biryani.
She exhales audibly, relieved that it's nothing serious. "So take an Alka-Seltzer."
"I did. It didn't help. I just came to the emergency room because all the doctors' offices
are closed today."
"You're working too hard. You're no longer a student, you know. I hope you're not
getting an ulcer," she says.
"No. I hope not."
"Who drove you there?"
"No one. I'm here on my own. Really, it's not that bad."
Nevertheless she feels a wave of sympathy for him, at the thought of him driving to the
hospital alone. She misses him suddenly, remembering afternoons years ago when
they'd first moved to this town, when he would surprise her and come home from the
university in the middle of the day. They would indulge in a proper Bengali lunch instead
of the sandwiches they'd gotten used to by then, boiling rice and warming the previous
night's leftovers, filling their stomachs, sitting and talking at the table, sleepy and sated,
as their palms turned yellow and dry.
"What does the doctor say?" she asks Ashoke now.
"I'm waiting to see him. It's a rather long wait. Do me one thing."
"What?"
"Call Dr. Sandler tomorrow. I'm due for a physical anyway. Make an appointment for me
next Saturday, if he has an opening."
"All right."
"Don't worry. I'm feeling better already. I'll call you when I get home."
"All right." She hangs up the phone, prepares her tea, returns to the table. She writes
"Call Dr. Sandler" on one of the red envelopes, propping it up against the salt and
pepper shakers. She takes a sip of tea and winces, detecting a faint film of dishwashing
liquid on this section of the rim, chiding herself for being careless about rinsing. She
wonders if she ought to call Gogol and Sonia, to tell them that their father is in the
hospital. But quickly she reminds herself that he is not technically in the hospital, that if
this were any other day but Sunday he'd be at a doctor's office having an ordinary

checkup. He had spoken to her normally, sounding a bit tired, perhaps, but not in great
pain.
And so she returns to her project. At the bottom of the cards, over and over, she signs
their names: her husband's name, which she has never once uttered in his presence,
followed by her own, and then the names of her children, Gogol and Sonia. She refuses
to write Nikhil, even though she knows that's what he would prefer. No parent ever
called a child by his good name. Good names had no place within a family. She writes
the names one below the other, in order of age, Ashoke Ashima Gogol Sonia. She
decides to send a card to each of them, shifting the respective name to the top of the
card: to her husband's apartment in Cleveland, to Gogol in New York, adding Maxine's
name, too. Though she'd been polite enough the one time Gogol had brought Maxine to
the house, Ashima doesn't want her for a daughter-in-law. She'd been startled that
Maxine had addressed her as Ashima, and her husband as Ashoke. And yet Gogol has
been dating her for over a year now. By now Ashima knows that Gogol spends his
nights with Maxine, sleeping under the same roof as her parents, a thing Ashima
refuses to admit to her Bengali friends. She even has his number there; she'd called it
once, listening to the voice of the woman who must be Maxine's mother, not leaving any
message. She knows the relationship is something she must be willing to accept. Sonia
has told her this, and so have her American friends at the library. She addresses a card
to Sonia and the two girlfriends she lives with in San Francisco. Ashima looks forward to
Christmas, the four of them being together. It still bothers her that neither Gogol nor
Sonia had come home for Thanksgiving this year. Sonia, who is working for an
environmental agency and studying for her LSAT, had said it was too far to travel.
Gogol, who had to work the following day because of a project at his firm, had spent the
holiday with Maxine's family in New York. Having been deprived of the company of her
own parents upon moving to America, her children's independence, their need to keep
their distance from her, is something she will never understand. Still, she had not
argued with them. This, too, she is beginning to learn. She had complained to her
friends at the library, and they had told her it was inevitable, that eventually parents had
to stop assuming that their children would return faithfully for the holidays. And so she
and Ashoke had spent Thanksgiving together, not bothering, for the first time in years,
to buy a turkey. "Love, Ma," she writes now at the bottom of the cards to her children.
And at the bottom of the one for Ashoke, simply, "Ashima."
She passes over two pages filled only with the addresses of her daughter, and then her
son. She has given birth to vagabonds. She is the keeper of all these names and
numbers now, numbers she once knew by heart, numbers and addresses her children
no longer remember. She thinks of all the dark, hot apartments Gogol has inhabited
over the years, beginning with his first dorm room in New Haven, and now the
apartment in Manhattan with the peeling radiator and cracks in the walls. Sonia has
done the same as her brother, a new room every year ever since she was eighteen,
new roommates Ashima must keep track of when she calls. She thinks of her husband's
apartment in Cleveland, which she had helped him settle into one weekend when she
visited. She'd bought him inexpensive pots and plates, the kind she used back in
Cambridge, as opposed to the gleaming ones from Williams-Sonoma her children buy
for her these days as gifts. Sheets and towels, some sheer curtains for the windows, a
big sack of rice. In her own life Ashima has lived in only five houses: her parents' flat in
Calcutta, her in-laws' house for one month, the house they rented in Cambridge, living
below the Montgomerys, the faculty apartment on campus, and, lastly, the one they own
now. One hand, five homes. A lifetime in a fist.
From time to time, she looks out the window, at the lilac sky of early evening, vividly
tinged with two parallel stripes of pink. She looks up at the phone on the wall, wishing it
would ring. She will buy her husband a cell phone for Christmas, she decides. She
continues to work in the silent house, in the waning light, not bothering to rest, though
her wrist has begun to ache, not bothering to get up and turn on the lamp over the table,
or the lights on the lawn or in any of the other rooms, until the telephone rings. She
answers after half a ring, but it's only a telemarketer, some poor soul on weekend duty,

asking reluctantly if a Mrs., um—
"Ganguli," Ashima replies tartly before hanging up.
At twilight the sky turns a pale but intense blue, and the trees on the lawn and the
shapes of the neighboring houses become silhouettes, solidly black. At five o'clock her
husband still hasn't called. She calls his apartment and gets no answer. She calls ten
minutes later, then ten minutes after that. It is her own voice on the answering machine,
reciting the number and asking the caller to leave a message. Each time she calls she
listens to the tone, but she doesn't leave a message. She considers the places he may
have stopped on his way home—the pharmacy to pick up a prescription, the
supermarket for food. By six o'clock she can no longer distract herself by sealing and
stamping the envelopes she's spent all day addressing. She calls directory assistance,
asking for an operator in Cleveland, then calls the number of the hospital he told her
he'd gone to. She asks for the emergency room, is connected to one part of the hospital
after another. "He's just there for an examination," she tells the people who answer and
tell her to hold. She spells the last name as she has hundreds of thousands of times by
now, "G like green," "N like napkin." She holds the line until she is tempted to hang up,
wondering all the while if her husband is trying to reach her from home, regretting not
having call waiting. She is disconnected, calls again. "Ganguli," she says. Again she is
told to hold. Then a person comes on the line, a young woman's voice, no older than
Sonia probably. "Yes. I do apologize for the wait. To whom am I speaking?"
"Ashima Ganguli," Ashima says. "Ashoke Ganguli's wife. To whom am I speaking,
please?"
"I see. I'm sorry, ma'am. I'm the intern who first examined your husband."
"I've been holding on for nearly half an hour. Is my husband still there or has he gone?"
"I'm very sorry, ma'am," the young woman repeats. "We've been trying to reach you."
And then the young woman tells her that the patient, Ashoke Ganguli, her husband, has
expired.
Expired. A word used for library cards, for magazine sub scriptions. A word which, for
several seconds, has no effect whatsoever on Ashima.
"No, no, it must be a mistake," Ashima says calmly, shaking her head, a small laugh
escaping from her throat. "My husband is not there for an emergency. Only for a
stomachache."
"I'm sorry, Mrs.... Ganguli, is it?"
She listens to something about a heart attack, that it had been massive, that all
attempts to revive him had failed. Did she wish to have any of her husband's organs
donated? she is asked. And then, is there anyone in the Cleveland area to identify and
claim the body? Instead of answering, Ashima hangs up the phone as the woman is still
speaking, pressing down the receiver as hard as she can into the cradle, keeping her
hand there for a full minute, as if to smother the words she's just heard. She stares at
her empty teacup, and then at the kettle on the stove, which she'd had to turn off in
order to hear her husband's voice just a few hours ago. She begins to shiver violently,
the house instantly feeling twenty degrees colder. She pulls her sari tightly around her
shoulders, like a shawl. She gets up and walks systematically through the rooms of the
house, turning on all the light switches, turning on the lamppost on the lawn and the
floodlight over the garage, as if she and Ashoke are expecting company. She returns to
the kitchen and stares at the pile of cards on the table, in the red envelopes it had
pleased her so much to buy, most of them ready to be dropped in the mailbox. Her
husband's name is on all of them. She opens her address book, suddenly unable to
remember her son's phone number, a thing she can normally dial in her sleep. There is
no answer at his office or at his apartment and so she tries the number she has written
down for Maxine. It's listed, along with the other numbers, under G, both for Ganguli
and for Gogol.

Sonia flies back from San Francisco to be with Ashima. Gogol flies from LaGuardia to

Cleveland alone. He leaves early the next morning, boarding the first flight he can get.
On the plane he stares through the window at the land below, at the snow-covered
patches of the Midwest and at curving rivers that seem covered with tinfoil glinting under
the sun. The plane's shape darkens a shifting length of ground. The flight is more than
half empty, men and a few women in business suits, people used to such flights and to
traveling at such hours, typing on laptops or reading the news of the day. He is
unaccustomed to the banality of domestic flights, the narrow cabin, the single bag he's
packed, small enough to stow overhead. Maxine has offered to go with him, but he has
told her no. He doesn't want to be with someone who barely knew his father, who's met
him only once. She walked him to Ninth Avenue, stood with him at dawn, her hair
uncombed, her face still thick with sleep, her coat and a pair of boots slipped on over
her pajamas. He withdrew cash from an ATM, hailed a cab. Most of the city, including
Gerald and Lydia, were still asleep in their beds.
He and Maxine had been at a book party for one of Maxine's writer friends the night
before. Afterward they'd gone out to dinner with a small group. At about ten o'clock they
returned to her parents' house as usual, tired as if it were much later, pausing on their
way upstairs to say good night to Gerald and Lydia, who were sitting under a blanket on
the sofa, watching a French film on video, sipping glasses of after-dinner wine. The
lights had been turned off, but from the glow of the television screen Gogol could see
that Lydia was resting her head on Gerald's shoulder, that they both had their feet
propped against the edge of the coffee table. "Oh, Nick. Your mother called," Gerald
had said, glancing up from the screen. "Twice," Lydia added. He felt a sting of
embarrassment. No, she hadn't left any message, they said. His mother called him
more often these days, now that she was living on her own. Every day, it seemed, she
needed to hear the voices of her children. But she had never called him at Maxine's
parents'. She called him at work, or left messages at his apartment that he would
receive days later. He decided that whatever it was could wait until morning. "Thanks,
Gerald," he'd said, his arm around Maxine's waist, turning to leave the room. But then
the phone had rung again. "Hello," Gerald had said, and then to Gogol, "It's your sister
this time."
He takes a cab from the airport to the hospital, shocked by how much colder it is in Ohio
than in New York, by the thick layer of snow that cakes the ground. The hospital is a
compound of beige stone buildings situated on the crest of a softly sloping hill. He
enters the same emergency room his father had entered the day before. After giving his
name, he is told to take the elevator to the sixth floor, and then to wait in an empty
room, the walls painted a rich dark blue. He watches the clock on the wall, donated,
along with the rest of the furnishings in the room, by the loving family of someone
named Eugene Arthur. There are no magazines in the waiting room, no television, only
a collection of matching wing chairs lined up against the walls and a water fountain at
one end. Through the glass door he sees a white hallway, a few empty hospital beds.
There is little commotion, no doctors or nurses scurrying down the halls. He keeps his
eyes on the elevator, half expecting his father to walk out and fetch him, to indicate, with
a slight tilt of the head, that it is time to go. When the elevator doors eventually open, he
sees a cart stacked with breakfast trays, most of their contents hidden under domes,
and tiny cartons of milk. He feels hungry all of a sudden, wishes he'd thought to save
the bagel the stewardess had handed him on the plane. His last meal had been at the
restaurant the night before, a bright, bustling place in Chinatown. They had waited
nearly an hour on the sidewalk for their table and then feasted on flowering chives and
salted squid and the clams in black bean sauce that Maxine loved best. They were
already drunk from the book party, lazily sipping their beers, their cold cups of jasmine
tea. All that time, his father was in the hospital, already dead.
The door opens and a short, pleasant-looking, middle-aged man with a salt-and-pepper
beard steps into the room. He wears a white knee-length coat over his clothing and
carries a clipboard. "Hello," he says, smiling kindly at Gogol.
"Are you—were you my father's doctor?"
"No. I'm Mr. Davenport. I'll be taking you downstairs."

Mr. Davenport escorts Gogol in an elevator reserved for patients and doctors, to the
subbasement of the hospital. He stands with Gogol in the morgue as a sheet is pulled
back to show his father's face. The face is yellow and waxy, a thickened, oddly bloated
image. The lips, nearly colorless, are set in an expression of uncharacteristic
haughtiness. Below the sheet, Gogol realizes, his father is unclothed. The fact shames
him, causes him to turn briefly away. When he looks again he studies the face more
closely, still thinking that perhaps it's a mistake, that a tap on his father's shoulder will
wake him. The only thing that feels familiar is the mustache, the excess hair on his
cheeks and chin shaved less than twenty-four hours ago.
"His glasses are missing," Gogol says, looking up at Mr. Davenport.
Mr. Davenport does not reply. After a few minutes he says, "Mr. Ganguli, are you able
to positively identify the body? Is this your father?"
"Yes, that's him," Gogol hears himself saying. After a few moments he realizes that a
chair has been brought for him to sit in, that Mr. Davenport has stepped aside. Gogol
sits down. He wonders if he should touch his father's face, lay a hand on his forehead
as his father used to do to Gogol when he was unwell, to see if he had a fever. And yet
he feels terrified to do so, unable to move. Eventually, with his index finger, he grazes
his father's mustache, an eyebrow, a bit of the hair on his head, those parts of him, he
knows, that are still quietly living.
Mr. Davenport asks Gogol if he's ready, and then the sheet is replaced, and he is led
from the room. A resident arrives, explaining exactly how and when the heart attack
happened, why there was nothing the doctors could do. Gogol is given the clothes his
father had been wearing, navy slacks, a white shirt with brown stripes, a gray L. L. Bean
sweater vest that Gogol and Sonia had gotten him for Christmas one year. Dark brown
socks, light brown shoes. His glasses. A trench coat and a scarf. The items brim to the
top of a large paper shopping bag. There is a book in the pocket of the trench coat, a
copy of The Comedians by Graham Greene, with yellow pages and tiny print. Opening
the cover, he sees that the book had been bought used, a stranger's name, Roy
Goodwin, is written inside. In a separate envelope he is given his father's wallet, his car
keys. He tells the hospital that no religious services are necessary, is told that the ashes
would be ready in a few days. He could pick them up personally, at the funeral home
the hospital suggests, or have them sent, along with the death certificate, directly to
Pemberton Road. Before leaving he asks to see the exact place in the emergency room
his father was last alive. The bed number is looked up on a chart; a young man with his
arm in a sling lies in it now, otherwise in good spirits, talking on the telephone. Gogol
glimpses the curtains that had partly girded his father when life left him, green and gray
flowers with a section of white mesh at the top; metal hooks hang from the ceiling,
traveling on a white U-shaped rail.

His father's leased car, described to him by his mother on the telephone last night, is
still parked in the visitors' parking lot. AM news fills his ears as soon as he turns on the
ignition, startling him; his father had always been particular about turning off the radio at
the end of a drive. In fact, there is no sign of his father in the car. No maps or scraps of
paper, no empty cups or loose change or receipts. All he finds in the glove compartment
is the registration and the owner's manual. He spends a few minutes reading through
the manual, comparing the features of the dashboard to the illustration in the book. He
turns the wipers on and off and tests the headlights even though it's still daylight. He
shuts off the radio, drives in silence through the cold, bleak afternoon, through the flat,
charmless town he will never visit again. He follows directions a nurse at the hospital
gave him to the apartment where his father had lived, wondering if this route is the
same one his father had taken when he drove himself to the hospital. Each time he
passes a restaurant he considers turning off the road, but then he finds himself in a
residential section, blocks of Victorian mansions on snow-covered lawns, sidewalks
covered with lacy patches of ice.

His father's apartment is part of a complex called Baron's Court. Beyond the gate,
oversized silver mailboxes, spacious enough to hold a month's worth of mail, stand in a
row. A man outside the first of the buildings, marked RENTAL OFFICE, nods to him as he
drives past, seeming to recognize the car. Has he mistaken him for his father? Gogol
wonders, the thought comforting. The only thing to distinguish each building is a number
and a name; to either side of it are more units, absolutely identical, each three stories
tall, arranged around a vast looping road. Tudor facades, tiny metal balconies, wood
chips under the stairs. The relentless uniformity of it upsets him profoundly, more so
than even the hospital, and the sight of his father's face. Thinking of his father living
here alone these past three months, he feels the first threat of tears, but he knows that
his father did not mind, that he was not offended by such things. He parks in front of his
father's building, remaining long enough in the car to see an elderly, sprightly couple
emerge with tennis rackets. He remembers his father telling him that the residents are
mostly retired, or divorced. There are paths for walking, a small exercise complex, a
man-made pond surrounded by benches and willow trees.
His father's apartment is on the second floor. He unlocks the door, takes off his shoes,
puts them on the plastic runner that his father must have placed there to protect the
plush off-white wall-to-wall carpeting. He sees a pair of his father's sneakers, and a pair
of lip-lops for wearing around the house. The door opens onto a spacious living room,
with a sliding glass door to the right, a kitchen to the left. Nothing hangs on the freshly
painted ivory walls. The kitchen is separated on one side by a half wall, one of the
things his mother always wanted in their own house, so that it would be possible to cook
and still see and speak to people in another room. Against the refrigerator is a picture of
himself and his mother and Sonia, behind a magnet from a local bank. They are
standing at Fatehpur Sikri with cloths tied over their feet to protect them from the hot
stone surface. He was a freshman in high school, thin and glum, Sonia just a girl, his
mother in a salwar kameeze, something she was too shy to wear in front of their
relatives in Calcutta, who always expected her to be in a sari. He opens the cupboards,
first the ones above the countertop, then the ones below. Most of them are empty. He
finds four plates, two mugs, four glasses. In a drawer he finds one knife and two forks, a
pattern recognizable from home. In another cupboard are a box of tea bags, Peek
Freans shortbread biscuits, a five-pound bag of sugar that has not been poured into a
bowl, a tin of evaporated milk. There are several small bags of yellow split peas and a
large plastic bag of rice. A rice cooker sits mindfully unplugged on the counter. The
ledge of the stove is lined with a few spice jars, labeled in his mother's hand. Below the
sink he finds a bottle of Windex, a box of trash bags, a single sponge.
He walks through the rest of the apartment. Behind the living room is a small bedroom
with nothing in it but a bed, and across from it a windowless bathroom. A jar of Pond's
cold cream, his father's lifelong answer to after-shave, sits at the side of the sink. He
goes to work immediately, going through the room and putting things into garbage bags:
the spices, the cold cream, the issue of Time magazine by his father's bed. "Don't bring
anything back," his mother had told him on the phone. "It's not our way." He lingers over
nothing at first, but in the kitchen he pauses. He feels guilty throwing out the food; were
it his father in his place, he would have packed the spare rice and tea bags into his
suitcase. His father had abhorred waste of any kind, to the point where he complained
to Ashima if a kettle had been filled with too much water.
On his first trip to the basement, Gogol sees a table on which other tenants have left
things up for grabs: books, videotapes, a white casserole with a clear glass lid. Soon the
table is filled with his father's hand-held vacuum, the rice cooker, the tape player, the
television, the curtains still attached to their collapsible plastic rods. From the bag he'd
brought back from the hospital, he saves his father's wallet, containing forty dollars,
three credit cards, a wad of receipts, photographs of Gogol and Sonia when they were
babies. He saves the photograph on the fridge.
Everything takes much longer than he expects. The task of emptying three rooms,
practically empty to begin with, leaves him exhausted. He is surprised to see how many
garbage bags he's managed to fill up, how many trips up and down the stairs he's had

to make. By the time he is finished, it is already beginning to get dark. He has a list with
him of the people he has to call before the business day is over: Call rental office. Call
university. Cancel utilities. "We're so very sorry," he is told by a series of people he's
never met. "We just saw him Friday," one of his father's colleagues says. "What a shock
it must be." The rental office tells him not to worry, that they will send someone by to
remove the couch and the bed. When he finishes, he drives through town to the dealer
who leased his father the car, and then he takes a cab back to Baron's Court. In the
lobby he notices a menu for pizza delivery. He orders a pizza, calls home as he waits
for it to arrive. For an hour the line is busy; by the time he gets through, his mother and
Sonia are both asleep, a friend of the family informs him. The house is filled with noise,
and it is only then that he realizes how quiet it is on his end. He considers going back
down to the basement to get the tape player or the television. Instead he calls Maxine,
describing the details of his day, amazed to think she'd been with him at the beginning
of it, that it was in her arms, in her bed, that he'd woken.
"I should have come with you," she says. "I could still make it out there by morning."
"I'm finished. There's nothing else to do. I'm taking the first flight back tomorrow."
"You're not going to spend the night there, are you, Nick?" she asks him.
"I have to. There aren't any other flights tonight."
"In that apartment, I mean."
He feels defensive; after all his efforts, he feels protective of the three empty rooms. "I
don't know anyone here."
"For God's sake, get out of there. Check yourself into a hotel."
"Okay." he says. He thinks of the last time he'd seen his father, three months ago: the
image of him waving good-bye as he and Maxine pulled out of the driveway on their
way to New Hampshire. He cannot remember the last time he and his father had
spoken. Two weeks ago? Four? His father was not one to make frequent phone calls
the way his mother does.
"You were with me," he tells her.
"What?"
"The last time I saw my father. You were there."
"I know. I'm so sorry, Nick. Just promise me you'll go to a hotel."
"Yeah. I promise." He hangs up and opens the phone book, looking at his choices of
places to stay. He is accustomed to obeying her, to taking her advice. He dials one of
the numbers. "Good evening, may I help you?" a voice inquires. He asks if there are
any rooms available for the night, but while he is on hold he hangs up. He doesn't want
to inhabit an anonymous room. As long as he is here, he doesn't want to leave his
father's apartment empty. He lies on the couch in the dark, in his clothes, his body
covered by his jacket, preferring that to the stripped mattress in the bedroom. For hours
he lies in the dark, falling in and out of sleep. He thinks of his father, in the apartment
just yesterday morning. What had he been doing when he'd begun to feel badly? Was
he at the stove making tea? Sitting on the sofa, where Gogol sits now? Gogol imagines
his father by the door, bending over to tie his shoelaces for the last time. Putting on his
coat and scarf and driving to the hospital. Stopping at a traffic light, listening to the
weather report on the radio, the thought of death absent from his mind. Eventually
Gogol is aware of bluish light creeping into the room. He feels strangely vigilant, as if,
were he to pay close enough attention, some sign of his father might manifest itself,
putting a stop to the events of the day. He watches the sky whiten, listens as the perfect
silence is replaced by the faintest hum of distant traffic, until suddenly he succumbs, for
a few hours, to the deepest sleep possible, his mind blank and undisturbed, his limbs
motionless, weighted down.
It is nearly ten in the morning when he wakes up again, unobstructed sunlight
brightening the room. A dull, steady ache persists on the right side of his head,
emanating from deep inside his skull. He opens the sliding glass door to the balcony
and stands outside. His eyes burn from fatigue. He gazes at the man-made pond,
which, his father had told Gogol during a phone conversation, he walked around twenty

times each evening before eating his dinner, that it equaled a distance of two miles. A
few people are out there now, walking their dogs, couples exercising side by side,
swinging their arms, thick fleece bands covering their ears. Gogol puts on his coat, goes
outside and attempts to walk around the pond once. At first he welcomes the cold air on
his face, but the chill turns brutal, unforgiving, slicing through his body and pressing the
backs of his pants against his legs, and so he returns to the apartment. He takes a
shower, changing into the same clothes he'd worn the day before. He calls himself a
cab and goes to the basement one last time to throw away the towel he'd used to dry
off, the gray push-button phone. He is taken to the airport, boards a flight to Boston.
Sonia and his mother will be there, along with a few friends of the family, waiting for him
at the arrival gate. He wishes it could be otherwise. Wishes he could simply get into
another cab, and ride along another highway, deferring the moment he must face them.
He is terrified to see his mother, more than he had been to see his father's body in the
morgue. He knows now the guilt that his parents carried inside, at being able to do
nothing when their parents had died in India, of arriving weeks, sometimes months later,
when there was nothing left to do.
On the way to Cleveland, the journey had felt endless, but this time, staring out the
plane window, seeing nothing, all too quickly he feels the plane's descent in his chest.
Just before landing he goes into the bathroom, retches into the tiny metal basin. He
rinses his face and looks at himself in the mirror. Apart from a day's growth on his face,
he looks exactly the same. He remembers when his paternal grandfather died,
sometime in the seventies, remembers his mother screaming when she walked in on his
father, who was shaving off all his hair with a disposable razor. In the process his scalp
had bled in numerous places, and for weeks he had worn a cap to work to hide the
scabs. "Stop it, you're hurting yourself," his mother had said. His father had shut the
door, and locked it, and emerged shrunken and bald. Years later Gogol had learned the
significance, that it was a Bengali son's duty to shave his head in the wake of a parent's
death. But at the time Gogol was too young to understand; when the bathroom door
opened he had laughed at the sight of his hairless, grief-stricken father, and Sonia, just
a baby, had cried.

For the first week they are never alone. No longer a family of four, they become a
household of ten, sometimes twenty, friends coming by to sit with them quietly in the
living room, their heads bent, drinking cups of tea, a cluster of people attempting to
make up for his father's loss. His mother has sham pooed the vermilion from her part.
She has taken off her iron wedding bracelet, forcing it from her hand with cold cream,
along with all the other bracelets she's always worn. Cards and flowers come
continually to the house, from his father's colleagues at the university, from the women
who work with his mother at the library, from neighbors who normally do little but wave
from their lawns. People call from the West Coast, from Texas, from Michigan and D.C.
All the people in his mother's address books, always added to, never crossed out, all of
them are stricken by the news. Who had forsaken everything to come to this country, to
make a better life, only to die here? The phone rings constantly, and their ears ache
from speaking to all these people, their throats turning weak from explaining again and
again. No he wasn't ill, they say; yes, it was completely unexpected. A short obituary
runs in the town paper, citing the names of Ashima and Gogol and Sonia, mentioning
that the children had been educated at the local schools. In the middle of the night, they
call their relatives in India. For the first time in their lives, it's they who have bad news to
bear.
For ten days following his father's death, he and his mother and Sonia eat a mourner's
diet, forgoing meat and fish. They eat only rice and dal and vegetables, plainly
prepared. Gogol remembers having to do the same thing when he was younger, when
his grandparents died, his mother yelling at him when he forgot one day and had a
hamburger at school. He remembers, back then, being bored by it, annoyed at having to
observe a ritual no one else he knew followed, in honor of people he had seen only a

few times in his life. He remembers his father sitting unshaven on a chair, staring
through them, speaking to no one. He remembers those meals eaten in complete
silence, the television turned off. Now, sitting together at the kitchen table at six-thirty
every evening, the hour feeling more like midnight through the window, his father's chair
empty, this meatless meal is the only thing that seems to make sense. There is no
question of skipping this meal; on the contrary, for ten evenings the three of them are
strangely hungry, eager to taste the blandness on their plates. It is the one thing that
structures their days: the sound of the food being warmed in the microwave, three
plates lowered from the cupboard, three glasses filled. The rest of it—the calls, the
flowers that are everywhere, the visitors, the hours they spend sitting together in the
living room unable to say a word, mean nothing. Without articulating it to one another,
they draw comfort from the fact that it is the only time in the day that they are alone,
isolated, as a family; even if there are visitors lingering in the house, only the three of
them partake of this meal. And only for its duration is their grief slightly abated, the
enforced absence of certain foods on their plates conjuring his father's presence
somehow.
On the eleventh day they invite their friends to mark the end of the mourning period.
There is a religious ceremony conducted on the floor in one corner of the living room;
Gogol is asked to sit in front of a picture of his father, as a priest chants verses in
Sanskrit. Before the ceremony they had spent a whole day looking for a picture to
frame, going through albums. But there are almost no pictures of his father alone, his
father who was forever behind the lens. They decide to crop one, of him and Ashima
standing together years ago in front of the sea. He is dressed like a New Englander, in a
parka and a scarf. Sonia takes it to CVS to have it enlarged. They prepare an elaborate
meal, fish and meat bought one bitterly cold morning at Chinatown and Haymarket,
cooked as his father liked them best, with extra potatoes and fresh coriander leaves.
When they shut their eyes, it's as if it is just another party, the house smelling of food.
All those years of entertaining have prepared them somehow. Ashima frets that there
will not be enough rice; Gogol and Sonia take people's coats and put them upstairs, on
the guest room bed. The friends his parents have collected for almost thirty years are in
attendance, to pay their respects, cars from six different states lining the whole of
Pemberton Road.
Maxine drives up from New York, bringing Gogol the clothes he normally keeps at her
house, his laptop, his mail. His bosses have given him a month off from work. It's a bit
of a shock to see Maxine, to introduce her to Sonia. This time he doesn't care how the
house, how the pile of guests' shoes heaped by the doorway, might appear to her eyes.
He can tell that she feels useless, a bit excluded in this house full of Bengalis. And yet
he doesn't bother to translate what people are saying, to introduce her to everyone, to
stay close by her side. "I'm so sorry," he hears her say to his mother, aware that his
father's death does not affect Maxine in the least. "You guys can't stay with your mother
forever," Maxine says when they are alone for a moment after the ceremony, upstairs in
his room, sitting side by side on the edge of the bed. "You know that." She says it
gently, puts her hand to his cheek. He stares at her, takes her hand and puts it back in
her lap.
"I miss you, Nikhil."
He nods.
"What about New Year's Eve?" she says.
"What about it?"
"Do you still want to try to go up to New Hampshire?" For they had talked of this, going
away together, just the two of them, Maxine picking him up after Christmas, staying at
the lake house. Maxine was going to teach him how to ski.
"I don't think so."
"It might do you good," she says, tilting her head to one side. She glances around the
room. "To get away from all this."
"I don't want to get away."

In the weeks that follow, as their neighbors' hedges and windows are decorated with
strings of colored lights, as piles of Christmas cards arrive at the house, each of them
assumes a task his father normally had done. In the mornings his mother goes to the
mailbox and brings in the paper. Sonia drives into town and does the weekly grocery
shopping. Gogol pays the bills, shovels the driveway when it snows. Instead of
arranging the Christmas cards on the fireplace mantel, Ashima glances at the return
addresses and then, without opening the envelopes, she throws them away.
Each small event seems like an enormous accomplishment. His mother spends hours
on the phone and has all the names changed on the bank account, the mortgage, the
bills. She is unable to stem the tide of junk mail that will continue to arrive for years,
addressed to her dead husband. In the wan, dreary afternoons Gogol goes running.
Sometimes he drives to the university, parking behind his father's department, running
along the campus roads, through the confined, picturesque universe that had been his
father's world for most of the past twenty-five years. Eventually, on weekends, they
begin to visit the homes of their parents' friends who live in surrounding suburbs. Gogol
drives one way, Sonia the other. Ashima sits in the back seat. At the homes of their
friends, his mother tells the story of calling the hospital. "He went in for a stomachache,"
she says each time, reciting the details of the afternoon, the pink streaks that had been
in the sky, the pile of cards, the cup of tea at her side, reciting it in a way that Gogol
cannot bear to have repeated, a way he quickly comes to dread. Friends suggest she
go to India, see her brother and her cousins for a while. But for the first time in her life,
Ashima has no desire to escape to Calcutta, not now. She refuses to be so far from the
place where her husband made his life, the country in which he died. "Now I know why
he went to Cleveland," she tells people, refusing, even in death, to utter her husband's
name. "He was teaching me how to live alone."

Early in January, after holidays they don't celebrate, in the first days of a year that his
father does not live to see, Gogol boards a train and goes back to New York. Sonia is
staying on with Ashima, thinking of getting an apartment in Boston or Cambridge so that
she will be nearby. They come to the station to see him off, standing on the platform in
the cold, his diminished family, straining but failing to see Gogol, who waves at them
through the tinted glass. He remembers them all coming to see him off each time, in his
first year of college, he would head back to Yale. And though, over the years, his
departures had become mundane, his father would always stand on the platform until
the moment the train was out of sight. Now Gogol raps his knuckles on the window, but
the train begins to move as his mother and Sonia are still struggling to spot him.
The train rattles forward, jostles from side to side, its engine making a sound like the
propeller of a plane. The whistle blares intermittently in a minor key. He sits on the left
side of the train, the winter sunlight strong on his face. Instructions for removing the
window in the event of an emergency, in three steps, are pasted to the glass. Snow
covers the straw-colored ground. Trees stand like spears, dried copper leaves from the
previous season still clinging to a few of the branches. He sees the backs of houses
made of brick and wood. Small snowy lawns. A solid shelf of winter clouds stops just
short of the horizon. More snow, possibly heavy, is expected by evening. He hears a
young woman somewhere in the compartment, talking to her boyfriend on a cell phone,
softly laughing. She talks about where they should meet for dinner once she gets into
the city. "I'm so bored," she complains. Gogol will arrive in New York in time for dinner
as well. Maxine will be there to greet him at Penn Station, something she has never
bothered to do in the past, waiting for him under the arrivals-and-departures board.
The landscape jerks forward, falls away, the train casting a passing shadow on an
expanse of nondescript buildings. The tracks resemble endless ladders that stretch
ahead rather than upward, rooted to the ground. Between Westerly and Mystic, the
tracks are at an angle, embedded into the sloping land, so that the whole train

threatens, ever so slightly, to topple over. Though the other passengers seldom
comment on this, the way they do, for example, when the engine changes at New
Haven from diesel to electric with a sudden jolt, this momentary shift never fails to rouse
Gogol from his nap, or the book he is reading, or the conversation he is engaged in, or
the thought that has gathered in his head. The train tilts to the left heading south to New
York, to the right on the way to Boston. In that brief period of suggested peril, he thinks,
always, of that other train he has never seen, the one that had nearly killed his father.
Of the disaster that has given him his name.
The train rights itself, the angle falls behind. Again he feels its motion at the small of his
back. For several miles the tracks hug the ocean, which is close enough to touch. The
shallowest waves lap against mere inches of shore. He sees a stone bridge, scattered
islands the size of rooms, gracious gray and white homes with pleasant views. Boxy
houses built on stilts. Lone herons and cormorants perch on bleached wooden posts.
Boats with naked masts crowd the marina. It is a view his father would have
appreciated, and Gogol is reminded of the many times he had driven with his family, on
cold Sunday afternoons, to the sea. There were times when it had been so cold that
they had simply sat in the car, in the parking lot, looking at the water, his parents
sharing tea from a thermos in the front seat, the engine running to keep them warm.
Once they had gone to Cape Cod, driving along that curving piece of land until they
could drive no farther. He and his father had walked to the very tip, across the
breakwater, a string of giant gray slanted stones, and then on the narrow, final inward
crescent of sand. His mother had stopped after a few stones and waited with Sonia, too
young to go with them, at her side. "Don't go too far," his mother had warned, "don't go
so that I can't see you." His legs began to ache halfway there, but his father marched
ahead, stopping at times to lend Gogol an arm, his body slightly tilted when he rested
on a rock. While on these rocks, some far apart enough to make them pause and
consider the best way to reach the next one, water had surrounded them on both sides.
It was early winter. Ducks swam in the tide pools. The waves flowed in two directions.
"He's too little," his mother had called out. "Are you listening? He's too little to go so far."
Gogol had stopped then, thinking that perhaps his father would agree. "What do you
say?" his father had said instead. "Are you too little? No, I didn't think so."
At the end of the breakwater, there was a field of yellow reeds to the right, and dunes
beyond, and the ocean behind it all. He had expected his father to turn back, but still
they had continued, stepping onto the sand. They walked along the water to the left,
heading toward the lighthouse, past rusted boat frames, fish spines as thick as pipes
attached to yellow skulls, a dead gull whose feathery white breast was freshly stained
with blood. They began to pick up small, faded black stones with white stripes running
around them, stuffing them into their pockets so that they drooped on either side. He
remembers his father's footprints in the sand; because of his limp, the right toe of his
shoe was always turned outward, the left straight ahead. Their shadows that day were
unnaturally slender and long, leaning in toward each other, the late afternoon sun at
their backs. They paused to regard a cracked wooden buoy painted blue and white,
shaped like an old parasol. The surface was wrapped with thin brown strands of
seaweed and encrusted with barnacles. His father lifted and inspected it, pointing to a
live mussel underneath. Finally they stood by the lighthouse, exhausted, surrounded by
water on three sides, pale green in the harbor, azure behind. Overheated from the
exertion, they unzipped their coats. His father stepped away to urinate. He heard his
father cry out—they had left the camera with his mother. "All this way, and no picture,"
he'd said, shaking his head. He reached into his pocket and began to throw the striped
stones into the water. "We will have to remember it, then." They looked around, at the
gray and white town that glowed across the harbor. Then they started back again, for a
while trying not to make an extra set of footsteps, inserting their shoes into the ones
they had just made. A wind had picked up, so strong that it forced them to stop now and
then.
"Will you remember this day, Gogol?" his father had asked, turning back to look at him,
his hands pressed like earmuffs to either side of his head.

"How long do I have to remember it?"
Over the rise and fall of the wind, he could hear his father's laughter. He was standing
there, waiting for Gogol to catch up, putting out a hand as Gogol drew near.
"Try to remember it always," he said once Gogol had reached him, leading him slowly
back across the breakwater, to where his mother and Sonia stood waiting. "Remember
that you and I made this journey, that we went together to a place where there was
nowhere left to go."

8
A year has passed since his father's death. He still lives in New York, rents the
apartment on Amsterdam Avenue. He works for the same firm. The only significant
difference in his life, apart from the permanent absence of his father, is the additional
absence of Maxine. At first she'd been patient with him, and for a while he'd allowed
himself to fall back into her life, going home after work to her parents' house, to their
world in which nothing had changed. Initially she'd tolerated his silences at the dinner
table, his indifference in bed, his need to speak to his mother and Sonia every evening,
and to visit them, on weekends, without her. But she had not understood being
excluded from the family's plans to travel to Calcutta that summer to see their relatives
and scatter Ashoke's ashes in the Ganges. Quickly they began to argue about this, and
about other things, Maxine going so far one day as to admit that she felt jealous of his
mother and sister, an accusation that struck Gogol as so absurd that he had no energy
to argue anymore. And so, a few months after his father's death, he stepped out of
Maxine's life for good. Recently, bumping into Gerald and Lydia in a gallery, he learned
of their daughter's engagement to another man.
On weekends he takes the train to Massachusetts, to the house in which his father's
photograph, the one used during the funeral, hangs in a frame on a wall in the upstairs
hallway. On the anniversary of his father's death, and on his father's birthday, a day
they never celebrated when his father was alive, they stand together in front of the
photograph and drape a garland of rose petals around the frame and anoint his father's
forehead with sandalwood paste through the glass. It is the photograph more than
anything that draws Gogol back to the house again and again, and one day, stepping
out of the bathroom on his way to bed and glancing at his father's smiling face, he
realizes that this is the closest thing his father has to a grave.
His visits home are different now; often it's Sonia who does the cooking. Sonia is still
living there with his mother, settled back into the room she had occupied as a girl. Four
days a week she leaves the house at five-thirty in the morning, takes a bus to a train
that takes her to downtown Boston. She works as a paralegal, is applying to law schools
nearby. It is she who drives his mother to weekend parties, and to Haymarket on
Saturday mornings. Their mother has become thinner, her hair gray. The white column
of her part, the sight of her bare wrists, pains Gogol when he first catches sight of her.
From Sonia he learns of how their mother spends her evenings, alone in her bed,
unable to sleep, watching television without sound. One weekend he suggests going to
one of the beaches where his father had liked to walk. At first his mother agrees,
cheered by the prospect, but as soon as they step out into the windy parking lot she
gets back into the car, saying she will wait.
He is preparing to take his registration exam, the two-day ordeal that will enable him to
become a licensed architect, to stamp drawings and design things under his own name.
He studies in his apartment, and occasionally up at one of the libraries at Columbia,
learning about the matter-of-fact aspects of his profession: electricity, materials, lateral
forces. He enrolls in a review class to help him prepare for the exam. The class meets
twice a week in the evenings, after work. He enjoys the passivity of sitting in a
classroom again, listening to an in structor, being told what to do. He is reminded of
being a student, of a time when his father was still alive. It's a small class, and afterward
several of them soon begin going out for drinks. Though he is invited to join them, he
always says no. Then one day, as they are all filing out of the classroom, one of the
women approaches him, and says, "So what's your excuse?" and because he has
none, that night he tags along. The woman's name is Bridget, and at the bar she sits
beside him. She is starkly attractive, with brown hair cut extremely short, the sort of
style that would have looked disastrous on most women. She speaks slowly,
deliberately, her speech unhurried. She was raised in the south, in New Orleans. She
tells him that she works for a small firm, a husband-and-wife team who operate out of a

brownstone in Brooklyn Heights. For a while they talk about the projects they are
working on, the architects they both admire: Gropius, van der Rohe, Saarinen. She is
his age, married. She sees her husband on weekends; he is a professor at a college in
Boston. He thinks of his parents then, living apart for the final months of his father's life.
"That must be difficult," he tells her. "It can be," she says. "But it was either that or
adjuncting in New York." She tells him about the house her husband rents in Brookline,
a sprawling Victorian that costs less than half of their one-bedroom apartment in Murray
Hill. She says that her husband had insisted on putting her name on the mailbox, her
voice on the answering machine. He had even insisted on hanging a few items of her
clothing in the closet, putting a tube of her lipstick in the medicine cabinet. She tells
Gogol that her husband delights in illusions like these, is consoled by them, whereas
she finds them simply to be reminders of what is missing.
That night they share a cab back to his apartment. Bridget excuses herself to use the
bathroom and when she emerges her wedding ring is absent from her finger. When they
are together, he is ravenous; it has been a long time since he's made love. And yet he
never thinks about seeing her at any other time. The day he sets out with his AIA Guide
to New York City to explore Roosevelt Island, it doesn't occur to him to ask her to come
along. Only twice a week, the nights the review class meets, does he look forward to
her company. They do not have each other's phone numbers. He does not know exactly
where she lives. She always goes with him to his apartment. She never spends the
night. He likes the limitations. He has never been in a situation with a woman in which
so little of him is involved, so little expected. He does not know, nor does he want to
know, her husband's name. Then one weekend, when he is on the train to
Massachusetts to see his mother and Sonia, a southbound train slices by, and he
wonders if perhaps the husband is on the other train, on his way to see Bridget.
Suddenly he imagines the house where Bridget's husband lives alone, longing for her,
with his unfaithful wife's name on the mailbox, her lipstick beside his shaving things.
Only then does he feel guilty.

From time to time his mother asks him if he has a new girlfriend. In the past she
broached the topic defensively, but now she is hopeful, quietly concerned. She even
asks once whether it is possible to patch things up with Maxine. When he points out to
her that she had disliked Maxine, his mother says that that isn't the point, the point is for
him to move on with his life. He works to remain calm during these conversations, not to
accuse her of meddling, as he once would have done. When he tells her that he isn't
even thirty, she tells him that by that age she had already celebrated her tenth wedding
anniversary. He is aware, without having to be told, that his father's death has
accelerated certain expectations, that by now his mother wants him settled. The fact
that he is single doesn't worry him, and yet he is conscious of the degree to which it
troubles his mother. She makes a point of mentioning the engagements and weddings
of the Bengali children he's grown up with in Massachusetts, and his cousins in India.
She mentions grandchildren being born.
One day when he is speaking to her on the phone, she asks him if he might be willing to
call someone. He had known her as a girl, his mother explains. Her name is Moushumi
Ma-zoomdar. He remembers her vaguely. She was the daughter of friends of his
parents who had lived for a while in Massachusetts, then moved to New Jersey when
he was in high school. She had a British accent. Always with a book in her hand at
parties. This is all he remembers about her—details neither appealing nor unappealing.
His mother tells him that she is a year younger than he is, that she has a much younger
brother, that her father is a renowned chemist with a patent to his name. That he called
her mother Rina Mashi, her father Shubir Mesho. Her parents had driven up for his
father's funeral, his mother says, from New Jersey, but Gogol has no memory of them
there. Moushumi lives in New York City these days, is a graduate student at NYU. She
was supposed to have been married a year ago, a wedding that he and his mother and
Sonia had been invited to, but her fiancé, an American, had backed out of the

engagement, well after the hotel had been booked, the invitations sent, the gift registry
selected. Her parents are a bit worried about her. She could use a friend, his mother
says. Why doesn't he give her a call?
When his mother asks if he has a pen to take down the number he lies, telling her yes,
not listening as she recites it to him. He has no intention of calling Moushumi; his exam
is coming up, besides which, as much as he wants to make his mother happy, he
refuses to let her set him up with someone. He refuses to go that far. The next time he
is home for the weekend, his mother brings it up again. This time, because he is in the
same room with her, he writes down the number, still with no intention of calling. But his
mother persists, reminding him, the next time they speak, that her parents had come to
his father's funeral, that it was the least he could do. A cup of tea, a conversation—did
he have no time for that?
***
They meet at a bar in the East Village, a place Moushumi had suggested when they'd
spoken on the phone. It's a small, dark, silent space, a single square room with just
three booths against one wall. She's there, sitting at the bar reading a paperback book,
when he arrives, and when she looks up from its pages, though it is she who is waiting
for him, he has the feeling that he is interrupting her. She has a slender face, pleasingly
feline features, spare, straight brows. Her eyes are heavy-lidded and boldly lined on the
top lids, in the manner of 1960s movie stars. Her hair is middle-parted, gathered into a
chignon, and she wears stylishly narrow tortoiseshell glasses. A gray wool skirt and a
thin blue sweater cling suggestively to her sides. Opaque black tights cover her calves.
A collection of white shopping bags lie at the base of her stool. On the phone, he hadn't
bothered to ask what she looked like, assuming he'd recognize her, but now he is no
longer sure.
"Moushumi?" he says, approaching her.
"Hey there," she says, closing the cover of the book and kissing him casually on both
sides of his face. The book has a plain ivory cover, a title written in French. Her British
accent, one of the few things he clearly remembers about her, is gone; she sounds as
American as he does, with the low, gravelly voice that had surprised him on the phone.
She has ordered herself a martini with olives. Beside it is a blue packet of Dunhills.
"Nikhil," she says as he sits down on the stool beside her, and orders a single malt.
"Yes."
"As opposed to Gogol."
"Yes." It had annoyed him, when he'd called her, that she hadn't recognized him as
Nikhil. This is the first time he's been out with a woman who'd once known him by that
other name. On the phone, she'd sounded guarded, faintly suspicious, as he had. The
conversation had been brief and thoroughly awkward. "I hope you don't mind my
calling," he'd begun, after explaining to her that he'd changed his name. "Let me check
my book," she'd told him when he'd asked if she was free Sunday evening for a drink,
and then he'd listened to her footsteps clicking across a bare wooden floor.
She studies him for a moment, playfully twisting her lips. "As I recall, given that you're a
year older than me, I was taught by my parents to call you Gogol Dada."
He is aware of the bartender glancing at them briefly, assessing their potential. He can
smell Moushumi's perfume, something slightly overpowering that makes him think of
wet moss and prunes. The silence and the intimacy of the room disconcerts him. "Let's
not dwell on that."
She laughs. "I'll drink to that," she says, lifting her glass.
"I never did, of course," she adds.
"Did what?"
"Call you Gogol Dada. I don't remember our ever talking, really."
He sips his drink. "Neither do I."
"So, I've never done this before," she says after a pause. She speaks matter-of-factly,
but nevertheless she averts her gaze.

He knows what she is referring to. In spite of this he asks, "Done what?"
"Gone out on a blind date that's been engineered by my mom."
"Well, it's not a blind date, exactly," he says.
"No?"
"We already know each other, in a way."
She shrugs and gives a quick smile, as if she has yet to be convinced. Her teeth are
crowded together, not entirely straight. "I guess. I guess we do."
Together they watch as the bartender puts a CD into the player mounted to the wall.
Some jazz. He is thankful for the distraction.
"I was sorry to hear about your father," she says.
Though she sounds genuinely sympathetic, he wonders whether she even remembers
his father. He is tempted to ask her, but instead he nods. "Thanks," he says, all he can
ever think to say.
"How is your mother getting along?"
"All right, I guess."
"Is she okay on her own?"
"Sonia's living with her now."
"Oh. That's good. That must be a relief to you." She reaches for the Dunhills, opening
the box and peeling back the gold foil. After offering one to him, she reaches for the
book of matches that lies in an ashtray on the bar and lights a cigarette for herself. "Do
you guys still live in that same house I used to visit?" she asks.
"Yeah."
"I remember it."
"Do you?"
"I remember that the driveway was to the right of the house as you faced it. There was
a flagstone path cut into the lawn."
The fact that she can recall these details so precisely is at once startling and endearing
to him. "Wow. I'm impressed."
"I also remember watching lots of television in a room covered with really thick brownish
gold carpeting."
He groans. "It still is."
She apologizes for not being at the funeral, she'd been in Paris at the time. It was
where she'd lived after graduating from Brown, she explains. Now she is a candidate for
a Ph.D. in French literature at NYU. She's been living in the city for almost two years.
She's spent the past summer temping, working for two months in the business office of
an expensive midtown hotel. Her job was to review and file all the exit surveys left by
the guests, make copies, distribute them to the appropriate people. This simple task had
taken up her day. She'd been amazed by the energy people put into the surveys. They
complained about the pillows being too hard or too soft, or that there wasn't enough
space around the sinks for their toilet ries, or that the bedskirt had a loose thread. Most
of the people didn't even pay for the rooms themselves. They were at conventions,
everything expensed. One person had complained that an architectural print above the
desk had a visible speck of dust under the glass.
The anecdote amuses him. "That might have been me," he speculates.
She laughs.
"Why did you leave Paris for New York?" he asks. "I'd think you'd rather study French
literature in France."
"I moved here for love," she says. Her frankness surprises him. "Surely you know about
my prenuptial disaster."
"Not really," he lies.
"Well, you ought to." She shakes her head. "Every other Bengali living on the East
Coast does." She speaks of it lightly, but he detects a bitterness in her voice. "In fact,
I'm pretty sure you and your family were invited to the wedding."

"When was the last time we saw each other?" he says, in an effort to change the
subject.
"Correct me if I'm wrong, but I think it was your high school graduation party."
His mind goes back to a brightly lit space in the basement of a church his parents and
their friends sometimes rented for especially large parties. It was where Sunday school
classes were normally held. In the hallways were felt hangings, mottoes about Jesus.
He remembers the big, long folding tables that he'd helped his father to set up,
chalkboards on the walls, Sonia standing up on a chair, writing "Congratulations."
"You were there?"
She nods. "It was right before we moved to New Jersey. You sat with your American
friends from high school. A few of your teachers were there. You seemed a little
embarrassed by it all."
He shakes his head. "I don't remember you there. Did I speak to you?"
"You ignored me thoroughly. But it doesn't matter." She smiles. "I'm sure I brought a
book with me."
They have a second round of drinks. The bar is beginning to fill up, small groups
occupying each of the booths, people sitting on either side of them. A large party enters,
and now there are patrons standing behind them to order drinks. When he'd arrived,
he'd been bothered by the lack of people, of sounds, feeling on display, but now the
crowd bothers him even more.
"It's getting pretty crazy in here," he says.
"It's not usually like this on a Sunday. Should we leave?"
He considers. "Maybe."
They ask for the bill, step out together into the cool October evening. Glancing at his
watch, he sees that not even an hour has passed.
"Where are you headed?" she asks in a way that makes him realize that she assumes
the date is over.
He hadn't planned to take her to dinner. He had intended to go back to his apartment
after the drink, and study, and order in some Chinese food. But now he finds himself
saying that he is thinking of getting something to eat, did she want to join him?
"I'd like that," she says.
Neither can think of a place to go and so they decide to walk a bit. He offers to carry her
shopping bags, and though they weigh nothing at all she allows him to, telling him she'd
been to a sample sale in SoHo just before they'd met. They stop in front of a small place
that looks as if it has just opened. They study the handwritten menu taped to the
window, the review that was printed a few days ago in the Times. He is distracted by
her reflection in the glass, a more severe version of herself, for some reason more
stunning.
"Shall we try it?" he asks, stepping away and reaching for the door. Inside, the walls are
painted red. They are surrounded by old posters advertising wine, and street signs and
photographs of Paris arranged above the picture rails.
"This place must seem silly to you," he acknowledges, watching her gaze up at the
walls.
She shakes her head. "It's pretty authentic, actually."
She asks for a glass of champagne and looks carefully at the wine list. He asks for
another single malt, but is told that there is only beer and wine.
"Shall we have a bottle?" she says, handing him the list.
"You choose."
She orders a salad and the bouillabaisse and a bottle of Sancerre. He orders the
cassoulet. She doesn't speak French to the waiter, who is French himself, but the way
she pronounces the items on the menu makes it clear that she is fluent. It impresses
him. Apart from Bengali, he has never bothered to master another language. The meal
passes quickly. He speaks of his work, the projects he is involved in, his upcoming
exam. They comment on each other's dishes, trading tastes on their bread plates. They

order espresso and share a crème brûlée, their two teaspoons cracking the hard amber
surface from either side.
She offers to pay her share when the bill comes, as she'd done in the bar, but this time
he insists on treating. He walks her to her apartment, which is on a run-down but pretty
residential block, close to the bar where they'd met. Her building has a crumbling stoop,
a terra cotta-colored facade with a gaudy green cornice. She thanks him for the dinner,
says she's had a great time. Again she kisses him on both cheeks, then begins to
search for the keys in her purse.
"Don't forget these." He gives her the shopping bags, watches as she loops them over
her wrist. Now that he is no longer carrying them he feels awkward, unsure of what to
do with his hands. He is parched from the alcohol he has consumed. "So, should we
make our parents happy and see each other again?"
She looks at him, studying his face intently. "Maybe." Her eyes stray to a passing car on
the street, the headlights briefly shining on their bodies, but then her gaze returns to his
face. She smiles at him, nodding. "Give me a call."
He watches as she ascends quickly up the stoop with her shopping bags, her heels
suspended over the treads in a way that looks precarious. She turns briefly to wave at
him and then she goes through a second glass door, not waiting to see him waving
back. For a minute longer he stands there, watching as the door opens again and a
tenant emerges to deposit something into one of the trash cans below the stoop. Gogol
looks up at the building, wondering which of the apartments is hers, waiting to see if a
light will turn on in one of the windows.
He had not expected to enjoy himself, to be attracted to her in the least. It strikes him
that there is no term for what they once were to each other. Their parents were friends,
not they. She is a family acquaintance but she is not family. Their contact until tonight
has been artificial, imposed, something like his relationship to his cousins in India but
lacking even the justification of blood ties. Until they'd met tonight, he had never seen
her outside the context of her family, or she his. He decides that it is her very familiarity
that makes him curious about her, and as he begins to walk west, to the subway, he
wonders when he might see her again. When he reaches Broadway he changes his
mind and hails a cab. The decision feels indulgent, as it is not particularly late, or cold,
or raining, and he is in no great rush to be home. But he has the urge to be alone all of
a sudden, to be thoroughly passive, to revisit the evening in solitude. The driver of the
cab is a Bangladeshi; the name on the registration card pasted to the plexiglass behind
the front seat says Mustafa Sayeed. He is talking in Bengali on his cell phone,
complaining of traffic on the FDR, of difficult passengers, as they sail uptown, past the
shuttered shops and restaurants on Eighth Avenue. If his parents were in the cab they
would have struck up a conversation with the driver, asking what part of Bangladesh he
was from, how long he'd been in this country, whether his wife and children lived here or
there. Gogol sits silently, as if he were any other passenger, lost in his own thoughts,
thinking of Moushumi. But as they near his apartment, he leans toward the plexiglass
and says to the driver, in Bengali, "It's that one, up on the right."
The driver turns around, surprised, smiling. "I didn't realize," he says.
"That's okay," Gogol says, reaching for his wallet. He tips the driver excessively and
steps out of the car.

In the days that follow, he begins to remember things about Moushumi, images that
come to him without warning while he is sitting at his desk at work, or during a meeting,
or drifting off to sleep, or standing in the mornings under the shower. They are scenes
he has carried within him, buried but intact, scenes he has never thought about or had
reason to conjure up until now. He is grateful that his mind has retained these images of
her, pleased with himself, as if he has just discovered an innate talent for a sport or a
game he's never played. He remembers her mainly at the pujos he had attended every
year, twice a year, with his family, where she would be dressed in a sari carefully pinned

to the top of her shoulder. Sonia would have to do the same, but she would always take
off her sari after an hour or two and put on her jeans, stuffing the sari into a plastic bag
and telling Gogol or their father to put it away for her in the car. He does not remember
Moushumi ever accompanying the other teenagers to the McDonald's that was across
the street from the building in Watertown where the pujos often were, or eventually
sitting in someone's car in the parking lot, listening to the radio and drinking beer from a
can. He struggles but fails to recall her presence at Pemberton Road; still, he is secretly
pleased that she has seen those rooms, tasted his mother's cooking, washed her hands
in the bathroom, however long ago.
He remembers once going to a Christmas party at her parents' home. He and Sonia
had not wanted to go; Christmas was supposed to be spent with just family. But their
parents had replied that in America, Bengali friends were the closest thing they had to
family, and so they had gone to Bedford, where the Mazoomdars lived. Her mother,
Rina Mashi, had served cold pound cake and warmed-up frozen doughnuts that
deflated at the touch. Her brother, Samrat, now a senior in high school, had been a boy
of four, obsessed with Spider-Man. Rina Mashi had gone to a great deal of trouble to
organize an anonymous gift exchange. Each family was asked to bring as many gifts as
there were members, so that there would be something for everyone to open. Gogol
had been asked to write numbers on squares of paper, one set to tape onto the gifts
and another to pass around, folded up in a drawstring pouch, to the guests. Everyone
gathered in a single room, cramming through the two doorways. He remembers sitting
in their living room, listening with all the other guests to Moushumi play something on
the piano. On the wall above her was a framed reproduction of Renoir's girl with a green
watering can. After great deliberation, just as people were beginning to fidget, she had
played a short piece by Mozart, adapted for children, but the guests wanted her to play
"Jingle Bells." She shook her head no, but her mother said, "Oh, Moushumi's just being
shy, she knows very well how to play 'Jingle Bells.'" For an instant she had glared at her
mother, but then she'd played the song, again and again, as the numbers were called
out and people claimed their gifts, sitting with her back to the room.

A week later they meet for lunch. It is the middle of the week and she has offered to
meet him someplace near his office, so he's told her to come to the building where he
works. When the receptionist tells him she is waiting in the lobby he feels the
anticipation rise in his chest; all morning he'd been unable to concentrate on the
elevation he was working on. He spends a few minutes showing her around, pointing
out photographs of projects he's worked on, introducing her to one of the principal
designers, showing her the room where the partners meet. His coworkers in the drafting
room look up from their desks as she passes by. It is early November, a day on which
the temperature has suddenly dropped, bringing the first true cold of the year. Outside,
unprepared pedestrians scurry past unhappily, arms folded across their chests. Fallen
leaves, battered and bleached, scuttle in swirls on the pavement. Gogol has no hat or
gloves, and as they walk he puts his hands into the pockets of his jacket. Moushumi, in
contrast, seems enviably protected, at ease in the cold. She wears a navy wool coat, a
black wool scarf at her throat, long black leather boots that zip up the sides.
He takes her to an Italian restaurant where he goes from time to time with people at
work, to celebrate birthdays and promotions and projects well done. The entrance is a
few steps below street level, the windows shielded with panels of lace. The waiter
recognizes him, smiles. They are led to a small table at the back as opposed to the long
one in the center that he normally sits at. Underneath the coat he sees that she is
wearing a nubbly gray suit, with large buttons on the jacket and a bell-shaped skirt that
stops short of her knees.
"I taught today," she explains, aware that he is looking at her—she preferred to wear a
suit when she taught, she says, given that her students were only a decade younger
than she was. Otherwise she feels no sense of authority. He envies her students
suddenly, seeing her without fail, three times a week, pictures them gathered together

around a table, staring at her continuously as she writes on the board.
"The pastas are usually pretty good here," he says as the waiter hands them menus.
"Join me for a glass of wine," she says. "I'm done for the day."
"Lucky you. I have a stressful meeting to go to after this."
She looks at him, closing the menu. "All the more reason for a drink," she points out
cheerfully.
"True," he concedes.
"Two glasses of the merlot," he says when the waiter re turns. She orders what he
does, porcini ravioli and a salad of arugula and pears. He's nervous that she'll be
disappointed by the choice, but when the food arrives she eyes it approvingly, and she
eats heartily, quickly, sopping up the leftover sauce on her plate with bread. As they
drink their wine and eat their meal, he admires the light on her face, the faint pale hairs
that shine against the contours of her cheek. She speaks of her students, the topic for
the dissertation she plans to write, about twentieth-century francophone poets from
Algeria. He tells her about his memory of the Christmas party, of her being forced to
play "Jingle Bells."
"Do you remember that night?" he asks, hopeful that she will.
"No. My mother was always forcing me to do things like that."
"Do you still play?"
She shakes her head. "I never wanted to learn in the first place. My mother had this
fantasy. One of many. I think my mother's taking lessons now."
The room is quiet again, the lunch crowd has come and gone. He looks around for the
waiter, signals for the check, dismayed that their plates are empty, that the hour has
passed.
"She is your sister, signore?" the waiter asks as he sets the check between them,
glancing at Moushumi and then back at Gogol.
"Oh, no," Gogol says, shaking his head, laughing, at once insulted and oddly aroused.
In a way, he realizes, it's true—they share the same coloring, the straight eyebrows, the
long, slender bodies, the high cheekbones and dark hair.
"You are sure?" the waiter persists.
"Quite sure," Gogol says.
"But you could be," the waiter says. "Sì, sì, there is quite a resemblance."
"You think so?" Moushumi says. She appears to be at ease with the comparison,
looking comically askance at Gogol. And yet he notices that some color has risen to her
cheeks, whether from the wine or from self-consciousness he doesn't know.
"It's funny he should say that," she says, once they have stepped out into the cold.
"What do you mean?"
"Well, it's just funny to think that all our lives our parents raised us according to the
illusion that we were cousins, that we were all part of some makeshift extended Bengali
family, and now here we are, years later, and someone actually thinks we're related."
He does not know what to say. The waiter's comment has discomfited him, making his
attraction to Moushumi feel mildly illicit.
"You're not dressed warmly enough," she observes, twisting the woolen scarf securely
around her neck.
"It's so damn hot in my apartment all the time," he says. "The heat just got turned on.
For some reason I can never get my mind around the fact that it won't be the same
temperature outside."
"Don't you check the paper?"
"I get it on my way to work."
"I always check the weather by phone when I leave the house," Moushumi says.
"You're joking." He stares at her, surprised that she should actually be the type to go to
such lengths. "Please tell me you're joking."
She laughs. "I don't admit that to just anyone, you know." She finishes arranging her

scarf, and then, without removing her hands from it, she says, "Why don't you borrow
this?" and begins to untie it again.
"Please, I'm fine." He puts a hand to his throat, against the knot of his tie.
"Sure?"
He nods, half tempted to say yes, to feel her scarf against his skin.
"Well, at the very least you need a hat," she tells him. "I know a place nearby. Do you
need to be back at work right away?"
She leads him to a little boutique on Madison. The window is crowded with women's
hats perched on gray, featureless heads, with sloping necks nearly a foot long.
"They have men's stuff in the back," she says. The shop is crowded with women. The
back is relatively tranquil, stacks of fedoras and berets arrayed on curved wooden
shelves. He picks up a fur hat, a top hat, trying them on as a joke. The glass of wine has
made him tipsy. Moushumi begins rummaging through a basket.
"This will be warm," she says, placing her fingers inside a thick navy cap with yellow
stripes on the brim. She stretches the hat with her fingers. "What do you think?" She
puts it on his head, touching his hair, his scalp. She smiles, pointing to the mirror. She
watches as he studies himself.
He is aware that she is looking at him rather than at his reflection. He wonders what her
face looks like without her glasses, when her hair is loose. He wonders what it might be
like to kiss her on the mouth. "I like it," he says. "I'll take it."
She pulls it off his head quickly, spoiling his hair.
"What are you doing?"
"I want to buy it for you."
"You don't have to do that."
"I want to," she says, already heading toward the register. "It was my idea, anyway. You
were perfectly happy freezing to death."
At the register the cashier notices Moushumi eyeing a brown wool and velvet hat
decorated with feathers. "It's an exquisite piece," the cashier says, carefully lifting it off
the bust. "Handmade by a woman in Spain. No two are alike. Would you like to try it?"
Moushumi places it on her head. A customer compliments her. So does the cashier.
"Not many women can pull off a hat like that," the cashier says.
Moushumi blushes, glances at the price tag dangling from a thread on one side of her
face. "I'm afraid it's out of my budget for today," she says.
The cashier replaces the hat on the shelf. "Well, now you know what to get her for her
birthday," she says, looking at Gogol.
He puts on the new cap and they step out of the store. He is late for his meeting. If it
weren't for that, he would be tempted to stay with her, to walk through the streets beside
her, or disappear with her into the dark of a movie theater. The day has turned even
colder, the wind more forceful, the sun a faint white patch. She walks him back to his
office. For the rest of the day, throughout his meeting and as he struggles, afterward, to
get back to work, he thinks of her. When he leaves the office, instead of walking to the
subway, he retraces the steps they'd taken together earlier, past the restaurant where
people are now having their dinners, and finds his way to the hat store, the sight of it
lifting his spirits. It is nearly eight o'clock, dark outside. He assumes the store will be
closed, is surprised to see the lights still on inside, the grate only partly lowered. He
studies the items in the window, and his reflection in the glass, wearing the cap she'd
bought for him. Eventually he walks in. He is the only customer; he can hear the sound
of a vacuum cleaner running at the rear of the store.
"I knew you'd be back," the saleswoman says as he walks through the door. She takes
the brown velvet hat off the Styro-foam head without his having to ask. "He was here
earlier today with his girlfriend," she explains to her assistant. "Shall I wrap it for you?"
"That would be great." It excites him to hear himself referred to that way. He watches as
the hat is placed in a round chocolate-colored box, tied with a thick, creamy ribbon. He
realizes that he has not asked the price, but without a thought he signs the receipt for

two hundred dollars. He takes the hat back to his apartment, hiding it at the back of his
closet even though Moushumi has never been there. He would give it to her on her
birthday, in spite of the fact that he has no idea when her birthday is.
And yet he has the feeling that he has been to a few of her birthdays, and she to his.
That weekend, at his parents' house, he confirms this; at night, after his mother and
Sonia have gone up to bed, he hunts for her in the photo albums that his mother has
assembled over the years. Moushumi is there, lined up behind a blazing cake in his
parents' dining room. She is looking away, a pointed paper hat on her head. He stares
straight at the lens, the knife in his hand, poised, for the camera's benefit, over the cake,
his face shining with impending adolescence. He tries to peel the image from the sticky
yellow backing, to show her the next time he sees her, but it clings stubbornly, refusing
to detach cleanly from the past.

The following weekend she invites him over for dinner at her place. She has to come
downstairs in order to let him into the building; the buzzer is broken, she'd warned him
when they'd made their plans.
"Nice cap," she says. She wears a sleeveless black dress tied loosely at the back. Her
legs are bare, her feet slim, her toe-nails, exposed at the tops of her sandals, painted
maroon. Strands of hair have come loose from her chignon. She holds half a cigarette
between her fingers, but just before she leans forward to kiss him on the cheeks she
lets it drop and crushes it with the toe of her sandal. She leads him up the steps to an
apartment on the third floor. She's left the door open. The apartment smells strongly of
cooking; on the stove, a few large pieces of chicken are browning in a pan full of oil.
Music is playing, a man singing songs in French. Gogol gives her a bunch of sunflowers
whose massive stems are heavier in his arms than the bottle of wine he's also brought.
She does not know where to put the flowers; the countertops, limited to begin with, are
crammed with evidence of the meal she is preparing, onions and mushrooms, flour, a
stick of butter rap idly softening in the heat, a glass of wine she is in the process of
drinking, plastic grocery bags she has not had time to put away.
"I should have brought something more manageable," he says as she looks around the
kitchen, the flowers resting against her shoulder, as if expecting a surface to
miraculously clear.
"I've been meaning for weeks to buy myself some sunflowers," she says. She glances
quickly at the pan on the stove and takes him through the kitchen and into the living
room. She unwraps the flowers. "There's a vase up there," she says, pointing to the top
of a bookcase. "Would you mind getting it down?"
She carries the vase into the bathroom, and he can hear water running in the tub. He
takes the opportunity to remove his coat and cap, drape them over the back of the sofa.
He has dressed with care, a blue-and-white-striped Italian shirt that Sonia had bought
for him at Filene's Basement, a pair of black jeans. She returns and fills the vase with
the flowers, putting it on the coffee table. The place is nicer than he expected from the
grimy look of the lobby. The floors have been redone, the walls freshly painted, the
ceiling dotted with track lights. The living room has a square dining table in one corner,
and a desk and file cabinets set up in another. Three particleboard bookcases line one
wall. On the dining table, there is a pepper mill, a saltcellar, bright, clear-skinned
clementines arranged in a bowl. He recognizes versions of things he knows from home:
a Kashmiri crewelwork carpet on the floor, Rajasthani silk pillows on the sofa, a castiron Natraj on one of the bookcases.
Back in the kitchen she sets out some olives and some goat cheese coated with ash.
She hands him a corkscrew and asks him to open the bottle he's brought, to pour
himself a glass. She dredges more of the chicken on a plate of flour. The pan is
sputtering loudly and has showered the wall behind the stove with oil. He stands there
as she refers to a cookbook by Julia Child. He is overwhelmed by the production taking
place for his benefit. In spite of the meals they've already shared, he is nervous about

eating with her.
"When would you like to eat?" she says. "Are you hungry?"
"Whenever. What are you making?"
She looks at him doubtfully. "Coq au vin. I haven't made it before. I just found out that
you're supposed to cook it twenty-four hours in advance. I'm afraid I'm running a bit
behind."
He shrugs. "It already smells great. I'll help you." He rolls up his sleeves. "What can I
do?"
"Let's see," she says, reading. "Oh. Okay. You can take those onions, and make X's in
the bottom with a knife, and drop them into that pan."
"In with the chicken?"
"No. Shoot." She kneels down and retrieves a pot from one of the lower cupboards. "In
here. They need to boil for a minute and then you take them out."
He does as he is told, filling the pan with water and turning on the flame. He finds a
knife and scores the onions, as he had once been taught to do with Brussels sprouts in
the Ratliffs' kitchen. He watches her measure wine and tomato paste into the pan
containing the chicken. She searches in a cupboard for a stainless-steel spice caddy
and throws in a bay leaf.
"Of course, my mother is appalled that I'm not making you Indian food," she says,
studying the contents of the pan.
"You told her I was coming over?"
"She happened to call today." Then she asks him, "What about you? Have you been
giving your mother updates?"
"I haven't gone out of my way. But she probably suspects something given that it's a
Saturday and I'm not at home with her and Sonia."
Moushumi leans over the pan, watching the contents come to a simmer, prodding the
pieces of chicken with a wooden spoon. She glances back at the recipe. "I think I need
to add more liquid," she says, pouring water from a teakettle into the pan, causing her
glasses to steam. "I can't see." She laughs, stepping away so that she stands a bit
closer to him. The CD has ended and the apartment is silent apart from the sounds on
the stove. She turns to him, still laughing, her eyes still obscured. She holds up her
hands, messy from cooking, coated with flour and chicken fat. "Would you mind taking
these off for me?"
With both hands he pries the glasses from her face, clasping the frames where they
meet her temples. He puts them on the counter. And then he leans over and kisses her.
He touches his fingers to her bare arms, cool in spite of the warmth of the kitchen. He
presses her close, a hand at the small of her back, against the knot of her dress, tasting
the warm, slightly sour tang of her mouth. They make their way through the living room,
to the bedroom. He sees a box spring and mattress without a frame. He unties the knot
at the back of her dress with difficulty, then swiftly undoes the long zipper, leaving a
small black pool at her feet. In the light cast from the living room, he glimpses black
mesh underwear and a matching bra. She is curvier than she appears clothed, her
breasts fuller, her hips generously flared. They make love on top of the covers, quickly,
efficiently, as if they've known each other's bodies for years. But when they are finished
she switches on the lamp by her bed and they examine each other, quietly discovering
moles and marks and ribs.
"Who would have thought," she says, her voice tired, satisfied. She is smiling, her eyes
partly closed.
He looks down at her face. "You're beautiful."
"And you."
"Can you even see me without those glasses?"
"Only if you stay close," she says.
"Then I'd better not move."
"Don't."

They peel back the covers and lie together, sticky and spent, in each other's arms. He
begins to kiss her again, and she wraps her legs around him. But the smell of
something burn ing causes them to bolt naked from the bed, rushing comically to the
kitchen, laughing. The sauce has evaporated and the chicken is irreparably scorched,
so much so that the pan itself has to be thrown away. By then they are starving and
because they lack the energy either to go out or to prepare another meal they end up
ordering in, feeding each other tart, tiny wedges of clementines as they wait for Chinese
food to arrive.

Within three months they have clothes and toothbrushes at each other's apartments. He
sees her for entire weekends without make-up, sees her with gray shadows under her
eyes as she types papers at her desk, and when he kisses her head he tastes the oil
that accumulates on her scalp between shampoos. He sees the hair that grows on her
legs between waxings, the black roots that emerge between appointments at the salon,
and in these moments, these glimpses, he believes he has known no greater intimacy.
He learns that she sleeps, always, with her left leg straight and her right leg bent, ankle
over knee, in the shape of a 4. He learns that she is prone to snoring, ever so faintly,
sounding like a lawn mower that will not start, and to gnashing her jaws, which he
massages for her as she sleeps. At restaurants and bars, they sometimes slip Bengali
phrases into their conversation in order to comment with impunity on another diner's
unfortunate hair or shoes.
They talk endlessly about how they know and do not know each other. In a way there is
little to explain. There had been the same parties to attend when they were growing up,
the same episodes of The Love Boat and Fantasy Island the children watched as the
parents feasted in another part of the house, the same meals served to them on paper
plates, the carpets lined with newspapers when the hosts happened to be particularly
fastidious. He can imagine her life, even after she and her family moved away to New
Jersey, easily. He can imagine the large suburban house her family owned; the china
cabinet in the din ing room, her mother's prized possession; the large public high school
in which she had excelled but that she had miserably attended. There had been the
same frequent trips to Calcutta, being plucked out of their American lives for months at
a time. They calculate the many months that they were in that distant city together, on
trips that had overlapped by weeks and once by months, unaware of each other's
presence. They talk about how they are both routinely assumed to be Greek, Egyptian,
Mexican—even in this misrendering they are joined.
She speaks with nostalgia of the years her family had spent in England, living at first in
London, which she barely remembers, and then in a brick semidetached house in
Croydon, with rosebushes in front. She describes the narrow house, the gas fireplaces,
the dank odor of the bathrooms, eating Weetabix and hot milk for breakfast, wearing a
uniform to school. She tells him that she had hated moving to America, that she had
held on to her British accent for as long as she could. For some reason, her parents
feared America much more than England, perhaps because of its vastness, or perhaps
because in their minds it had less of a link to India. A few months before their arrival in
Massachusetts, a child had disappeared while playing in his yard and was never found;
for a long time afterward there were posters in the supermarket. She remembers always
having to call her mother every time she and her friends moved to another house in the
neighborhood, a house visible from her own, to play with another girl's toys, to have
another family's cookies and punch. She would have to excuse herself upon entering
and ask for the telephone. The American mothers were at once charmed and perplexed
by her sense of duty. "I'm at Anna's house," she would report to her mother in English.
"I'm at Sue's."
He does not feel insulted when she tells him that for most of her life he was exactly the
sort of person she had sought to avoid. If anything it flatters him. From earliest girlhood,
she says, she had been determined not to allow her parents to have a hand in her
marriage. She had always been admonished not to marry an American, as had he, but

he gathers that in her case these warnings had been relentless, and had therefore
plagued her far more than they had him. When she was only five years old, she was
asked by her relatives if she planned to get married in a red sari or a white gown.
Though she had refused to indulge them, she knew, even then, what the correct
response was. By the time she was twelve she had made a pact, with two other Bengali
girls she knew, never to marry a Bengali man. They had written a statement vowing
never to do so, and spit on it at the same time, and buried it somewhere in her parents'
backyard.
From the onset of adolescence she'd been subjected to a series of unsuccessful
schemes; every so often a small group of unmarried Bengali men materialized in the
house, young colleagues of her father's. She never spoke to them; she strutted upstairs
with the excuse of homework and did not come downstairs to say good-bye. During
summer visits to Calcutta, strange men mysteriously appeared in the sitting room of her
grandparents' flat. Once on a train to Durgapur to visit an uncle, a couple had been bold
enough to ask her parents if she was engaged; they had a son doing his surgical
residency in Michigan. "Aren't you going to arrange a wedding for her?" relatives would
ask her parents. Their inquiries had filled her with a cold dread. She hated the way they
would talk of the details of her wedding, the menu and the different colors of saris she
would wear for the different ceremonies, as if it were a fixed certainty in her life. She
hated when her grandmother would unlock her almari, showing her which jewels would
be hers when the day came.
The shameful truth was that she was not involved, was in fact desperately lonely. She
had rebuffed the Indian men she wasn't interested in, and she had been forbidden as a
teenager to date. In college she had harbored lengthy infatuations, with students with
whom she never spoke, with professors and TAs. In her mind she would have
relationships with these men, structuring her days around chance meetings in the
library, or a conversation during office hours, or the one class she and a fellow student
shared, so that even now she associated a particular year of college with the man or
boy she had silently, faithfully, absurdly, desired. Occasionally one of her infatuations
would culminate in a lunch or coffee date, an encounter on which she would pin all her
hopes but which would lead to nothing. In reality there had been no one, so that toward
the end of college, as graduation loomed, she was convinced in her bones that there
would be no one at all. Sometimes she wondered if it was her horror of being married to
someone she didn't love that had caused her, subconsciously, to shut herself off. She
shakes her head as she speaks, irritated with having revisited this aspect of her past.
Even now she regrets herself as a teenager. She regrets her obedience, her long,
unstyled hair, her piano lessons and lace-collared shirts. She regrets her mortifying lack
of confidence, the extra ten pounds she carried on her frame during puberty. "No
wonder you never talked to me back then," she says. He feels tenderness toward her
when she disparages herself this way. And though he had witnessed that stage of her
himself, he can no longer picture it; those vague recollections of her he's carried with
him all his life have been wiped clean, replaced by the woman he knows now.
At Brown her rebellion had been academic. At her parents' insistence, she'd majored in
chemistry, for they were hopeful she would follow in her father's footsteps. Without
telling them, she'd pursued a double major in French. Immersing herself in a third
language, a third culture, had been her refuge—she approached French, unlike things
American or Indian, without guilt, or misgiving, or expectation of any kind. It was easier
to turn her back on the two countries that could claim her in favor of one that had no
claim whatsoever. Her four years of secret study had prepared her, at the end of
college, to escape as far as possible. She told her parents she had no inten tion of
being a chemist and, deaf to their protests, she'd scraped together all the money she
had and moved to Paris, with no specific plans.
Suddenly it was easy, and after years of being convinced she would never have a lover
she began to fall effortlessly into affairs. With no hesitation, she had allowed men to
seduce her in cafés, in parks, while she gazed at paintings in museums. She gave
herself openly, completely, not caring about the consequences. She was exactly the

same person, looked and behaved the same way, and yet suddenly, in that new city,
she was transformed into the kind of girl she had once envied, had believed she would
never become. She allowed the men to buy her drinks, dinners, later to take her in taxis
to their apartments, in neighborhoods she had not yet discovered on her own. In
retrospect she saw that her sudden lack of inhibition had intoxicated her more than any
of the men had. Some of them had been married, far older, fathers to children in
secondary school. The men had been French for the most part, but also German,
Persian, Italian, Lebanese. There were days she slept with one man after lunch, another
after dinner. They were a bit excessive, she tells Gogol with a roll of her eyes, the type
to lavish her with perfume and jewels.
She found a job working for an agency, helping American businesspeople learn
conversational French, and French businesspeople learn conversational English. She
would meet with them in cafés, or speak with them by phone, asking questions about
their families, their backgrounds, their favorite books and foods. She began to socialize
with other American expatriates. Her fiancé was part of that crowd. He was an
investment banker from New York, living in Paris for a year. His name was Graham.
She had fallen in love and very quickly moved in with him. It was for Graham that she'd
applied to NYU. They took a place together on York Avenue. They lived there in secret,
with two telephone lines so that her parents would never know. When her parents came
to the city, he'd disappear to a hotel, removing all traces of himself from the apartment.
It had been exciting at first, maintaining such an elaborate lie. But then it had gotten
tiresome, impossible. She brought him home to New Jersey, prepared herself for battle,
but in fact, to her enormous surprise, her parents were relieved. By then she was old
enough so that it didn't matter to them that he was an American. Enough of their friends'
children had married Americans, had produced pale, dark-haired, half-American
grandchildren, and none of it was as terrible as they had feared. And so her parents did
their best to accept him. They told their Bengali friends that Graham was well behaved,
Ivy educated, earned an impressive salary. They learned to overlook the fact that his
parents were divorced, that his father had remarried not once but twice, that his second
wife was only ten years older than Moushumi.
One night, in a taxi stuck in midtown traffic, she had impulsively asked him to marry her.
Looking back on it, she supposed it was all those years of people attempting to claim
her, choose her, of feeling an invisible net cast around her, that had led her to this
proposal. Graham had accepted, gave her his grandmother's diamond. He had agreed
to fly with her and her parents to Calcutta, to meet her extended family and ask for her
grandparents' blessing. He had charmed them all, learned to sit on the floor and eat
with his fingers, take the dust from her grandparents' feet. He had visited the homes of
dozens of her relatives, eaten the plates full of syrupy mishti, patiently posed for
countless photographs on rooftops, surrounded by her cousins. He had agreed to a
Hindu wedding, and so she and her mother had gone shopping in Gariahat and New
Market, selected a dozen saris, gold jewelry in red cases with purple velvet linings, a
dhoti and a topor for Graham that her mother carried by hand on the plane ride back.
The wedding was planned for summer in New Jersey, an engagement party thrown, a
few gifts already received. Her mother had typed up an explanation of Bengali wedding
rituals on the computer and mailed it to all the Americans on the guest list. A
photograph of the two of them was taken for the local paper in her parents' town.
A few weeks before the wedding, they were out to dinner with friends, getting happily
drunk, and she heard Graham talking about their time in Calcutta. To her surprise, he
was complaining about it, commenting that he found it taxing, found the culture
repressed. All they did was visit her relatives, he said. Though he thought the city was
fascinating, the society, in his opinion, was somewhat provincial. People tended to stay
at home most of the time. There was nothing to drink. "Imagine dealing with fifty in-laws
without alcohol. I couldn't even hold her hand on the street without attracting stares," he
had said. She had listened to him, partly sympathetic, partly horrified. For it was one
thing for her to reject her background, to be critical of her family's heritage, another to
hear it from him. She realized that he had fooled everyone, including her. On their walk

home from the restaurant, she brought it up, saying that his comments had upset her,
why hadn't he told her these things? Was he only pretending to enjoy himself all that
time? They'd begun to argue, a chasm opening up between them, swallowing them, and
suddenly, in a rage, she had removed his grandmother's ring from her finger and tossed
it into the street, into oncoming traffic, and then Graham had struck her on the face as
pedestrians watched. By the end of the week, he had moved out of the apartment they
shared. She stopped going to school, filed for incompletes in all her classes. She
swallowed half a bottle of pills, was forced to drink charcoal in an emergency room. She
was given a referral to a therapist. She called her adviser at NYU, told him she'd had a
nervous breakdown, took off the rest of the semester. The wedding was canceled,
hundreds of phone calls made. They lost the deposit they'd paid to Shah Jahan
caterers, as well as to their honeymoon destination, Palace on Wheels. The gold was
taken to a bank vault, the saris and blouses and petticoats put away in a mothproof box.
Her first impulse was to move back to Paris. But she was in school, too invested to drop
out, and besides, she had no money for that. She fled the apartment on York Avenue,
unable to afford it on her own. She refused to go home to her parents. Some friends in
Brooklyn took her in. It was painful, she told him, living with a couple at that particular
time, listening to them shower together in the mornings, watching them kiss and shut
the door to their bedroom at the end of each night, but in the beginning she could not
face being alone. She started temping. By the time she'd saved enough to move to her
own place in the East Village, she was thankful to be alone. All summer she went to
movies by herself, sometimes as many as three a day. She bought TV Guide every
week and read it from cover to cover, planning her nights around her favorite shows.
She began to subsist on a diet of raita and Triscuits. She grew thinner than she'd ever
been in her life, so that in the few pictures taken of her in that period her face is faintly
unrecognizable. She went to end-of-summer sales and bought everything in a size four;
six months later she would be forced to donate it all to a thrift shop. When autumn
came, she threw herself into her studies, catching up on all the work she had
abandoned that spring, began every now and then to date. And then one day her
mother called, asking if she remembered a boy named Gogol.

9
They marry within a year, at a DoubleTree hotel in New Jersey, close to the suburb
where her parents live. It's not the type of wedding either of them really wants. They
would have preferred the sorts of venues their American friends choose, the Brooklyn
Botanic Gardens or the Metropolitan Club or the Boat House in Central Park. They
would have preferred a sit-down dinner, jazz played during the reception, black-andwhite photographs, keeping things small. But their parents insist on inviting close to
three hundred people, and serving Indian food, and providing easy parking for all the
guests. Gogol and Moushumi agree that it's better to give in to these expectations than
to put up a fight. It's what they deserve, they joke, for having listened to their mothers,
and for getting together in the first place, and the fact that they are united in their
resignation makes the consequences somewhat bearable. Within weeks of announcing
their engagement, the date is settled, the hotel booked, the menu decided, and though
for a while there are nightly phone calls, her mother asking if they prefer a sheet cake or
layers, sage- or rose-colored napkins, Chardonnay or Chablis, there is little for either
Gogol or Moushumi to do other than listen and say yes, whichever seems best, it all
sounds fine. "Consider yourselves lucky," Gogol's coworkers tell him. Planning a
wedding is in credibly stressful, the first real trial of a marriage, they say. Still, it feels a
little strange to be so uninvolved in his own wedding, and he is reminded of the many
other celebrations in his life, all the birthdays and graduation parties his parents had
thrown when he was growing up, in his honor, attended by his parents' friends,
occasions from which he had always felt at a slight remove.
The Saturday of the wedding they pack suitcases, rent a car, and drive down to New
Jersey, separating only when they get to the hotel, where they are claimed one last time
by their respective families. Starting tomorrow, he realizes with a shock, he and
Moushumi will be regarded as a family of their own. They have not seen the hotel
beforehand. Its most memorable feature is a glass elevator that rises and falls
ceaselessly at its center, much to the amusement of children and adults alike. The
rooms are gathered around successive elliptical balconies that can be seen from the
lobby, reminding Gogol of a parking garage. He has a room to himself, on a floor with
his mother and Sonia and a few of the Gangulis' closest family friends. Moushumi stays
chastely on the floor above, next door to her parents, though by now she and Gogol are
practically living together at her place. His mother has brought him the things he is to
wear, a parchment-colored Punjabi top that had once belonged to his father, a
prepleated dhoti with a drawstring waist, a pair of nagrai slippers with curling toes. His
father had never worn the punjabi, and Gogol has to hang it in the bathroom, hot water
running in the shower, to get the creases out. "His blessings are always with you," his
mother says, reaching up and placing both her hands for a moment on his head. For the
first time since his father's death, she is dressed with care, wearing a pretty pale green
sari, a pearl necklace at her throat, has agreed to let Sonia put some lipstick on her lips.
"Is it too much?" his mother worries, regarding herself in the mirror. Still, he has not
seen her looking this lovely, this happy, this excited, in years. Sonia wears a sari, too,
fuchsia with silver em broidery, a red rose stuck into her hair. She gives him a box
wrapped in tissue.
"What's this?" he asks.
"You didn't think I forgot your thirtieth birthday, did you?"
It had been a few days ago, a weeknight he and Moushumi had both been too busy to
celebrate properly. Even his mother, preoccupied with last-minute wedding details, had
forgotten to call him first thing in the morning, as she normally did.
"I think I'm officially at the age when I want people to forget my birthday," he says,
accepting the gift.
"Poor Goggles."
Inside he finds a small bottle of bourbon and a red leather flask. "I had it engraved," she

says, and when he turns the flask over he sees the letters ng. He remembers poking his
head into Sonia's room years ago, telling her about his decision to change his name to
Nikhil. She'd been thirteen or so, doing her homework on her bed. "You can't do that,"
she'd told him then, shaking her head, and when he'd asked her why not she'd simply
said, "Because you can't. Because you're Gogol." He watches her now, applying her
make-up in his room, pulling at the skin next to her eye and painting a thin black line on
the lid, and he recalls photographs of his mother at her own wedding.
"You're next, you know," he says.
"Don't remind me." She grimaces, then laughs. Their shared giddiness, the excitement
of the preparations, saddens him, all of it reminding him that his father is dead. He
imagines his father wearing an outfit similar to his own, a shawl draped over one
shoulder, as he used to during pujo. The ensemble he fears looks silly on himself would
have looked dignified, elegant, befitting his father in a way he knows it does not him.
The nagrais are a size too large and need to be stuffed with tissues. Unlike Moushumi,
who is having her hair and make-up professionally styled and applied, Gogol is ready in
a matter of minutes. He regrets not having brought his running shoes along; he could
have done a few miles on the treadmill before preparing himself for the event.
There is an hour-long watered-down Hindu ceremony on a platform covered with
sheets. Gogol and Moushumi sit cross-legged, first opposite each other, then side by
side. The guests sit facing them in folding metal chairs; the accordion wall between two
windowless banquet rooms, with dropped ceilings, has been opened up to expand the
space. A video camera and hand-held white lights hover above their faces. Shenai
music plays on a boom box. Nothing has been rehearsed or explained to them
beforehand. A cluster of mashis and meshos surround them, telling them continually
what to do, when to speak or stand or throw flowers at a small brass urn. The priest is a
friend of Moushumi's parents, an anesthesiologist who happens to be a Brahmin.
Offerings are made to pictures of their grandparents and his father, rice poured into a
pyre that they are forbidden by the management of the hotel to ignite. He thinks of his
parents, strangers until this moment, two people who had not spoken until after they
were actually wed. Suddenly, sitting next to Moushumi, he realizes what it means, and
he is astonished by his parents' courage, the obedience that must have been involved
in doing such a thing.
It's the first time he's seen Moushumi in a sari, apart from all those pujos years ago,
which she had suffered through silently. She has about twenty pounds of gold on
her—at one point, when they are sitting face to face, their hands wrapped up together in
a checkered cloth, he counts eleven necklaces. Two enormous paisleys have been
painted in red and white on her cheeks. Until now, he has continued to call Moushumi's
father Shubir Mesho, and her mother Rina Mashi, as he always has, as if they were still
his uncle and aunt, as if Moushumi were still a sort of cousin. But by the end of the night
he will become their son-in-law and so be expected to address them as his second set
of parents, an alternative Baba and Ma.
For the reception he changes into a suit, she into a red Ba narasi gown with spaghetti
straps, something she'd designed herself and had made by a seamstress friend. She
wears the gown in spite of her mother's protests—what was wrong with a salwar
kameeze, she'd wanted to know—and when Moushumi happens to forget her shawl on
a chair and bares her slim, bronze shoulders, which quietly sparkle from a special
powder she's applied to them, her mother manages, in the midst of that great crowd, to
shoot her reproachful glances, which Moushumi ignores. Countless people come to
congratulate Gogol, saying they had seen him when he was so little, asking him to pose
for photographs, to wrap his arms around families and smile. He is numbly drunk
through it all, thanks to the open bar her parents have sprung for. Moushumi is horrified,
in the banquet room, to see the tables wreathed with tulle, the ivy and baby's breath
twisted around the columns. They bump into each other on her way out of the ladies'
room and exchange a quick kiss, the smoke on her breath faintly masked by the mint
she is chewing. He imagines her smoking in the stall, the lid of the toilet seat down.
They've barely said a word to each other all evening; throughout the ceremony she'd

kept her eyes lowered, and during the reception, each time he'd looked at her, she'd
been deep in conversation with people he didn't know. He wants to be alone with her
suddenly, wishes they could sneak off to her room or his, ignore the rest of the party as
he would when he was a boy. "Come on," he urges, motioning toward the glass
elevator, "fifteen minutes. No one will notice." But the dinner has begun, and table
numbers are being called one by one on the loudspeaker. "I'd need someone to redo
my hair," she says. The heated silver chafing dishes are labeled for the American
guests. It's typical north Indian fare, mounds of hot pink tandoori, aloo gobi in thick
orange sauce. He overhears someone in the line saying the chickpeas have gone bad.
They sit at the head table in the center of the room, with his mother and Sonia, her
parents and a handful of her relatives visiting from Calcutta, and her brother, Samrat,
who is missing out on his orientation at the University of Chicago in order to attend the
wedding. There are awkward champagne toasts and speeches by their families, their
parents' friends. Her father stands up, smiling nervously, forgets to raise his glass, and
says, "Thank you very much for coming," then turns to Gogol and Moushumi: "Okay, be
happy." Forks are tapped against glasses by giggling, sari-clad mashis, instructing them
when to kiss. Each time he obliges them and kisses his bride tamely on the cheek.
A cake is wheeled out, "Nikhil Weds Moushumi" piped across its surface. Moushumi
smiles as she always smiles for a camera, her mouth closed, her head tilted slightly
downward and to the left. He is aware that together he and Moushumi are fulfilling a
collective, deep-seated desire—because they're both Bengali, everyone can let his hair
down a bit. At times, looking out at the guests, he can't help but think that two years ago
he might have been sitting in the sea of round tables that now surround him, watching
her marry another man. The thought crashes over him like an unexpected wave, but
quickly he reminds himself that he is the one sitting beside her. The red Banarasi
wedding sari and the gold had been bought two years ago, for her wedding to Graham.
This time all her parents have had to do is bring down the boxes from a closet shelf,
retrieve the jewels from the safety deposit box, find the itemized list for the caterer. The
new invitation, designed by Ashima, the English translation lettered by Gogol, is the only
thing that isn't a leftover.
Since Moushumi has to teach a class three days after the wedding, they have to
postpone the honeymoon. The closest they come is a night alone in the DoubleTree,
which they are both dying to leave. But their parents have gone to great trouble and
expense to book the newlywed suite. "I have got to take a shower," she says as soon as
they are finally alone, and disappears into the bathroom. He knows she is exhausted, as
he is—the night had ended with a long session of dancing to Abba songs. He examines
the room, opening drawers and pulling out the stationery, opening the minibar, reading
the contents of the room service menu, though he is not at all hungry. If anything, he
feels slightly ill, from the combination of the bourbon and the two large pieces of cake
he'd had because he had not had any dinner. He sprawls on the king-sized bed. The
bedspread has been strewn with flower petals, a final gesture before their families
withdrew. He waits for her, flipping through the channels on the television. Beside him is
a bottle of champagne in a bucket, heart-shaped chocolates on a lace-covered plate.
He takes a bite out of one of the chocolates. The inside is an unyielding toffee, requiring
more chewing than he expects.
He fidgets with the gold ring she'd placed on his finger after they'd cut the cake,
identical to the one he'd placed on hers. He'd proposed to her on her birthday, giving
her a diamond solitaire in addition to the hat he'd bought for her after their second date.
He'd made a production out of it, using her birthday as an excuse to take her to a
country inn for the weekend, in a town upstate on the banks of the Hudson, the first trip
they'd taken together that wasn't to her parents' place in New Jersey, or to Pemberton
Road. It was springtime, the velvet hat out of season by then. She'd been overwhelmed
that he'd remembered it all this time. "I can't believe the store still had it," she said. He
didn't tell her the truth about when he'd bought the hat. He'd presented it to her
downstairs, in the dining room, after a Châteaubriand that had been carved for them at
the table. Strangers turned to admire Moushumi when the hat was on her head. After

trying it on, she'd put the box away under her chair, not noticing the smaller box lost
among the tissue. "There's something else in there," he'd been forced to say. In
retrospect he decided that she had been more shocked by the hat than by his proposal.
For while the former was a true surprise, the latter was something expected—from the
very beginning it was safely assumed by their families, and soon enough by
themselves, that as long as they liked each other their courtship would not lag and they
would surely wed. "Yes," she'd told him, grinning, looking up from the hatbox before he'd
even had to ask.
She emerges now in the snow-white terry-cloth hotel robe. She has taken off her makeup and her jewels; the vermilion with which he'd stained her part at the end of the
ceremony has been rinsed from her hair. Her feet are free of the three-inch heels she'd
worn as soon as the religious part of the wedding was over, causing her to tower over
almost everyone. This is the way he still finds her most ravishing, unadorned, aware
that it is a way she is willing to look for no one but him. She sits on the edge of the
mattress, applies some blue cream from a tube to her calves and the bottoms of her
feet. She'd massaged the cream onto his own feet once, the day they'd walked across
the Brooklyn Bridge, causing them to tingle and go cold. And then she lies against the
pillows, and looks at him, and puts out a hand. Underneath the robe he expects to find
some racy lingerie—back in New York he'd glimpsed the pile of things she'd received for
her shower in the corner of her bedroom. But she is naked, her skin smelling, a little too
intensely, of some sort of berry. He kisses the dark hair on her forearms, the prominent
collarbone, which she had once confessed to him is her favorite part of her body. They
make love in spite of their exhaustion, her damp hair limp and cool against his face, the
rose petals sticking to their elbows and shoulders and calves. He breathes in the scent
of her skin, still unable to fathom that they are husband and wife. When would it sink in?
Even then he does not feel fully alone with her, half waiting for someone to knock on the
door and tell them how to go about things. And though he desires her as much as ever,
he is relieved when they are through, lying naked side by side, knowing that nothing
else is expected of them, that finally they can relax.
Afterward they open up the champagne and sit together on the bed, going through a
large shopping bag full of cards with personal checks inside them. The checks have
been given to them by their parents' hundreds of friends. She had not wanted to register
for gifts. She told Gogol it was because she didn't have the time, but he sensed that it
was something she couldn't bring herself to face the second time around. It's fine with
him, not to have their apartment crammed with a dozen crystal vases and platters and
matching pots and pans. There is no calculator, and so they add up the figures on
numerous sheets of the hotel stationery. Most of the checks have been written out to
Mr. and Mrs. Nikhil and Moushumi Ganguli. Several are written to Gogol and Moushumi
Ganguli. The amounts are for one hundred and one dollars, two hundred and one
dollars, occasionally three hundred and one dollars, as Bengalis consider it inauspicious
to give round figures. Gogol adds up the subtotals on each page.
"Seven thousand thirty-five," he announces.
"Not bad, Mr. Ganguli."
"I'd say we've made a killing, Mrs. Ganguli."
Only she is not Mrs. Ganguli. Moushumi has kept her last name. She doesn't adopt
Ganguli, not even with a hyphen. Her own last name, Mazoomdar, is already a
mouthful. With a hyphenated surname, she would no longer fit into the window of a
business envelope. Besides, by now she has begun to publish under Moushumi
Mazoomdar, the name printed at the top of footnoted articles on French feminist theory
in a number of prestigious academic journals that always manage to give Gogol a paper
cut when he tries to read them. Though he hasn't admitted this to her, he'd hoped, the
day they'd filled out the application for their marriage license, that she might consider
otherwise, as a tribute to his father if nothing else. But the thought of changing her last
name to Ganguli has never crossed Moushumi's mind. When relatives from India
continue to address letters and cards to "Mrs. Moushumi Ganguli," she will shake her
head and sigh.

***
They put the money toward a security deposit for a one-bedroom apartment in the
Twenties, off Third Avenue. It's slightly more than they can comfortably afford, but they
are won over by the maroon awning, the part-time doorman, the lobby paved with
pumpkin-colored tiles. The apartment itself is small but luxurious, with built-in mahogany
bookcases rising to the ceiling and dark, oily, wide-planked floors. There is a living room
with a skylight, a kitchen with expensive stainless-steel appliances, a bathroom with a
marble floor and walls. There is a Juliet balcony off the bedroom, in one corner of which
Moushumi sets up her desk, her computer and printer, her files. They are on the top
floor, and if one leans far enough to the left outside the bathroom window it's possible to
see the Empire State Building. They spend a few weekends taking the shuttle bus to
Ikea and filling up the rooms: imitation Noguchi lamps, a black sectional sofa, kilim and
flokati carpets, a blond wood platform bed. Both her parents and Ashima are at once
impressed and puzzled when they come to visit for the first time. Isn't it a bit small, now
that they are married? But Gogol and Moushumi aren't thinking of children at the
moment, certainly not until Moushumi finishes her dissertation. On Saturdays they shop
together for food at the farmers' market in Union Square, with canvas bags over their
shoulders. They buy things they are not certain how to prepare, leeks and fresh fava
beans and fiddleheads, looking up recipes in the cookbooks they've received for their
wedding. From time to time when they cook they set off the fire alarm, which is overly
sensitive, and they bang it into silence with the handle of a broom.
They entertain together on occasion, throwing the sorts of parties their parents never
had, mixing martinis in a stainless-steel shaker for a few of the architects at Gogol's
work or Moushumi's graduate student friends at NYU. They play bossa nova and serve
bread and salami and cheese. He transfers the money in his bank account over to hers,
and they have pale green checks with both their names printed in the corner. The pass
code they decide on for their ATM card, Lulu, is the name of the French restaurant
where they had their first meal together. They eat most nights side by side on the stools
at the kitchen counter or at the coffee table, watching TV. They make Indian food
infrequently—usually it's pasta or broiled fish or take-out from the Thai restaurant down
the block. But sometimes, on a Sunday, both craving the food they'd grown up eating,
they ride the train out to Queens and have brunch at Jackson Diner, piling their plates
with tandoori chicken and pakoras and kabobs, and shop afterward for basmati rice and
the spices that need replenishing. Or they go to one of the hole-in-the-wall tea shops
and drink tea in paper cups with heavy cream, asking the waitress in Bengali to bring
them bowls of sweet yogurt and haleem. He calls every evening before leaving the
office to say he is on his way home, asks if he needs to pick up lettuce or a loaf of
bread. After dinner they watch television, as Moushumi writes out thank-you cards to all
their parents' friends, for the checks they had needed twenty different slips to deposit.
These are the things that make him feel married. Otherwise it's the same, only now
they're always together. At night she sleeps beside him, always rolling onto her
stomach, waking up every morning with a pillow pressed over her head.
Occasionally, in the apartment, he finds odd remnants of her life before he'd appeared
in it, her life with Graham—the inscription to the two of them in a book of poems, a
postcard from Provence stuffed into the back of a dictionary, addressed to the
apartment they'd secretly shared. Once, unable to stop himself, he'd walked to this
address during his lunch break, wondering what her life had been like back then. He
imagined her walking along the sidewalk, carrying grocery bags from the supermarket
that was on the next corner, in love with another man. He doesn't feel jealous of her
past per se. It's only that sometimes Gogol wonders whether he represents some sort of
capitulation or defeat. He doesn't feel this always, just enough to nag at him, settling
over his thoughts like a web. But then he looks around the apartment for reassurance,
reminding himself of the life they've set up together and share. He looks at the
photograph taken at their wedding, in which matching garlands hang from their necks. It
sits in a tasteful leather frame on top of the television set. He wanders into the bedroom,
where she's working, kissing her on the shoulder, drawing her to bed. But in the closet

they now share is a garment bag containing a white dress he knows she would have
worn a month after the Indian ceremony that had been planned for her and Graham, a
second ceremony before a justice of the peace on Graham's father's lawn in
Pennsylvania. She had told him about it. A patch of the dress is visible through a plastic
window in the garment bag. He'd unzipped it once, glimpsed something sleeveless, to
the knee, with a plain round neck, reminding him of a tennis dress. One day he asks her
why she still keeps it. "Oh that," she says with a shrug. "I keep meaning to have it
dyed."

In March they go to Paris. Moushumi is invited to give a paper at a conference at the
Sorbonne, and they decide to make a vacation out of it, Gogol arranging to take the
week off from work. Instead of staying in a hotel, they stay in an apartment in the
Bastille which belongs to a friend of Moushumi's, a male friend named Emanuel, a
journalist, who is on holiday in Greece. The apartment is barely heated, minuscule, at
the top of six steep flights of stairs, with a bathroom the size of a phone booth. There is
a loft bed just inches from the ceiling, so that sex is a serious hazard. An espresso pot
nearly fills the narrow two-burner stove. Apart from two chairs at the dining table, there
is no place to sit. The weather is raw, cheerless, the sky white, the sun perpetually
hidden from view. Paris is famous for such weather, Moushumi tells him. He feels
hidden himself; men on the streets stare at Moushumi constantly, their glances lingering
plainly, in spite of the fact that Gogol is at her side.
It is his first time in Europe. The first time he sees the sort of architecture he has read
about for so many years, admired only in the pages of books and slides. For some
reason, in Moushumi's company, he feels more apologetic than excited. Though they
journey together one day to Chartres, and another to Versailles, he has the feeling
she'd rather be meeting friends for coffee, attending panels at the conference, eating at
her favorite bistros, shopping at her favorite stores. From the beginning he feels
useless. Moushumi makes all the decisions, does all the talking. He is mute in the
brasseries where they eat their lunches, mute in the shops where he gazes at beautiful
belts, ties, paper, pens; mute on the rainy afternoon they spend together at the d'Orsay.
He is particularly mute when he and Moushumi get together for dinners with groups of
her French friends, drinking Pernods and feasting on couscous or choucroute, smoking
and arguing around paper-covered tables. He struggles to grasp the topic of
conversation—the euro, Monica Lewinsky, Y2K—but everything else is a blur,
indistinguishable from the clatter of plates, the drone of echoing, laughing voices. He
watches them in the giant gilt-framed mirrors on the walls, their dark heads leaning
close.
Part of him knows this is a privilege, to be here with a person who knows the city so
well, but the other part of him wants simply to be a tourist, fumbling with a phrase book,
looking at all the buildings on his list, getting lost. When he confesses his wish to
Moushumi one night as they are walking back to the apartment, she says, "Why didn't
you tell me that in the first place?" and the next morning she instructs him to walk to the
Métro station, have his photo taken in a booth, get a Carte Orange. And so Gogol goes
sightseeing, alone, while Moushumi is off at her conference, or as she sits at the table in
the apartment and puts the final touches on her paper. His only companion is
Moushumi's Plan de Paris, a small red guide to the arrondissements, with a folded map
attached to the back cover. On the last page, Moushumi writes in a few phrases for his
benefit: "Je voudrais un café, s'il vous plaît." "Où sont les toilettes?" And she warns as
he's walking out the door, "Avoid ordering a café crème unless it's morning. The French
never do that."
Though the day is bright for a change, it is particularly cold, brisk air stinging his ears.
He remembers his first lunch with Moushumi, the afternoon she'd dragged him to the
hat store. He remembers the two of them crying out in unison as the wind blasted their
faces, a time too soon for them to cling to each other for warmth. He walks now to the
corner, decides to get another croissant at the boulangerie where he and Moushumi go

every morning to buy breakfast. He sees a young couple standing in a patch of sunlight
on the sidewalk, feeding each other pastries from a bag. Suddenly he wants to go back
to the apartment, climb into the loft bed and forget about sightseeing, hold Moushumi in
his arms. He wants to lie with her for hours, as they did at the beginning, skipping
meals, then wandering the streets at odd hours, desperate for something to eat. But she
must present her paper at the end of the week, and he knows she will not be roused
from her task of reading it aloud, timing its duration, making small marks in the margin.
He consults his map and for the next few days he follows the routes she has charted for
him with a pencil. He wanders for miles along the famous boulevards, through the
Marais, arriving after many wrong turns at the Picasso Museum. He sits on a bench and
sketches the town houses in the Place des Vosges, walks along the desolate gravel
paths in the Luxembourg Gardens. Outside the Academie des Beaux-Arts he wanders
for hours through the shops selling prints, eventually buying a drawing of the Hôtel de
Lauzun. He photographs the narrow sidewalks, the dark cobblestone streets, the
mansard roofs, the ancient, shuttered buildings of pale beige stone. All of it he finds
beautiful beyond description, and yet at the same time it depresses him that none of it is
new to Moushumi, that she has seen it all hundreds of times. He understands why she
lived here for as long as she did, away from her family, away from anyone she knew.
Her French friends adore her. Waiters and shopkeepers adore her. She both fits in
perfectly yet remains slightly novel. Here Moushumi had reinvented herself, without
misgivings, without guilt. He admires her, even resents her a little, for having moved to
another country and made a separate life. He realizes that this is what their parents had
done in America. What he, in all likelihood, will never do.
On their last day, in the morning, he shops for gifts for his in-laws, his mother, Sonia. It
is the day Moushumi is presenting her paper. He had offered to go with her, to sit in the
audience and listen to her speak. But she told him that was silly, why sit in the middle of
a roomful of people speaking a language he doesn't understand when there was still
more of the city he could see? And so, after shopping, he sets off, alone, for the Louvre,
a destination he's put off until now. At the end of the day he meets her at a café in the
Latin Quarter. She is there waiting for him behind a glassed-in partition on the sidewalk,
wearing a dark red lipstick, sipping a glass of wine.
He sits down, orders a coffee. "How was it? How did it go?"
She lights a cigarette. "Okay. Over with, at any rate."
She looks more regretful than relieved, her eyes lingering over the small round table
between them, the veins in the marble bluish, like those in cheese.
Normally she wants a full account of his adventures, but today they sit silently, watching
the passers-by. He shows her the things he's bought, a tie for his father-in-law, soaps
for their mothers, a shirt for Samrat, a silk scarf for Sonia, sketchbooks for himself,
bottles of ink, a pen. She admires the drawings he's done. It is a café they've been to
before, and he feels the slight nostalgia it is sometimes possible to feel at the end of an
extended stay in a foreign place, taking in the details that will soon evaporate from his
mind: the surly waiter who has served them both times, the view of the shops across the
street, the green and yellow straw chairs.
"Are you sad to be leaving?" he asks, stirring sugar into his coffee, drinking it back in
one gulp.
"A little. I guess a little part of me wishes I'd never left Paris, you know?"
He leans over, takes both her hands in his. "But then we would never have met," he
says, with more confidence than he feels.
"True," she acknowledges. And then: "Maybe we'll move here one day."
He nods. "Maybe."
She looks beautiful to him, tired, the concentrated light of the dying day on her face,
infusing it with an amber-pink glow. He watches the smoke drift away from her. He
wants to remember this moment, the two of them together, here. This is how he wants
to remember Paris. He takes out his camera, focusing it on her face.
"Nikhil, please, don't," she says, laughing, shaking her head. "I look awful." She shields

her face with the back of her hand.
He still holds up the camera. "Oh, come on, Mo. You're beautiful. You look great."
But she refuses to indulge him, moving her chair out of view with a scrape on the
pavement; she doesn't want to be mistaken for a tourist in this city, she says.

A Saturday evening in May. A dinner party in Brooklyn. A dozen people are gathered
around a long, scratched-up dining table, smoking cigarettes, drinking Chianti from juice
glasses, sitting on a series of backless wooden stools. The room is dark apart from a
domed metal lamp hanging from a long cord, which casts a concentrated pool of light on
the table's center. An opera plays on a battered boom box on the floor. A joint is being
passed around. Gogol takes a hit, but as he sits there, holding his breath, he regrets
it—he is already starved. Though it's close to ten o'clock, dinner has yet to be served.
Apart from the Chianti, the only offerings so far are a loaf of bread and a small bowl of
olives. A blizzard of crumbs and pointy violet olive pits litter the tabletop. The bread, like
a hard, dusty cushion, is full of prune-sized holes and has a crust that hurts the roof of
Gogol's mouth when he chews.
They are at the home of Moushumi's friends Astrid and Donald. It's a brownstone under
renovation; Astrid and Donald, expecting their first child, are in the process of expanding
their domain from a single floor of the house to the top three. Thick plastic sheets hang
from rafters, creating transparent, temporary corridors. Behind them, a wall is missing.
Even at this hour, guests continue to arrive. They enter complaining of the cold that has
persisted this far into spring, of the stinging, bothersome wind that tosses the treetops
outside. They remove their coats, introduce themselves, pour themselves Chianti. If it
happens to be their first time in the house they eventually drift from the table and troop
up the stairs, to admire the pocket doors, the original tin ceilings, the vast space that will
eventually become the nursery, the distant, sparkling view of Manhattan visible from the
top floor.
Gogol has been to the house before, a bit too frequently in his opinion. Astrid is a friend
of Moushumi's from Brown. The first time he'd met Donald and Astrid had been at his
wedding. At least that's what Moushumi says; he doesn't remember them. They were
living in Rome the first year that Gogol and Moushumi were together, on a Guggenheim
that Astrid had gotten. But they've since moved back to New York, where Astrid has
begun teaching film theory at the New School. Donald is a moderately talented painter
of small still lifes of single, everyday objects: an egg, a cup, a comb, suspended against
brightly colored backgrounds. Donald's rendition of a spool of thread, a wedding present
to Gogol and Moushumi, hangs in their bedroom. Donald and Astrid are a languidly
confident couple, a model, Gogol guesses, for how Moushumi would like their own lives
to be. They reach out to people, hosting dinner parties, bequeathing little bits of
themselves to their friends. They are passionate spokespeople for their brand of life,
giving Gogol and Moushumi a steady, unquestionable stream of advice about quotidian
things. They swear by a certain bakery on Sullivan Street, a certain butcher on Mott, a
certain style of coffeemaker, a certain Florentine designer of sheets for their bed. Their
decrees drive Gogol crazy. But Moushumi is loyal. She regularly goes out of her way,
and thus out of their budget, to buy bread at that bakery, meat at that butcher.
He recognizes a few familiar faces tonight: Edith and Colin, who teach sociology at
Princeton and Yale, respectively, and Louise and Blake, both Ph.D. candidates, like
Moushumi, at NYU. Oliver is an editor at an art magazine; his wife, Sally, works as a
pastry chef. The rest are painter friends of Donald's, poets, documentary filmmakers.
They are all married. Even now, a fact as ordinary, as obvious, as this astonishes him.
All married! But this is life now, the weekend sometimes more tiring than the workweek,
an endless stream of dinner parties, cocktail parties, occasional after-eleven parties with
dancing and drugs to remind them that they are still young, followed by Sunday
brunches full of unlimited Bloody Marys and overpriced eggs.
They are an intelligent, attractive, well-dressed crowd. Also a bit incestuous. The vast

majority of them know each other from Brown, and Gogol can't ever shake the feeling
that half the people in the room have slept with one another. There is the usual
academic talk around the table, versions of the same conversation he can't participate
in, concerning conferences, job listings, ungrateful undergraduates, proposal deadlines.
At one end of the table, a woman with short red hair and cat's-eye glasses is talking
about a Brecht play she'd once acted in in San Francisco, performed fully in the nude.
At the other end, Sally is putting the finishing touches on a dessert she's brought, in
tently assembling layers and covering them with glistening white meringue that shoots
up like a dense thicket of flames. Astrid is showing a few people paint chips, which
she's lined up in front of her like tarot cards, versions of an apple green she and Donald
are considering for the front hallway. She wears glasses that might have belonged to
Malcolm X. She eyes the paint chips with precision; though she seeks the advice of her
guests, she has already made up her mind about which permutation of the shade she
will choose. To Gogol's left, Edith is discussing her reasons for not eating bread. "I just
have so much more energy if I stay off wheat," she maintains.
Gogol has nothing to say to these people. He doesn't care about their dissertation
topics, or their dietary restrictions, or the color of their walls. In the beginning these
occasions hadn't been quite so excruciating. When Moushumi had first introduced him
to her crowd he and she would sit with their arms around each other, their fellow guests
a footnote to their own ongoing conversation. Once, at a party at Sally and Oliver's,
they'd wandered off to make quick, giddy love in Sally's walkin closet, piles of her
sweaters looming over them. He knows that that sort of insular passion can't be
sustained. Still, Moushumi's devotion to these people puzzles him. He looks at her now.
She is lighting a Dunhill. Her smoking hadn't bothered him initially. He liked it, after sex,
when she'd lean over the bedside table and strike a match, and he would lie beside her,
listening to her exhale in the quiet, watching the smoke drift up over their heads. But
these days the stale smell of it, in her hair and on her fingertips, and in the bedroom
where she sits typing, slightly disgusts him, and from time to time he can't help but have
a fleeting vision of himself, tragically abandoned as a result of her mild but persistent
addiction. When he'd admitted his fear to her one day, she'd laughed. "Oh, Nikhil," she'd
said, "you can't be serious."
She is laughing now, nodding intently at something Blake is saying. She seems
animated in a way he doesn't remember her having been in a while. He looks at her
straight, smooth hair, which she's had cut recently so that it flips up at the ends. The
glasses that only emphasize her beauty. Her pale, pretty mouth. He knows that the
approval of these people means something to her, though what exactly he isn't sure.
And yet, as much as Moushumi enjoys seeing Astrid and Donald, Gogol has recently
begun to notice that she is gloomy in the aftermath, as if seeing them serves only to
remind her that their own lives will never match up. The last time they'd gone home after
one of Astrid and Donald's dinner parties, she'd picked a fight with him as soon as
they'd walked in the door, complaining about the noise on Third Avenue, about the
sliding doors on the closets that always fall off the rails, about the fact that it's
impossible to use the bathroom without being deafened by the exhaust fan. He tells
himself that it's the stress—she's been studying for her orals, holed up in her carrel at
the library until nine o'clock most nights. He remembers how it was studying for his
licensing exam, which he failed twice before passing. He remembers the sustained
isolation it had demanded, speaking to no one for days at a time, and so he doesn't say
anything. Tonight he'd held out the hope that she'd use her orals as a reason to decline
the invitation to Astrid and Donald's. But by now he's learned that there is never a
question of saying no when it comes to them.
It was through Astrid and Donald that Moushumi had met her former fiancé, Graham;
Donald had gone to prep school with him, and he had given Moushumi's number to
Graham when he'd moved to Paris. Gogol doesn't like to think about the fact that
Moushumi's connection to Graham persists through Astrid and Donald, that through
them Moushumi has learned that Graham lives in Toronto now, is married and a father
of twins. Back when Moushumi and Graham were together they'd made a foursome

with Donald and Astrid, renting cottages together in Vermont, time-shares in the
Hamptons. They try to incorporate Gogol into similar plans; this summer, for example,
they are thinking of renting a house on the coast of Brittany. Though Astrid and Donald
have welcomed Gogol heartily into their lives, sometimes he has the feeling they still
think she's with Graham. Once Astrid even called him Graham by mistake. No one had
noticed except Gogol. They had all been a little drunk, but he knew he'd heard correctly,
toward the end of an evening much like this one. "Mo, why don't you and Graham take
some of this pork loin home," Astrid had said as they'd been clearing the dishes. "It's
great for sandwiches."
At the moment, the guests are united in a single topic of conversation, talking about
names for the baby. "What we want is something totally unique," Astrid is saying. Lately
Gogol has started to notice a trend: now that they inhabit this world of couples, dinner
party small talk gravitates to the naming of children. If a woman at the table happens to
be pregnant, as Astrid is now, the subject is inevitable.
"I always liked the names of popes," Blake says.
"You mean John and Paul?" Louise asks.
"More like Innocent and Clement."
There are nonsensical names, like Jet and Tipper. These elicit groans. Someone claims
to have once known a girl named Anna Graham—"Get it? Anagram!"—and everyone
laughs.
Moushumi argues that a name like hers is a curse, complains that no one can say it
properly, that the kids at school pronounced it Moosoomi and shortened it to Moose. "I
hated being the only Moushumi I knew," she says.
"See now, I'd have loved that," Oliver tells her.
Gogol pours himself another juice glass of Chianti. He hates contributing to these
conversations, hates listening. A number of name books are passed around the table:
Finding the Perfect Name, Alternative Baby Names, The Idiot's Guide to Naming Your
Baby. One is called What Not to Name Your Baby. Pages are folded down, some with
stars and checks in the margins. Someone suggests Zachary. Someone else says she
once had a dog named Zachary. Everyone wants to look up his or her own name to see
what it means, is by turns pleased and disappointed. Both Gogol and Moushumi are
absent from these books, and for the first time all evening he feels a hint of that odd
bond that had first drawn them together. He goes over to where she's sitting, takes one
of her hands, which have been resting flat on the surface of the table, her arms
extended. She turns to look at him.
"Hey there," she says. She smiles at him, temporarily leaning her head on his shoulder,
and he realizes that she's drunk.
"What does Moushumi mean?" Oliver asks on the other side of her.
"A damp southwesterly breeze," she says, shaking her head, rolling her eyes.
"Sort of like the one outside?"
"I always knew you were a force of nature," Astrid says, laughing.
Gogol turns to Moushumi. "Really?" he says. He realizes that it's something he'd never
thought to ask about her, something he hadn't known.
"You never told me that," he says.
She shakes her head, confused. "I haven't?"
It bothers him, though he's not quite sure why. But it's not the time to dwell on it. Not in
the middle of all this. He gets up to go to the bathroom. When he is finished, instead of
returning to the dining room, he walks up a flight of stairs, to check out the renovations.
He pauses at the doors to a series of whitewashed rooms with nothing but ladders in
them. Others are filled with boxes, stacked six or seven deep. He stops to inspect some
blueprints spread out on the floor. He remembers that when he and Moushumi were first
dating they'd spent an entire afternoon, in a bar, drawing a plan of the ideal house. He'd
argued for something modernist, full of glass and light, but she'd wanted a brownstone
like this one. In the end they'd designed something implausible, a town house of poured

concrete with a glass facade. It was before they'd slept together, and he remembers
how they'd both grown embarrassed when deciding where the bedroom should go.
He ends up in the kitchen, where Donald is only now beginning to prepare spaghetti alle
vongole. It's an old kitchen from one of the former rental units, which they're using until
their new one is ready. Dingy linoleum and appliances lining a single wall remind Gogol
of his former place on Amsterdam Avenue. On the stove is an empty, gleaming
stainless-steel stockpot so large that it covers two burners. Salad leaves are in a bowl
covered with dampened paper towels. A heap of tiny pale green clams no larger than
quarters soak in the deep porcelain sink.
Donald is tall, wearing jeans and flip-flops and a paprika-colored shirt whose sleeves
are rolled up to just above his elbows. He is handsome, with patrician features and
swept-back, slightly greasy, light brown hair. He wears an apron over his clothes, and is
busily plucking leaves from an excessively large bunch of parsley.
"Hey there," Gogol says. "Need any help?"
"Nikhil. Welcome." Donald hands over the parsley. "Be my guest."
Gogol is grateful for something to do, to be occupied and productive, even in the role of
sous-chef to Donald.
"So, how are the renovations going?"
"Don't ask," Donald says. "We just fired our contractor. At this rate our kid will already
have moved out by the time the nursery's ready."
Gogol watches as Donald begins to remove the clams from their bath, scrubbing the
shells with something that looks like a tiny toilet bowl brush, then tossing them one by
one into the stockpot. Gogol pokes his head into the pot and sees the vongole, their
shells uniformly parted in a quietly foaming broth.
"So when are you guys moving out to this neighborhood?" Donald asks.
Gogol shrugs. He has no interest in moving to Brooklyn, not in such proximity to Donald
and Astrid, anyway. "I haven't really considered it. I prefer Manhattan. Moushumi does
too."
Donald shakes his head. "You're wrong. Moushumi adores Brooklyn. We practically had
to kick her out after the whole Graham thing."
The mention of the name pricks him, deflates him as it always does.
"She stayed here with you?"
"Right down the hall. She was here for a couple of months. She was a real mess. I've
never seen anyone so devastated."
He nods. This was something else she'd never told him. He wonders why. He hates the
house suddenly, aware that it was here, with Donald and Astrid, that she spent her
darkest hour. That it was here she'd mourned for another man.
"But you're much better for her," Donald concludes.
Gogol looks up, surprised.
"Don't get me wrong, Graham's a great guy. But they were too alike somehow, too
intense together."
Gogol does not find this observation particularly reassuring. He finishes plucking the
last of the parsley leaves, watches as Donald grabs a knife and chops them, expertly
and swiftly, a hand held flat over the top of the blade.
Gogol feels incompetent all of a sudden. "I've never quite figured out how to do that," he
says.
"All you need is a really good knife," Donald tells him. "I swear by these."
Gogol is sent off with a stack of plates, a bunch of forks and knives. On his way he
pokes his head into the room down the hall where Moushumi had stayed. It's empty
now, a drop cloth on the floor, a tangle of wires poking out of the center of the ceiling.
He imagines her in a bed in the corner, sullen, emaciated, a cloud of smoke over her
head. Downstairs, he takes his place beside Moushumi. She kisses his earlobe. "Where
did you wander off to?"
"Just keeping Donald company."

The name conversation is still going full force. Colin says he likes names that signify a
virtue: Patience, Faith, Chastity. He says his great-grandmother was named Silence,
something nobody wants to believe.
"What about Prudence? Isn't Prudence one of the virtues?" Donald says, coming down
the stairs with a platter of spaghetti. The platter is lowered onto the table to scattered
applause. The pasta is served, the plates passed around.
"It just feels like such a huge responsibility to name a baby. What if he hates it," Astrid
frets.
"So he'll change it," Louise says. "By the way. Remember Joe Chapman from college? I
heard he's a Joanne now."
"God, I would never change my name," Edith says. "It's my grandmother's."
"Nikhil changed his," Moushumi blurts out suddenly, and for the first time all evening,
with the exception of the opera singers, the room goes completely quiet.
He stares at her, stunned. He has never told her not to tell anyone. He simply assumed
she never would. His expression is lost on her; she smiles back at him, unaware of what
she's done. The dinner guests regard him, their mouths hanging open in confused
smiles.
"What do you mean he changed his name?" Blake asks slowly.
"Nikhil. It wasn't the name he was born with." She nods, her mouth full, tossing a
clamshell onto the table. "Not his name when we were kids."
"What name were you born with?" Astrid says, looking at him suspiciously, her
eyebrows furrowed for effect.
For a few seconds he says nothing. "Gogol," he says finally. It has been years since
he's been Gogol to anyone other than his family, their friends. It sounds as it always
does, simple, impossible, absurd. He stares at Moushumi as he says it, but she's too
drunk to absorb his reproach.
"As in 'The Overcoat'?" Sally asks.
"I get it," Oliver says. "Nick-olai Gogol."
"I can't believe you've kept this from us, Nick," Astrid chides.
"What in the world made your parents choose that name?" Donald wants to know.
He thinks back to the story he cannot bring himself to tell these people, at once as vivid
and as elusive as it's always been: the capsized train in the middle of the night, his
father's arm sticking through a window, the crumpled page of a book clutched in his fist.
It's a story he'd told Moushumi, in the months after they'd first met. He'd told her of the
accident, and then he'd told her about the night his father had told him, in the driveway
at Pemberton Road. He'd confessed to her that he still felt guilty at times for changing
his name, more so now that his father was dead. And she'd assured him that it was
understandable, that anyone in his place would have done the same. But now it's
become a joke to her. Suddenly he regrets having ever told Moushumi; he wonders
whether she'll proclaim the story of his father's accident to the table as well. By morning,
half the people in the room will have forgotten. It will be a tiny, odd fact about him, an
anecdote, perhaps, for a future dinner party. This is what upsets him most.
"My father was a fan," he says finally.
"Then maybe we should call the baby Verdi," Donald muses, just as the opera surges to
its closing bars, and the tape ends with a click.
"You're not helping," Astrid says, petulant, kissing Donald on the nose. Gogol watches
them, knowing that it's all in jest—they're not the type to do something so impulsive, so
naive, to blunder, as his own parents had done.
"Relax," Edith says. "The perfect name will come to you in time."
Which is when Gogol announces, "There's no such thing."
"No such thing as what?" Astrid says.
"There's no such thing as a perfect name. I think that human beings should be allowed
to name themselves when they turn eighteen," he adds. "Until then, pronouns."
People shake their heads dismissively. Moushumi shoots him a look that he ignores.

The salad is served. The conversation takes a new turn, carries on without him. And yet
he can't help but recall a novel he'd once picked up from the pile on Moushumi's side of
the bed, an English translation of something French, in which the main characters were
simply referred to, for hundreds of pages, as He and She. He had read it in a matter of
hours, oddly relieved that the names of the characters were never revealed. It had been
an unhappy love story. If only his own life were so simple.

10
1999
On the morning of their first anniversary, Moushumi's parents call, waking them, wishing
them a happy anniversary before they've had the chance to say it to each other. In
addition to their anniversary, there is something else to celebrate: Moushumi
successfully passed her orals the week before, is now officially ABD. There's a third
thing worth celebrating but which she hasn't mentioned—she's been awarded a
research fellowship to work on her dissertation in France for the year. She'd applied for
the grant secretly, just before the wedding, simply curious to see if she'd get it. It was
always good practice, she'd reasoned, to strive for such things. Two years ago she
would have said yes on the spot. But it's no longer possible to fly off to France for the
year, now that she has a husband, a marriage, to consider. So when the good news
came she decided it was easier to decline the fellowship quietly, to file away the letter,
not to bring it up.
She's taken the initiative for the evening, making reservations at a place in midtown,
which Donald and Astrid have recommended. She feels a bit guilty for all these months
of studying, aware that with her exams as an excuse, she has ignored Nikhil perhaps
more than necessary. There were nights that she told him she was at her carrel in the
library when really she'd met Astrid and her baby, Esme, in SoHo, or gone for a walk by
herself. Sometimes she would sit at a restaurant alone, at the bar, ordering sushi or a
sandwich and a glass of wine, simply to remind herself that she was still capable of
being on her own. This assurance is important to her; along with the Sanskrit vows
she'd repeated at her wedding, she'd privately vowed that she'd never grow fully
dependent on her husband, as her mother has. For even after thirty-two years abroad,
in England and now in America, her mother does not know how to drive, does not have
a job, does not know the difference between a checking and a savings account. And yet
she is a perfectly intelligent woman, was an honors student in philology at Presidency
College before she was married off at twenty-two.
They've both dressed up for the occasion—when she emerges from the bathroom she
sees that he is wearing the shirt she's given him, moss-colored with a velvet Nehru
collar of slightly darker green. It was only after the salesman had wrapped it that she'd
remembered the rule about giving paper on the first anniversary. She considered saving
the shirt for Christmas, going to Rizzoli and buying him an architecture book instead.
But there hasn't been the time. She is wearing the black dress she'd worn the first time
he'd come to dinner, the first time they'd slept together, and over it, a lilac pashmina
shawl, Nikhil's anniversary present to her. She still remembers their very first date, liking
the slightly untamed look of his hair as he'd approached her at the bar, the dark pine
stubble on his cheeks, the shirt he'd worn with green stripes and thinner stripes of
lavender, the collar beginning to fray. She still remembers her bewilderment, looking up
from her book and seeing him, her heart skipping, feeling the attraction instantly,
powerfully, in her chest. For she had been expecting an older version of the boy she
remembered, distant, quiet, in corduroy jeans and a sweatshirt, a few pimples dotting
his chin. The day before the date, she'd had lunch with Astrid. "I just don't see you with
some Indian guy," Astrid had said dismissively over salads at City Bakery. At the time
Moushumi had not protested, maintaining apologetically that it was just one date. She'd
been deeply skeptical herself—apart from the young Shashi Kapoor and a cousin in
India, she had never until then found herself attracted to an Indian man. But she'd
genuinely liked Nikhil. She'd liked that he was neither a doctor nor an engineer. She'd
liked that he'd changed his name from Gogol to Nikhil; though she'd known him all those
years, it was a thing that made him somehow new, not the person her mother had
mentioned.
They decide to walk to the restaurant, thirty blocks north of their apartment, four blocks

west. Though it's dark already, the evening is pleasantly warm, so much so that she
hesitates under the awning of their building, wondering if the pashmina is necessary.
She has nowhere to put it, her evening bag is too small. She lets the shawl drop from
her shoulders, gathers it up in her hands.
"Maybe I should leave this upstairs."
"What if we want to walk back?" he says. "You'll probably need it then."
"I guess."
"It looks nice on you, by the way."
"Do you remember this dress?"
He shakes his head. She's disappointed but not surprised. By now she's learned that
his architect's mind for detail fails when it comes to everyday things. For example, he
had not bothered to hide the receipt for the shawl, leaving it, along with change emptied
from his pocket, on top of the bureau they share. She can't really blame him for not
remembering. She herself can no longer remember the exact date of that evening. It
had been a Saturday in November. But now those landmarks in their courtship have
faded, have given way to the occasion they are now celebrating.
They walk up Fifth Avenue, past the stores that sell Oriental carpets, unfurled in
illuminated windows. Past the public library. Instead of proceeding to the restaurant,
they decide to wander up the sidewalk for a while; there are still twenty minutes before
their reservation. Fifth Avenue is eerily uncluttered, only a handful of people and cabs in
a neighborhood usually choked with shoppers and tourists. She comes here seldom,
only to buy make-up at Bendel's, or to see the odd movie at the Paris, and once, with
Graham and his father and stepmother, to have drinks at the Plaza. They walk past the
windows of closed shops displaying watches, luggage, trench coats. A pair of turquoise
sandals causes Moushumi to stop. The shoes are arranged on a Lucite pedestal,
glowing under a spotlight, the gladiator-style straps festooned with rhinestones.
"Ugly or beautiful?" she asks him. It is a question she poses to him often, as they leaf
together through apartments featured in Architectural Digest or the design section of the
Times magazine. Often his answers surprise her, convincing her to appreciate an object
she would have otherwise dismissed.
"I'm pretty certain they're ugly. But I would have to see them on."
"I agree. Guess how much they cost," she says.
"Two hundred dollars."
"Five. Can you believe it? I saw them featured in Vogue."
She begins to walk away. After a few paces she turns back and sees that he's still
standing there, bent down to see if there's a price tag on the bottom of the shoe. There
is something at once innocent and irreverent about the gesture, and she is reminded,
forcefully, of why she still loves him. It reminds her of how grateful she'd felt when he'd
reappeared in her life. By the time she'd met him she'd begun to fear that she was
retreating into her former self, before Paris—untouched, bookish, alone. She recalled
the panic she'd felt, all her friends married. She'd even considered placing a personal
ad. But he had accepted her, had obliterated her former disgrace. She believed that he
would be incapable of hurting her as Graham had. After years of clandestine
relationships, it felt refreshing to court in a fish-bowl, to have the support of her parents
from the very start, the inevitability of an unquestioned future, of marriage, drawing them
along. And yet the familiarity that had once drawn her to him has begun to keep her at
bay. Though she knows it's not his fault, she can't help but associate him, at times, with
a sense of resignation, with the very life she had resisted, had struggled so mightily to
leave behind. He was not who she saw herself ending up with, he had never been that
person. Perhaps for those very reasons, in those early months, being with him, falling in
love with him, doing precisely what had been expected of her for her entire life, had felt
forbidden, wildly transgressive, a breach of her own instinctive will.
They can't find the restaurant at first. Though they have the exact address, written on a
slip of folded paper in Moushumi's evening bag, it leads them only to a suite of offices in
a town house. They press the buzzer, peer through the glass door into the empty,

carpeted foyer, at a big vase of flowers at the foot of the stairs.
"It can't be this," she says, putting her hands up to the glass, shielding either side of her
face in order to block out the glare.
"Are you sure you wrote down the address right?" Gogol asks.
They wander partway up and down the block, look on the other side. They return to the
town house, looking up at the darkened windows for signs of life.
"There it is," he says, noticing a couple emerging from a basement door below the
steps. There, in an entryway lit by a single sconce, they find a plaque nailed discreetly
into the facade of the building bearing the restaurant's name, Antonia. A small fleet
gathers to welcome them, to tick their names off a list at a podium, to lead them to their
table. The fuss feels unwarranted as they step into a stark, sunken dining room. The
atmosphere is somber, vaguely abandoned, as the streets had been. There is a family
eating after the theater, she guesses, the two small daughters in absurdly fancy dresses
with petticoats and large lacy collars. There are a few wealthy-looking middle-aged
couples in suits. A well-dressed elderly gentleman is dining alone. She finds it
suspicious that there are so many empty tables, that no music plays. She'd been hoping
for something more bustling, warmer. Given that it's subterranean, the place seems
surprisingly vast, the ceilings high. The air-conditioning is too strong, chilling her bare
legs and arms. She wraps the pashmina tightly around her shoulders.
"I'm freezing. Do you think they'd turn down the AC if I asked?"
"I doubt that. Would you like my jacket?" Nikhil offers.
"No, it's okay." She smiles at him. And yet she feels uncomfortable, depressed. She is
depressed by the pair of teenaged Bangladeshi busboys who wear tapestry waistcoats
and black trousers, serving them warm bread with silver tongs. It annoys her that the
waiter, perfectly attentive, looks neither of them in the eye as he describes the menu,
speaking instead to the bottle of mineral water positioned between them. She knows it's
too late to change their plans now. But even after they place their order, a part of her
has a nagging urge, feels like standing up, leaving. She had done something similar a
few weeks ago, sitting in the chair of an expensive hair salon, walking out after the
apron had been tied behind her neck, while the stylist had gone to check on another
client, simply because something about the stylist's manner, the bored expression on
her face as she'd lifted a lock of Moushumi's hair and studied it in the mirror, had felt
insulting. She wonders what Donald and Astrid like about this place, decides it must be
the food. But when it arrives, it too disappoints her. The meal, served on square white
plates, is fussily arranged, the portions microscopically small. As usual they trade plates
partway through the meal, but this time she doesn't like the taste of his so she sticks to
her own. She finishes her entree of scallops too quickly, sits for a very long time, it
seems, watching Nikhil work his way through his quail.
"We shouldn't have come here," she says suddenly, frowning.
"Why not?" He looks approvingly around the room. "It's nice enough."
"I don't know. It's not what I thought it would be."
"Let's just enjoy ourselves."
But she is not able to enjoy herself. As they near the end of the meal, it occurs to her
that she is neither very drunk nor full. In spite of two cocktails and the bottle of wine
they'd shared she feels distressingly sober. She looks at the hair-thin quail bones Nikhil
has discarded on his plate and is faintly repulsed, wishing he'd finish so that she could
light her after-dinner cigarette.
"Madam, your shawl," one of the busboys says, picking it up from the floor and handing
it to her.
"Sorry," she says, feeling clumsy, unkempt. Then she notices that her black dress is
coated with lilac fibers. She brushes at the material, but the fibers cling stubbornly, like
cat hair.
"What's the matter?" Nikhil asks, looking up from his plate.
"Nothing," she says, not wanting to hurt his feelings, to find fault with his costly gift.

They are the last of the diners to leave. It's been wildly expensive, far more than they'd
expected. They put down a credit card. Watching Nikhil sign the receipt, she feels
cheap all of a sudden, irritated that they have to leave such a generous tip though there
had been no real reason to fault the waiter's performance. She notices that a number of
tables have already been cleared, chairs placed upside down on their surfaces.
"I can't believe they're already stripping the tables."
He shrugs. "It's late. They probably close early on Sundays."
"You'd think they could wait for us to leave," she says. She feels a lump form in her
throat, tears filming her eyes.
"Moushumi, what's wrong? Is there something you want to talk about?"
She shakes her head. She doesn't feel like explaining. She wants to be home, crawl
into bed, put the evening behind her. Outside, she's relieved that it's drizzling, so that
instead of walking back to the apartment as they'd planned they can hail a cab.
"Are you sure nothing's wrong?" he says as they are riding home. He's beginning to
lose patience with her, she can tell.
"I'm still hungry," she says, looking out the window, at the restaurants still open at this
hour—brashly lit diners with specials scrawled on paper plates, cheap calzone places
with sawdust-coated floors, the type of restaurants she would never think to enter
normally but which look suddenly enticing. "I could eat a pizza."

Two days later, a new semester begins. It's Moushumi's eighth semester at NYU. She is
finished with classes, will never in her life take a class again. Never again will she sit for
an exam. This fact delights her—finally, a formal emancipation from studenthood.
Though she still has a dissertation to write, still has an adviser to monitor her progress,
she feels unmoored already, somehow beyond the world that has defined and
structured and limited her for so long. This is the third time she's taught the class.
Beginning French, Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, a total of three hours a week.
All she's had to do is look ahead in her calendar and change the date of the class
meetings. Her biggest effort will be to learn her students' names. She is always flattered
when they assume she herself is French, or half-French. She enjoys their looks of
disbelief when she tells them she is from New Jersey, born to Bengali parents.
Moushumi's been given an eight A.M. section, something that had annoyed her at first.
But now that she's up, showered, dressed, walking down the street, a latte from the deli
on their block in one hand, she's invigorated. Being out at this hour al ready feels like an
accomplishment. When she'd left the apartment, Nikhil had still been asleep,
undisturbed by the persistent beeping of the alarm. The night before, she'd laid out her
clothes, her papers, something she had not done since she was a girl preparing for
school. She likes walking through the streets so early, had liked rising by herself in
semidarkness, liked the sense of promise it lent the day. It's a pleasant change from
their usual routine—Nikhil showered, in his suit, flying out the door as she's just pouring
herself a first cup of coffee. She's thankful not to have to face her desk in the corner of
their bedroom first thing, surrounded as it is by sacks full of dirty clothes they keep
meaning to drop off at the laundry but get around to only once a month, when buying
new socks and underwear becomes necessary. Moushumi wonders how long she will
live her life with the trappings of studenthood in spite of the fact that she is a married
woman, that she's as far along in her studies as she is, that Nikhil has a respectable if
not terribly lucrative job. It would have been different with Graham—he'd made more
than enough money for the both of them. And yet that, too, had been frustrating,
causing her to fear that her career was somehow an indulgence, unnecessary. Once
she has a job, a real full-time tenure-track job, she reminds herself, things will be
different. She imagines where that first job might take her, assumes it will be in some
far-flung town in the middle of nowhere. Sometimes she jokes with Nikhil about their
having to pick up and move, in a few years, to Iowa, to Kalama-zoo. But they both know
it's out of the question for him to leave New York, that she will be the one to fly back and

forth on weekends. There is something appealing to her about this prospect, to make a
clean start in a place where no one knows her, as she had done in Paris. It's the one
thing about her parents' lives she truly admires—their ability, for better or for worse, to
turn their back on their homes.
As she approaches the department she sees that something is wrong. An ambulance is
parked on the sidewalk, the doors at the back flung open. Static crackles from a
paramedic's walkie-talkie. She peeks into the ambulance as she crosses the street,
sees the resuscitative equipment but no people. The sight causes her to shudder
nevertheless. Upstairs, the hallway is crowded. She wonders who's hurt, whether it's a
student or a professor. She recognizes no one, only a group of bewildered-looking
freshmen bearing add-drop forms. "I think someone fainted," people are saying. "I have
no idea." A door opens and they are told to make way. She expects to see someone in
a wheelchair, is startled to see a body covered by a sheet, being carried out on a
stretcher. A number of onlookers cry out in alarm. Moushumi's hand goes to her mouth.
Half the crowd is looking down, away, shaking their heads. From the splayed feet at one
end of the stretcher, wearing a pair of beige flat-heeled shoes, she can tell that it's a
woman. From a professor, she learns what happened: Alice, the administrative
assistant, had fallen suddenly by the mailboxes. One minute she was sorting campus
mail, the next minute she was out cold. By the time the paramedics had arrived she was
dead from an aneurysm. She was in her thirties, unmarried, perpetually sipping herbal
tea. Moushumi had never been particularly fond of her. There had been a brittle quality
to her, something unyielding, a young person who carried about her a premonition of old
age.
Moushumi feels sick at the thought of it, of a death so sudden, of a woman so marginal
and yet so central to her world. She enters the office she shares with the other TAs,
empty now. She calls Nikhil at home, at work. No answer. She looks at her watch,
realizes he must be on the subway, on his way to work. Suddenly she's glad he's
unreachable—she's reminded of the way Nikhil's father had died, instantly, without
warning. Surely this would remind him of that. She has the urge to leave campus, return
to the apartment. But she has a class to teach in half an hour. She goes back to the
Xerox room to copy her syllabus and a short passage from Flaubert to translate in class.
She pushes the button to collate the syllabus but forgets to push the button for staples.
She searches in the supply closet for a stapler, and when she fails to find one, goes
instinctively to Alice's desk. The phone is ringing. A cardigan is draped over the back of
the chair. She opens up Alice's drawer, afraid to touch anything. She finds a stapler
behind paper clips and Sweet'N Low packets in the drawer. ALICE is written on masking
tape stuck to the top. The faculty mailboxes are still half-empty, the mail piled in a bin.
Moushumi goes to her mailbox to look for her class roster. Her box is empty, so she
roots through the bin for her mail. As she picks up each piece of mail, addressed to this
or that faculty member or TA, she begins putting it into the appropriate box, matching
name to name. Even after she's found her roster, she continues, completing the task
Alice left undone. The mindlessness soothes her nerves. As a child she always had a
knack for organization; she would take it upon herself to neaten closets and drawers,
not only her own but her parents' as well. She had organized the cutlery drawer, the
refrigerator. These self-appointed tasks would occupy her during quiet, hot days of her
summer vacation, and her mother would look on in disbelief, sipping watermelon
sherbet in front of the fan. There is just a handful of items left in the bin. She bends over
to pick them up. And then another name, a sender's name typed in the upper left-hand
corner of a business-sized envelope, catches her eye.
She takes the stapler and the letter and the rest of her things into her office. She shuts
the door, sits at her desk. The envelope is addressed to a professor of Comparative
Literature who teaches German as well as French. She opens the envelope. Inside she
finds a cover letter and a résumé. For a minute she simply stares at the name centered
at the top of the résumé, laser-printed in an elegant font. She remembers the name, of
course. The name alone, when she'd first learned it, had been enough to seduce her.
Dimitri Desjardins. He pronounced Desjardins the English way, the s's intact, and in

spite of her training in French this is how she still thinks of it. Underneath the name is an
address on West 164 th Street. He is looking for an adjunct position, teaching German
part-time. She reads through the résumé, learns exactly where he's been and what he's
done for the past decade. Travels in Europe. A job working with the BBC. Articles and
reviews published in Der Spiegel, Critical Inquiry. A Ph.D. in German literature from the
University of Heidelberg.
She had met him years ago, in her final months of high school. It was a period in which
she and two of her friends, in their eagerness to be college students, in desperation
over the fact that no one their own age was interested in dating them, would drive to
Princeton, loiter on the campus, browse in the college bookstore, do their homework in
buildings they could enter without an ID. Her parents had encouraged these
expeditions, believing she was at the library, or attending lectures—they hoped she
would go to Princeton for college, live with them at home. One day, as she and her
friends were sitting on the grass, they were invited to join a student coalition from the
university, a coalition protesting apartheid in South Africa. The group was planning a
march on Washington, calling for sanctions.
They took a chartered overnight bus to D.C. in order to be at the rally by early morning.
Each of them had lied to their parents, claiming to be sleeping over at one another's
homes. Everyone on the bus was smoking pot and listening to the same Crosby, Stills,
and Nash album continuously, on a tape player running on batteries. Moushumi had
been facing backward, leaning over and talking to her friends, who were in the two
seats behind her, and when she turned back around he was in the neighboring seat. He
seemed aloof from the rest of the group, not an actual member of the coalition,
somehow dismissive of it all. He was wiry, slight, with small, downward-sloping eyes
and an intellectual, ravaged-looking face that she found sexy though not handsome. His
hairline was already receding, his hair curly and fair. He needed a shave; his finger nails
needed paring. He was wearing a white button-down shirt, faded Levi's with threadbare
knees, pliable gold-framed spectacles that wrapped around his ears. Without
introducing himself he began talking to her, as if they were already acquainted. He was
twenty-seven, had gone to Williams College, was a student of European history. He was
taking a German course at Princeton now, living with his parents, both of whom taught
at the university, and he was going out of his mind. He had spent the years after college
traveling around Asia, Latin America. He told her he probably wanted to get a Ph.D.,
eventually. The randomness of all this had appealed to her. He asked her what her
name was and when she told him he had leaned toward her, cupping his ear, even
though she knew he had heard it perfectly well. "How in the world do you spell that?"
he'd asked, and when she told him, he mispronounced it, as most people did. She
corrected him, saying that "Mou" rhymed with "toe," but he shook his head and said, "I'll
just call you Mouse."
The nickname had irritated and pleased her at the same time. It made her feel foolish,
but she was aware that in renaming her he had claimed her somehow, already made
her his own. As the bus grew quiet, as everyone began to fall asleep, she had let him
lean his head against her shoulder. Dimitri was asleep, or so she thought. And so she
pretended to fall asleep too. After a while she felt his hand on her leg, on top of the
white denim skirt she was wearing. And then slowly, he began to unbutton the skirt.
Several minutes passed between his undoing of one button and the next, his eyes
closed all the while, his head still on her shoulder, as the bus hurtled down the empty,
dark highway. It was the first time in her life a man had touched her. She held herself
perfectly still. She was desperate to touch him too, but she was terrified. Finally Dimitri
opened his eyes. She felt his mouth near her ear, and she turned to him, prepared to be
kissed, at seventeen, for the very first time. But he had not kissed her. He had only
looked at her, and said, "You're going to break hearts, you know." And then he leaned
back, in his own seat this time, removed his hand from her lap, and closed his eyes
once again. She had stared at him in disbelief, angry that he assumed she hadn't
broken any hearts yet, and at the same time flattered. For the rest of the journey she
kept her skirt unbuttoned, hoping he would return to the task. But he didn't touch her

after that, and in the morning there was no acknowledgment of what had passed
between them. At the demonstration he had wandered off, paid her no attention. On the
way back they had sat apart.
Afterward she returned to the university every day to try to run into him. After some
weeks she saw him striding across campus, alone, holding a copy of The Man Without
Qualities. They shared some coffee and sat on a bench outside. He had asked her to
see a movie, Goddard's Alphaville, and to have Chinese food. She had worn an outfit
that still causes her to wince, an old blazer of her father's that was too long for her, over
jeans, the sleeves of the blazer rolled up as if it were a shirt, to reveal the striped lining
inside. It had been the first date of her life, strategically planned on an evening her
parents were at a party. She recalled nothing of the movie, had eaten nothing at the
restaurant, part of a small shopping complex off Route 1. And then, after watching
Dimitri eat both of their fortune cookies without reading either prediction, she had made
her error: she had asked him to be her date to her senior prom. He had declined, driven
her home, kissed her lightly on her cheek in the driveway, and then he never called her
again. The evening had humiliated her; he had treated her like a child. Sometime over
the summer she bumped into him at the movies. He was with a date, a tall freckled girl
with hair to her waist. Moushumi had wanted to flee, but he'd made a point of
introducing her to the girl. "This is Moushumi," Dimitri had said deliberately, as if he'd
been waiting for the opportunity to say her name for weeks. He told her he was going to
Europe for a while, and from the look on the date's face she realized that she was going
with him. Moushumi told him she'd been accepted at Brown. "You look great," he told
her when the date wasn't listening.
While she was at Brown, postcards would arrive from time to time, envelopes plastered
with colorful, oversized stamps. His handwriting was minuscule but sloppy, always
causing her eyes to strain. There was never a return address. For a time she carried
these letters in her book bag, to her classes, thickening her agenda. Periodically he sent
her books he'd read and thought she might like. A few times he called in the middle of
the night, waking her, and she spoke to him for hours in the dark, lying in bed in her
dorm room, then sleeping through her morning classes. A single call kept her sailing for
weeks. "I'll come visit you. I'll take you to dinner," he told her. He never did. Eventually
the letters tapered off. His last communication had been a box of books, along with
several postcards he'd written to her in Greece and Turkey but not managed to send at
the time. And then she'd moved to Paris.
She reads Dimitri's résumé again, then the cover letter. The letter reveals nothing other
than earnest pedagogical intent, mentions a panel Dimitri and the professor to whom it's
addressed attended some years ago. Practically the same letter exists in a file on her
computer. His third sentence is missing a period, which she now carefully inserts with
her finest-nibbed fountain pen. She can't bring herself to write down his address, though
she doesn't want to forget it. In the Xerox room, she makes a copy of the résumé. She
sticks it in the bottom of her bag. Then she types up a new envelope and puts the
original in the professor's mailbox. As she returns to her office, she realizes there's no
stamp or postmark on the new envelope, worries that the professor will suspect
something. But she reassures herself that Dimitri could easily have delivered the letter
personally; the idea of him standing in the department, occupying the same space she
occupies now, fills her with the same combination of desperation and lust he's always
provoked.
The hardest part is deciding where to write down the phone number, in what part of her
agenda. She wishes she had a code of some sort. In Paris she had briefly dated an
Iranian professor of philosophy who would write the names of his students in Persian on
the backs of index cards, along with some small, cruel detail to help him distinguish
among them. Once he read the cards to Moushumi. Bad skin, one said. Thick ankles,
said another. Moushumi can't resort to such trickery, can't write in Bengali. She barely
remembers how to write her own name, something her grandmother had once taught
her. Finally she writes it on the D page, but she doesn't include his name beside it. Just
the numbers, disembodied, don't feel like a betrayal. They could be anybody's. She

looks outside. As she sits down at her desk, her eye travels upward; the window in the
office reaches the top of the wall, so that the rooftop of the building across the street
stretches across the bottom edge of the sill. The view induces the opposite of vertigo, a
lurching feeling inspired not by gravity's pull to earth, but by the infinite reaches of
heaven.

At home that night, after dinner, Moushumi hunts among the shelves in the living room
she and Nikhil share. Their books have merged since they've gotten married, Nikhil had
unpacked them all, and nothing is where she expects it to be. Her eyes pass over
stacks of Nikhil's design magazines, thick books on Gropius and Le Corbusier. Nikhil,
bent over a blueprint at the dining table, asks what she's looking for.
"Stendhal," she tells him. It's not a lie. An old Modern Library edition of The Red and the
Black in English, inscribed to Mouse. Love Dimitri, he'd written. It was the one book he'd
inscribed to her. Back then it was the closest thing she'd ever had to a love letter; for
months she had slept with the book under her pillow, and later, slipped it between her
mattress and box spring. Somehow she managed to hold on to it for years; it's moved
with her from Providence to Paris to New York, a secret talisman on her shelves that
she would glance at now and again, still faintly flattered by his peculiar pursuit of her,
and always faintly curious as to what had become of him. But now that she's desperate
to locate the book she's convinced that it won't be in the apartment, that maybe Graham
had taken it by mistake when he'd moved out of their place on York Avenue, or that it's
in the basement of her parents' house, in one of the boxes she'd shipped there a few
years ago, when her shelves were getting too full. She doesn't remember packing it
from her old apartment, doesn't remember unpacking it when she and Nikhil moved in
together. She wishes she could ask Nikhil if he's seen it—a small green clothbound
book missing its dust jacket, the title embossed in a rectangle of black on the spine. And
then suddenly she sees it herself, sitting in plain view, on a shelf she'd scanned a
minute ago. She opens the book, sees the Modern Library emblem, the dashing, naked,
torch-bearing figure. She sees the inscription, the force of the ballpoint pen he'd used
slightly crimping the other side of the page. She'd abandoned the novel after the second
chapter. Her place is still marked by a yellowing receipt for shampoo. By now she's read
the book in French three times. She finishes Scott-Moncrieff's English translation within
days, reading it at her desk in the department, and in her carrel in the library. In the
evenings, at home, she reads it in bed until Nikhil comes in to join her—then she puts it
away and opens something else.

She calls him the following week. By then she's dug up the postcards, saved in an
unsealed, unmarked manila envelope in the box where she keeps her tax returns, and
read them, too, amazed that his words, the sight of his handwriting, still manage to
discombobulate her. She tells herself she's calling an old friend. She tells herself the
coincidence of finding his résumé, of stumbling upon him in this way, is too great, that
anyone in her position would pick up the phone and call. She tells herself he could very
well be married, as she is. Perhaps all four of them will go out to dinner, become great
friends. Still, she doesn't tell Nikhil about the résumé. One night in her office, after
seven o'clock when only a janitor roams the halls, after a few sips from the small bottle
of Maker's Mark she has stashed at the back of her file cabinet, she calls. A night Nikhil
thinks she's working on revisions for an article for PMLA.
She dials the number, listens as it rings four times. She wonders if he'll even remember
her. Her heart races. Her finger moves to the cradle, ready to press down.
"Hello?"
It's his voice. "Hi. Dimitri?"
"Speaking. Who's this?"
She pauses. She can still hang up if she wants. "It's Mouse."

They begin seeing each other Mondays and Wednesdays, after she teaches her class.
She takes the train uptown and they meet at his apartment, where lunch is waiting. The
meals are ambitious: poached fish; creamy potato gratins; golden, puffed chickens
roasted with whole lemons in their cavities. There is always a bottle of wine. They sit at
a table with his books and papers and laptop pushed to one side. They listen to WQXR,
drink coffee and cognac and smoke a cigarette afterward. Only then does he touch her.
Sunlight streams through large dirty windows into the shabby prewar apartment. There
are two spacious rooms, flaking plaster walls, scuffed parquet floors, towering stacks of
boxes he has not yet bothered to unpack. The bed, a brand-new mattress and box
spring on wheels, is never made. After sex they are always amazed to discover that the
bed has moved several inches away from the wall, pushing up against the bureau on
the other side of the room. She likes the way he looks at her when their limbs are still
tangled together, out of breath as if he'd been chasing her, his expression anxious
before relaxing into a smile. Some gray has come into Dimitri's hair and chest, some
lines around the mouth and eyes. He's heavier than before, his stomach undeniably
wide, so that his thin legs appear slightly comic. He recently turned thirty-nine. He has
not been married. He does not seem very desperate to be employed. He spends his
days cooking meals, reading, listening to classical music. She gathers that he has
inherited some money from his grandmother.
The first time they met, the day after she called him, at the bar of a crowded Italian
restaurant near NYU, they had not been able to stop staring at each other, not been
able to stop talking about the résumé, and the uncanny way it had fallen into
Moushumi's hands. He had moved to New York only a month ago, had tried to look her
up but the phone is listed under Nikhil's last name. It didn't matter, they agreed. It was
better this way. They drank glasses of prosecco. She agreed to an early dinner with
Dimitri that night, sitting at the bar of the restaurant, for the prosecco had gone quickly
to their heads. He had ordered a salad topped with warm lambs' tongue, a poached
egg, and pecorino cheese, something she swore she would not touch but ended up
eating the better part of. Afterward she'd gone into Balducci's to buy the pasta and
ready-made vodka sauce she would have at home with Nikhil.
On Mondays and Wednesdays no one knows where she is. There are no Bengali fruit
sellers to greet her on the walk from Dimitri's subway stop, no neighbors to recognize
her once she turns onto Dimitri's block. It reminds her of living in Paris—for a few hours
at Dimitri's she is inaccessible, anonymous. Dimitri is not terribly curious about Nikhil,
does not ask her his name. He expresses no jealousy. When she told him in the Italian
restaurant that she was married, his expression had not changed. He regards their time
together as perfectly normal, as destined, and she begins to see how easy it is.
Moushumi refers to Nikhil in conversation as "my husband": "My husband and I have a
dinner to go to next Thursday." "My husband's given me this cold."

At home, Nikhil suspects nothing. As usual they have dinner, talk of their days. They
clean up the kitchen together, then sit on the sofa and watch television while she
corrects her students' quizzes and exercises. During the eleven o'clock news, they have
bowls of Ben and Jerry's, then brush their teeth. As usual they get into bed, kiss, then
slowly they turn away from each other in order to stretch comfortably into sleep. Only
Moushumi stays awake. Each Monday and Wednesday night, she fears that he will
sense something, that he will put his arms around her and instantly know. She stays
awake for hours after they've turned out the lights, prepared to answer him, prepared to
lie to his face. She had gone shopping, she would tell him if he were to ask, for in fact
she had done this on her way home that first Monday, halting her journey back from
Dimitri's in midstream, getting out of the subway at 72d Street before continuing
downtown, stopping in a store she'd never been in, buying a pair of the most ordinarylooking black shoes.

One night it's worse than usual. It's three o'clock, then four. Construction work has been
taking place for the past few nights on their street, giant bins of rubble and concrete are
moved and crushed, and Moushumi feels angry at Nikhil for being able to sleep through
it. She's tempted to get up, pour herself a drink, take a bath, anything. But fatigue keeps
her in bed. She watches the shadows that the passing traffic throws onto their ceiling,
listens to a truck wailing in the distance like a solitary, nocturnal beast. She is convinced
she will be up to see the sun rise. But somehow she falls asleep again. She is woken
just after dawn by the sound of rain beating against the bedroom window, pelting it with
such ferocity that she almost expects the glass to shatter. She has a splitting headache.
She gets out of bed and parts the curtains, then returns to bed and shakes Nikhil
awake. "Look," she says, pointing at the rain, as if it were something truly extraordinary.
Nikhil obliges, fully asleep, sits upright, then closes his eyes again.
At seven-thirty she gets out of bed. The morning sky is clear. She walks out of the
bedroom and sees that rain has leaked through the roof, left an unsightly yellow patch
on the ceiling and puddles in the apartment: one in the bathroom, another in the front
hall. The sill of a window left open in the living room is soaked, streaked with mud, as
are the bills and books and papers piled on it. The sight of it makes her weep. At the
same time she's thankful that there's something tangible for her to be upset about.
"Why are you crying?" Nikhil asks, squinting at her in his pajamas.
"There are cracks in the ceiling," she says.
Nikhil looks up. "They're not too bad. I'll call the super."
"The rainwater came right through the roof."
"What rain?"
"Don't you remember? It was pouring rain at dawn. It was incredible. I woke you."
But Nikhil doesn't remember a thing.

A month of Mondays and Wednesdays passes. She begins to see him on Fridays as
well. One Friday she finds herself alone in Dimitri's apartment; he goes out as soon as
she arrives, to buy a stick of butter for a white sauce he is making to pour over trout.
Bartók plays on the stereo, expensive components scattered on the floor. She watches
him from the window, walking down the block, a small, balding, unemployed middleaged man, who is enabling her to wreck her marriage. She wonders if she is the only
woman in her family ever to have betrayed her husband, to have been unfaithful. This is
what upsets her most to admit: that the affair causes her to feel strangely at peace, the
complication of it calming her, structuring her day. After the first time, washing up in the
bathroom, she'd been horrified by what she'd done, at the sight of her clothes scattered
throughout the two rooms. Before leaving, she'd combed her hair in the bathroom
mirror, the only one in the apartment. She'd kept her head bent low, glancing up only
briefly at the end. When she did she saw that it was one of those mirrors that was for
some reason particularly flattering, due to some trick of the light or the quality of the
glass, causing her skin to glow.
There is nothing on Dimitri's walls. He is still living out of a series of mammoth duffel
bags. She is glad not to be able to picture his life in all its detail, its mess. The only
things he's set up are the kitchen, the stereo components, and some of his books. Each
time she visits, there are modest signs of progress. She wanders around his living
room, looks at the books he is beginning to organize on his plywood shelves. Apart from
all the German, their personal libraries are similar. There is the same lime green spine
of The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics. The same edition of Mimesis. The
same boxed set of Proust. She pulls out an oversized volume of photographs of Paris,
by Atget. She sits on an armchair, Dimitri's only piece of living room furniture. It was
here that she'd sat the first time she'd visited, and he'd stood behind her, massaging a
spot on her shoulder, arousing her, until she stood up, and they'd walked together to the
bed.
She opens up the book to regard the streets and the landmarks she once knew. She

thinks of her wasted fellowship. A large square of sunlight appears on the floor. The sun
is directly behind her, and the shadow of her head spreads across the thick, silken
pages, a few strands of her hair strangely magnified, quivering, as if viewed through a
microscope. She leans back her head, closes her eyes. When she opens them a
moment later the sun has slipped away, a lone sliver of it now diminishing into the
floorboards, like the gradual closing of a curtain, causing the stark white pages of the
book to turn gray. She hears Dimitri's footsteps on the stairs, then the clean sound of
his key in the lock, slicing sharply into the apartment. She gets up to put the book away,
searching for the gap in which it had stood.

11
Gogol wakes up late on a Sunday morning, alone, from a bad dream he cannot recall.
He looks over at Moushumi's side of the bed, at the untidy pile of her books and
magazines on the end table, the bottle of lavender room spray she likes to squirt
sometimes on their pillows, the tortoiseshell barrette with strands of her hair caught in
its clasp. She's at another conference this weekend, in Palm Beach. By tonight she'll be
home. She claimed she'd told him about the conference months ago, but he doesn't
remember. "Don't worry," she'd said as she was packing, "I won't be there long enough
to get a tan." But when he'd seen her bathing suit on top of the clothing on the bed, a
strange panic had welled up inside of him as he thought of her lying without him by a
hotel pool, her eyes closed, a book at her side. At least one of us isn't cold, he thinks to
himself now, crossing his arms tightly in front of his chest. Since yesterday afternoon
the building's boiler has been broken, turning the apartment into an icebox. Last night
he'd had to turn the oven on in order to tolerate being in the living room, and he'd worn
his old Yale sweatpants, a thick sweater over a T-shirt, and a pair of rag-wool socks to
bed. He throws back the comforter and the extra blanket he'd placed on top of it in the
middle of the night. He couldn't find the blanket at first, nearly called Moushumi at the
hotel to ask where she kept it. But by then it was nearly three in the morning, and so,
eventually, he'd hunted it down himself, found it wedged on the top shelf of the hall
closet, an unused wedding gift still in its zippered plastic case.
He gets out of bed, brushes his teeth with freezing-cold water from the tap, decides to
skip shaving. He pulls on jeans and an extra sweater, and Moushumi's bathrobe over
that, not caring how ridiculous he looks. He makes a pot of coffee, toasts some bread to
eat with butter and jam. He opens the front door and retrieves the Times, removing the
blue wrapper, putting it on the coffee table to read later. There is a drawing for work he
must complete by tomorrow, a cross section for a high school auditorium in Chicago. He
unrolls the plan from its tube and spreads it out on the dining table, securing the corners
with paperback books he grabs off the bookcase. He puts on his Abbey Road CD,
skipping ahead to the songs that would have been on side 2 of the album, and tries to
work on the drawing, making sure his measurements correspond to the principal
designer's notes. But his fingers are stiff and so he rolls up the plan, leaves a note for
Moushumi on the kitchen counter, and goes in to the office.
He's glad to have an excuse to be out of the apartment, instead of waiting for her, at
some point this evening, to return. It feels milder outside, the air pleasantly damp, and
instead of taking the train he walks the thirty blocks, up Park Avenue and over to
Madison. He is the only person at the office. He sits in the darkened drafting room,
surrounded by the desks of his coworkers, some piled with drawings and models, others
as neat as a pin. He crouches over his table, a single pool of light from a swinging metal
lamp illuminating the large sheet of paper. Tacked to the wall over his desk is a tiny
calendar showing the entire year, which is coming once again to a close. At the end of
the week, it will be the fourth anniversary of his father's death. Circled dates indicate all
his deadlines, past and future. Meetings, site visits, conferences with clients. A lunch
with an architect who's interested, possibly, in hiring him. He's eager to move to a
smaller firm, to have some domestic commissions, to work with fewer people. Next to
the calendar there is a postcard of a Duchamp painting he has always loved, of a
chocolate grinder that reminds him of a set of drums, suspended against a gray
background. Several Post-it notes. The photograph of his mother and Sonia and himself
at Fatehpur Sikri, salvaged from his father's refrigerator door in Cleveland. And next to
this, a picture of Moushumi, an old passport photo he'd found and asked to keep. She is
in her early twenties, her hair loose, her heavy-lidded eyes slightly lowered, looking to
one side. It was taken before he'd begun to date her, when she was living in Paris. A
time in her life in which he was still Gogol to her, a remnant from her past with little
likelihood of appearing in her future. And yet they had met; after all her adventures, it

was he whom she had married. He with whom she shared her life.
Last weekend was Thanksgiving. His mother and Sonia and Sonia's new boyfriend,
Ben, had come, along with Moushumi's parents and brother, and they had all celebrated
the holiday together in New York, crowded together in Gogol and Moushumi's
apartment. It was the first time he had not gone either to his parents' or to his in-laws'
for a holiday. It felt strange to be hosting, to assume the center of responsibility. They
had ordered a fresh turkey in advance from the farmers' market, planned the menu out
of Food & Wine, bought folding chairs so that everyone would have a place to sit.
Moushumi had gone out and bought a rolling pin, made an apple pie for the first time in
her life. For Ben's sake they had all spoken in English. Ben is half-Jewish, half-Chinese,
raised in Newton, close to where Gogol and Sonia grew up. He is an editor at the
Globe. He and Sonia met by chance, at a café on Newbury Street. Seeing them
together, sneaking into the hallway so that they could kiss freely, holding hands
discreetly as they sat at the table, Gogol had been oddly envious, and as they all sat
eating their turkey and roasted sweet potatoes and cornbread stuffing, and the spiced
cranberry chutney his mother had made, he looked at Moushumi and wondered what
was wrong. They didn't argue, they still had sex, and yet he wondered. Did he still make
her happy? She accused him of nothing, but more and more he sensed her distance,
her dissatisfaction, her distraction. But there had been no time to dwell on this worry.
The weekend had been exhausting, getting their various family members to the
apartments of nearby friends who were away and had given them keys. The day after
Thanksgiving they had all gone to Jackson Heights, to the halal butcher so that both
their mothers could stock up on goat meat, and then to brunch. And on Saturday there
had been a concert of classical Indian music up at Columbia. Part of him wants to bring
it up with her. "Are you happy you married me?" he would ask. But the fact that he is
even thinking of this question makes him afraid.
He finishes up the drawing, leaves it pinned on his desk to be reviewed in the morning.
He's worked through lunch, and when he steps out of his office building it is colder, the
light fading rapidly from the sky. He buys a cup of coffee and a falafel sandwich at the
Egyptian restaurant on the corner and walks south as he eats, toward the Flatiron and
lower Fifth Avenue, the twin towers of the World Trade Center looming in the distance,
sparkling at the island's end. The falafel, wrapped in foil, is warm and messy in his
hands. The stores are full, the windows decorated, the sidewalks crammed with
shoppers. The thought of Christmas overwhelms him. Last year they went to
Moushumi's parents' house. This year they'll go to Pemberton Road. He no longer looks
forward to the holiday; he wants only to be on the other side of the season. His
impatience makes him feel that he is, incontrovertibly, finally, an adult. He wanders
absently into a perfume store, a clothing store, a store that sells only bags. He has no
idea what to get Moushumi for Christmas. Normally she drops hints, showing him
catalogues, but he has no clue as to what she's coveting this season, if it's a new pair of
gloves or a wallet or new pajamas she'd like. In the maze of stalls in Union Square that
sell candles and shawls and handmade jewelry, nothing inspires him.
He decides to try the Barnes and Noble at the northern edge of the square. But staring
at the immense wall of new titles on display he realizes he has read none of these
books, and what was the point of giving her something he hadn't read? On his way out
of the store he pauses by a table devoted to travel guides. He picks up one for Italy, full
of illustrations of the architecture he had studied so carefully as a student, has admired
only in photographs, has always meant to see. It angers him, yet there is no one to
blame but himself. What was stopping him? A trip together, to a place neither of them
has been—maybe that's what he and Moushumi need. He could plan it all himself,
select the cities they would visit, the hotels. It could be his Christmas gift to her, two
airplane tickets tucked into the back of the guide. He was due for another vacation; he
could plan it for her spring break. Inspired by the thought, he goes to the register, waits
in a long line, and pays for the book.
He walks across the park toward home, thumbing through the book, anxious to see her
now. He decides to stop off at the new gourmet grocery that's opened on Irving Place,

to buy some of the things she likes: blood oranges, a wedge of cheese from the
Pyrenees, slices of soppresata, a loaf of peasant bread. For she will be hungry—they
serve nothing on planes these days. He looks up from the book, at the sky, at the
darkness gathering, the clouds a deep, beautiful gold, and is momentarily stopped by a
flock of pigeons flying dangerously close. Suddenly terrified, he ducks his head, feeling
foolish afterward. None of the other pedestrians has reacted. He stops and watches as
the birds shoot up, then land simultaneously on two neighboring bare-branched trees.
He is unsettled by the sight. He has seen these graceless birds on windowsills and
sidewalks, but never in trees. It looks almost unnatural. And yet, what could be more
ordinary? He thinks of Italy, of Venice, the trip he will begin to plan. Maybe it's a sign
that they are meant to go there. Wasn't the Piazza San Marco famous for its pigeons?
The lobby of the apartment is warm when he enters, the building's heat restored. "She
just got back," the doorman tells Gogol with a wink as he walks past, and his heart
leaps, unburdened of its malaise, grateful for her simple act of returning to him. He
imagines her puttering around the apartment, drawing a bath, pouring herself a glass of
wine, her bags in the hallway. He slips the book he will give her for Christmas into the
pocket of his coat, making sure it's well concealed, and calls the elevator to take him
upstairs.

12
2000
It is the day before Christmas. Ashima Ganguli sits at her kitchen table, making
mincemeat croquettes for a party she is throwing that evening. They are one of her
specialties, something her guests have come to expect, handed to them on small plates
within minutes of their arrival. Alone, she manages an assembly line of preparation.
First she forces warm boiled potatoes through a ricer. Carefully she shapes a bit of the
potato around a spoonful of cooked ground lamb, as uniformly as the white of a hardboiled egg encases its yolk. She dips each of the croquettes, about the size and shape
of a billiard ball, into a bowl of beaten eggs, then coats them on a plate of bread
crumbs, shaking off the excess in her cupped palms. Finally she stacks the croquettes
on a large circular tray, a sheet of wax paper between each layer. She stops to count
how many she's made so far. She estimates three for each adult, one or two for each of
the children. Counting the lines on the backs of her fingers, she reviews, once more, the
exact number of her guests. Another dozen to be safe, she decides. She pours a fresh
heap of bread crumbs on the plate, their color and texture reminding her of sand on a
beach. She remembers making the first batches in her kitchen in Cambridge, for her
very first parties, her husband at the stove in white drawstring pajamas and a T-shirt,
frying the croquettes two at a time in a small blackened saucepan. She remembers
Gogol and Sonia helping her when they were small, Gogol's hand wrapped around the
can of crumbs, Sonia always wanting to eat the croquettes before they'd been breaded
and fried.
This will be the last party Ashima will host at Pemberton Road. The first since her
husband's funeral. The house in which she has lived for the past twenty-seven years,
which she has occupied longer than any other in her life, has been recently sold, a
Realtor's sign stuck into the lawn. The buyers are an American family, the Walkers, a
young professor new to the university where her husband used to work, and a wife and
daughter. The Walkers are planning renovations. They will knock down the wall
between the living and dining rooms, put an island in the kitchen, track lights overhead.
They want to pull up the wall-to-wall carpeting, convert the sun deck into a den.
Listening to their plans, Ashima had felt a moment's panic, a protective instinct, wanting
to retract her offer, wanting the house to remain as it's always been, as her husband
had last seen it. But this had been sentimentality speaking. It is foolish for her to hope
that the golden letters spelling GANGULI on the mailbox will not be peeled off, replaced.
That Sonia's name, written in Magic Marker on the inside of her bedroom door, will not
be sanded, restained. That the pencil markings on the wall by the linen closet, where
Ashoke used to record his children's height on their birthdays, will not be painted over.
Ashima has decided to spend six months of her life in India, six months in the States. It
is a solitary, somewhat premature version of the future she and her husband had
planned when he was alive. In Calcutta, Ashima will live with her younger brother,
Rana, and his wife, and their two grown, as yet unmarried daughters, in a spacious flat
in Salt Lake. There she will have a room, the first in her life intended for her exclusive
use. In spring and summer she will return to the Northeast, divid ing her time among her
son, her daughter, and her close Bengali friends. True to the meaning of her name, she
will be without borders, without a home of her own, a resident everywhere and nowhere.
But it's no longer possible for her to live here now that Sonia's going to be married. The
wedding will be in Calcutta, a little over a year from now, on an auspicious January day,
just as she and her husband were married nearly thirty-four years ago. Something tells
her Sonia will be happy with this boy—quickly she corrects herself—this young man. He
has brought happiness to her daughter, in a way Moushumi had never brought it to her
son. That it was she who had encouraged Gogol to meet Moushumi will be something
for which Ashima will always feel guilty. How could she have known? But fortunately

they have not considered it their duty to stay married, as the Bengalis of Ashoke and
Ashima's generation do. They are not willing to accept, to adjust, to settle for something
less than their ideal of happiness. That pressure has given way, in the case of the
subsequent generation, to American common sense.
For a few final hours she is alone in the house. Sonia has gone with Ben to pick up
Gogol at the train station. It occurs to Ashima that the next time she will be by herself,
she will be traveling, sitting on the plane. For the first time since her flight to meet her
husband in Cambridge, in the winter of 1967, she will make the journey entirely on her
own. The prospect no longer terrifies her. She has learned to do things on her own, and
though she still wears saris, still puts her long hair in a bun, she is not the same Ashima
who had once lived in Calcutta. She will return to India with an American passport. In
her wallet will remain her Massachusetts driver's license, her social security card. She
will return to a world where she will not single-handedly throw parties for dozens of
people. She will not have to go to the trouble of making yogurt from half-and-half and
sandesh from ricotta cheese. She will not have to make her own croquettes. They will
be available to her from restaurants, brought up to the flat by servants, bearing a taste
that after all these years she has still not quite managed, to her entire satisfaction, to
replicate.
She finishes breading the final croquette, then glances at her wristwatch. She is slightly
ahead of schedule. She sets the platter on the counter next to the stove. She takes a
pan out of the cupboard and pours in the oil, several cupfuls, to be heated in the
minutes before her guests are expected. From a crock she selects the slotted spatula
she will use. For now, there is nothing left to be done. The rest of the food has been
prepared, sitting in long CorningWare pans on the dining room table: dal coated with a
thick skin that will rupture as soon as the first of it is served, a roasted cauliflower dish,
eggplant, a korma of lamb. Sweet yogurt and pantuas for dessert sit on the sideboard.
She eyes everything with anticipation. Normally cooking for parties leaves her without
an appetite, but tonight she looks forward to serving herself, sitting among her guests.
With Sonia's help the house has been cleaned one last time. Ashima has always loved
these hours before a party, the carpets vacuumed, the coffee table wiped with Pledge,
her dimmed, blurry reflection visible in the wood just as the old television commercial
used to promise.
She roots through her kitchen drawer for a packet of incense. She lights a stick by the
flame of the stove and walks from room to room. It's gratified her to go to all this
effort—to make a final, celebratory meal for her children, her friends. To decide on a
menu, to make a list and shop in the supermarket and fill the refrigerator shelves with
food. It's a pleasant change of pace, something finite in contrast to her current,
overwhelming, ongoing task: to prepare for her departure, picking the bones of the
house clean. For the past month, she has been dismantling her household piece by
piece. Each evening she has tackled a drawer, a closet, a set of shelves. Though Sonia
offers to help, Ashima prefers to do this alone. She has made piles of things to give to
Gogol and Sonia, things to give to friends, things to take with her, things to donate to
charities, things to put into trash bags and drive to the dump. The task both saddens
and satisfies her at the same time. There is a thrill to whittling down her possessions to
little more than what she'd come with, to those three rooms in Cambridge in the middle
of a winter's night. Tonight she will invite friends to take whatever might be useful,
lamps, plants, platters, pots and pans. Sonia and Ben will rent a truck and take
whatever furniture they have room for.
She goes upstairs to shower and change. The walls now remind her of the house when
they'd first moved in, bare except for the photograph of her husband, which will be the
last thing she will remove. She pauses for a moment, waving the remains of the incense
in front of Ashoke's image before throwing the stick away. She lets the water run in the
shower, turns up the thermostat to compensate for the terrible moment when she will
have to step onto the mat on the bathroom floor, unclothed. She gets into her beige
bathtub, behind the crackled sliding glass doors. She is exhausted from two days of
cooking, from her morning of cleaning, from these weeks of packing and dealing with

the sale of the house. Her feet feel heavy against the fiberglass floor of the tub. For a
while she simply stands there before tending to the shampooing of her hair, the soaping
of her softening, slightly shrinking fifty-three-year-old body, which she must fortify each
morning with calcium pills. When she is finished, she wipes the steam off the bathroom
mirror and studies her face. A widow's face. But for most of her life, she reminds herself,
a wife. And perhaps, one day, a grandmother, arriving in America laden with hand-knit
sweaters and gifts, leaving, a month or two later, inconsolable, in tears.
Ashima feels lonely suddenly, horribly, permanently alone, and briefly, turned away
from the mirror, she sobs for her husband. She feels overwhelmed by the thought of the
move she is about to make, to the city that was once home and is now in its own way
foreign. She feels both impatience and indifference for all the days she still must live, for
something tells her she will not go quickly as her husband did. For thirty-three years she
missed her life in India. Now she will miss her job at the library, the women with whom
she's worked. She will miss throwing parties. She will miss living with her daughter, the
surprising companionship they have formed, going into Cambridge together to see old
movies at the Brattle, teaching her to cook the food Sonia had complained of eating as
a child. She will miss the opportunity to drive, as she sometimes does on her way home
from the library, to the university, past the engineering building where her husband once
worked. She will miss the country in which she had grown to know and love her
husband. Though his ashes have been scattered into the Ganges, it is here, in this
house and in this town, that he will continue to dwell in her mind.
She takes a deep breath. In a moment she will hear the beeps of the security system,
the garage door opening, car doors closing, her children's voices in the house. She
applies lotion to her arms and legs, reaches for a peach-colored terry-cloth robe that
hangs from a hook on the door. Her husband had given her the robe years ago, for a
Christmas now long forgotten. This too she will have to give away, will have no use for
where she is going. In such a humid climate it would take days for such a thick material
to dry. She makes a note to herself, to wash it well and donate it to the thrift shop. She
does not remember the year she'd gotten the robe, does not remember opening it, or
her reaction. She knows only that it had been either Gogol or Sonia who had picked it
out at one of the department stores at the mall, had wrapped it, even. That all her
husband had done was to write his name and hers on the to-and-from tag. She does not
fault him for this. Such omissions of devotion, of affection, she knows now, do not
matter in the end. She no longer wonders what it might have been like to do what her
children have done, to fall in love first rather than years later, to deliberate over a period
of months or years and not a single afternoon, which was the time it had taken for her
and Ashoke to agree to wed. It is the image of their two names on the tag that she
thinks of, a tag she had not bothered to save. It reminds her of their life together, of the
unexpected life he, in choosing to marry her, had given her here, which she had refused
for so many years to accept. And though she still does not feel fully at home within
these walls on Pemberton Road she knows that this is home nevertheless—the world
for which she is responsible, which she has created, which is everywhere around her,
needing to be packed up, given away, thrown out bit by bit. She slips her damp arms
into the sleeves of the robe, ties the belt around her waist. It's always been a bit short
on her, a size too small. Its warmth is a comfort all the same.

There is no one to greet Gogol on the platform when he gets off the train. He wonders if
he's early, looks at his watch. Instead of going into the station house he waits on a
bench outside. The last of the passengers board, the train doors slide to a close. The
conductors wave their signals to one another, the wheels roll slowly away, the
compartments glide forward one by one. He watches his fellow passengers being
greeted by family members, lovers reunited with entangled arms, without a word.
College students burdened by backpacks, returning for Christmas break. After a few
minutes the platform is empty, as is the space the train had occupied. Now Gogol looks
onto a field, some spindly trees against a cobalt twilight sky. He thinks of calling home

but decides he is content to sit and wait awhile longer. The cool air is pleasant on his
face after his hours on the train. He'd slept most of the journey to Boston, the conductor
poking him awake once they'd reached South Station, and he was the only person left
in the compartment, the last to get off. He had slept soundly, curled up on two seats, his
book unread, using his overcoat as a blanket, pulled up to his chin.
He feels groggy still, a bit lightheaded from having skipped his lunch. At his feet are a
duffel bag containing clothes, a shopping bag from Macy's with gifts bought earlier that
morning, before catching his train at Penn Station. His choices are uninspired—a pair of
fourteen-karat gold earrings for his mother, sweaters for Sonia and Ben. They have
agreed to keep things simple this year. He has a week of vacation. There is work to do
at the house, his mother has warned him. His room must be emptied, every last scrap
either taken back with him to New York or tossed. He must help his mother pack her
things, settle her accounts. They will drive her to Logan and see her off as far as airport
security will allow. And then the house will be occupied by strangers, and there will be
no trace that they were ever there, no house to enter, no name in the telephone
directory. Nothing to signify the years his family has lived here, no evidence of the effort,
the achievement it had been. It's hard to believe that his mother is really going, that for
months she will be so far. He wonders how his parents had done it, leaving their
respective families behind, seeing them so seldom, dwelling unconnected, in a
perpetual state of expectation, of longing. All those trips to Calcutta he'd once
resented—how could they have been enough? They were not enough. Gogol knows
now that his parents had lived their lives in America in spite of what was missing, with a
stamina he fears he does not possess himself. He had spent years maintaining distance
from his origins; his parents, in bridging that distance as best they could. And yet, for all
his aloofness toward his family in the past, his years at college and then in New York,
he has always hovered close to this quiet, ordinary town that had remained, for his
mother and father, stubbornly exotic. He had not traveled to France as Moushumi had,
or even to California as Sonia had done. Only for three months was he separated by
more than a few small states from his father, a distance that had not troubled Gogol in
the least, until it was too late. Apart from those months, for most of his adult life he has
never been more than a four-hour train ride away. And there was nothing, apart from his
family, to draw him home, to make this train journey, again and again.
It had been on the train, exactly a year ago, that he'd learned of Moushumi's affair. They
were on their way up to spend Christmas with his mother and Sonia. They had left the
city late, and outside the windows it had been dark, the disturbing pitch-black of early
winter evenings. They were in the middle of a conversation about how to spend the
coming summer, whether to rent a house in Siena with Donald and Astrid, an idea
Gogol was resisting, when she'd said, "Dimitri says Siena is something out of a fairy
tale." Immediately a hand had gone to her mouth, accompanied by a small intake of
breath. And then, silence. "Who's Dimitri?" he'd asked. And then: "Are you having an
affair?" The question had sprung out of him, something he had not consciously put
together in his mind until that moment. It felt almost comic to him, burning in his throat.
But as soon as he asked it, he knew. He felt the chill of her secrecy, numbing him, like a
poison spreading quickly through his veins. He'd felt this way on only one other
occasion, the night he had sat in the car with his father and learned the reason for his
name. That night he'd experienced the same bewilderment, was sickened in the same
way. But he felt none of the tenderness that he had felt for his father, only the anger, the
humiliation of having been deceived. And yet, at the same time, he was strangely
calm—in the moment that his marriage was effectively severed he was on solid ground
with her for the first time in months. He remembered a night weeks ago; looking through
her bag for her wallet, to pay the Chinese food delivery man, he'd pulled out her
diaphragm case. She told him she'd gone to the doctor that afternoon to have it refitted,
and so he'd put it out of his mind.
His first impulse had been to get out at the next station, to be as physically far from her
as possible. But they were bound together, by the train, by the fact that his mother and
Sonia were expecting them, and so somehow they had suffered through the rest of the

journey, and then through the weekend, telling no one, pretending that nothing was
wrong. Lying in his parents' house, in the middle of the night, she told him the whole
story, about meeting Dimitri on a bus, finding his résumé in the bin. She confessed that
Dimitri had gone with her to Palm Beach. One by one he stored the pieces of
information in his mind, unwelcome, unforgivable. And for the first time in his life,
another man's name upset Gogol more than his own.
The day after Christmas she left Pemberton Road, with the excuse to his mother and
Sonia that a last-minute interview had fallen into place at the MLA. But really the job
was a ruse; she and Gogol had decided that it was best for her to return to New York
alone. By the time he arrived at the apartment, her clothes were gone, and her make-up
and her bathroom things. It was as if she were away on another trip. But this time she
didn't come back. She wanted nothing of the brief life they'd had together; when she
appeared one last time at his office a few months later, so that he could sign the divorce
papers, she told him she was moving back to Paris. And so, systematically, as he had
done for his dead father, he removed her possessions from the apartment, putting her
books into boxes on the sidewalk in the middle of the night for people to take, throwing
out the rest. In the spring he went to Venice alone for a week, the trip he'd planned for
the two of them, saturating himself in its ancient, melancholy beauty. He lost himself
among the darkened narrow streets, crossing countless tiny bridges, discovering
deserted squares, where he sat with a Campari or a coffee, sketching the facades of
pink and green palaces and churches, unable ever to retrace his steps.
And then he returned to New York, to the apartment they'd inhabited together that was
now all his. A year later, the shock has worn off, but a sense of failure and shame
persists, deep and abiding. There are nights he still falls asleep on the sofa, without
deliberation, waking up at three A.M. with the television still on. It is as if a building he'd
been responsible for designing has collapsed for all to see. And yet he can't really
blame her. They had both acted on the same impulse, that was their mistake. They had
both sought comfort in each other, and in their shared world, perhaps for the sake of
novelty, or out of the fear that that world was slowly dying. Still, he wonders how he's
arrived at all this: that he is thirty-two years old, and already married and divorced. His
time with her seems like a permanent part of him that no longer has any relevance, or
currency. As if that time were a name he'd ceased to use.
He hears the familiar beep of his mother's car, spots it pulling into the parking lot. Sonia
is sitting in the driver's seat, waving. Ben is next to her. This is the first time he's seeing
Sonia since she and Ben have announced their engagement. He decides that he will
ask her to stop off at a liquor store so he can buy some champagne. She steps out of
the car, walking toward him. She is an attorney now, working in an office in the Hancock
building. Her hair is cut to her jaw. She's wearing an old blue down jacket that Gogol
had worn back in high school. And yet there is a new maturity in her face; he can easily
imagine her, a few years from now, with two children in the back seat. She gives him a
hug. For a moment they stand there with their arms around each other in the cold.
"Welcome home, Goggles," she says.

For the last time, they assemble the artificial seven-foot tree, the branches color-coded
at their base. Gogol brings up the box from the basement. For decades the instructions
have been missing; each year they have to figure out the order in which the branches
must be inserted, the longest ones at the bottom, the smallest at the top. Sonia holds
the pole, and Gogol and Ben insert the branches. The orange go first, then the yellow,
then the red and finally blue, the uppermost piece slightly bent under the white speckled
ceiling. They place the tree in front of the window, drawing apart the curtains so that
people passing by the house can see, as excited as they were when they were children.
They decorate it with ornaments made by Sonia and Gogol in elementary school:
construction paper candlesticks, Popsicle-stick god's-eyes, glitter-covered pinecones. A
torn Banarasi sari of Ashima's is wrapped around the base. At the top they put what
they always do, a small plastic bird covered with turquoise velvet, with brown wire

claws.
Stockings are hung on nails from the mantel, the one put up for Moushumi last year
now put up for Ben. They drink the champagne out of Styrofoam cups, forcing Ashima
to have some, too, and they play the Perry Como Christmas tape his father always
liked. They tease Sonia, telling Ben about the year she had refused her gifts after taking
a Hinduism class in college, coming home and protesting that they weren't Christian.
Early in the morning, his mother, faithful to the rules of Christmas her children had
taught her when they were little, will wake up and fill the stockings, with gift certificates
to record stores, candy canes, mesh bags of chocolate coins. He can still remember the
very first time his parents had had a tree in the house, at his insistence, a plastic thing
no larger than a table lamp, displayed on top of the fireplace mantel. And yet its
presence had felt colossal. How it had thrilled him. He had begged them to buy it from
the drugstore. He remembers decorating it clumsily with garlands and tinsel and a string
of lights that made his father nervous. In the evenings, until his father came in and
pulled out the plug, causing the tiny tree to go dark, Gogol would sit there. He
remembers the single wrapped gift that he had received, a toy that he'd picked out
himself, his mother asking him to stand by the greeting cards while she paid for it.
"Remember when we used to put on those awful flashing colored lights?" his mother
says now when they are done, shaking her head. "I didn't know a thing back then."

At seven-thirty the bell rings, and the front door is left open as people and cold air
stream into the house. Guests are speaking in Bengali, hollering, arguing, talking on top
of one another, the sound of their laughter filling the already crowded rooms. The
croquettes are fried in crackling oil and arranged with a red onion salad on plates. Sonia
serves them with paper napkins. Ben, the jamai-to-be, is introduced to each of the
guests. "I'll never keep all these names straight," he says at one point to Gogol. "Don't
worry, you'll never need to," Gogol says. These people, these honorary aunts and
uncles of a dozen different surnames, have seen Gogol grow, have surrounded him at
his wedding, his father's funeral. He promises to keep in touch with them now that his
mother is leaving, not to forget them. Sonia shows off her ring, six tiny diamonds
surrounding an emerald, to the mashis, who wear their red and green saris. "You will
have to grow your hair for the wedding," they tell Sonia. One of the meshos is sporting a
Santa hat. They sit in the living room, on the furniture and on the floor. Children drift
down into the basement, the older ones to rooms upstairs. He recognizes his old
Monopoly game being played, the board in two pieces, the racecar missing ever since
Sonia dropped it into the baseboard heater when she was little. Gogol does not know to
whom these children belong—half the guests are people his mother has befriended in
recent years, people who were at his wedding but whom he does not recognize. People
talk of how much they've come to love Ashima's Christmas Eve parties, that they've
missed them these past few years, that it won't be the same without her. They have
come to rely on her, Gogol realizes, to collect them together, to organize the holiday, to
convert it, to introduce the tradition to those who are new. It has always felt adopted to
him, an accident of circumstance, a celebration not really meant to be. And yet it was for
him, for Sonia, that his parents had gone to the trouble of learning these customs. It was
for their sake that it had come to all this.
In so many ways, his family's life feels like a string of accidents, unforeseen,
unintended, one incident begetting another. It had started with his father's train wreck,
paralyzing him at first, later inspiring him to move as far as possible, to make a new life
on the other side of the world. There was the disappearance of the name Gogol's greatgrandmother had chosen for him, lost in the mail somewhere between Calcutta and
Cambridge. This had led, in turn, to the accident of his being named Gogol, defining and
distressing him for so many years. He had tried to correct that randomness, that error.
And yet it had not been possible to reinvent himself fully, to break from that mismatched
name. His marriage had been something of a misstep as well. And the way his father
had slipped away from them, that had been the worst accident of all, as if the

preparatory work of death had been done long ago, the night he was nearly killed, and
all that was left for him was one day, quietly, to go. And yet these events have formed
Gogol, shaped him, determined who he is. They were things for which it was impossible
to prepare but which one spent a lifetime looking back at, trying to accept, interpret,
comprehend. Things that should never have happened, that seemed out of place and
wrong, these were what prevailed, what endured, in the end.
"Gogol, the camera," his mother calls out over the crowd. "Take some pictures tonight,
please? I want to remember this Christmas. Next year at this time I'll be so far away."
He goes upstairs to get his father's Nikon, still sitting on the top shelf of Ashoke's closet.
There is practically nothing else there. No clothes hang from the rod. The emptiness
upsets him, but the weight of the camera is solid, reassuring in his hands. He takes the
camera into his room to load a fresh battery, a new roll of film. Last year he and
Moushumi slept in the guest room, on the double bed, with its folded towels and a fresh
bar of soap on top of the dresser, what his mother always left out for guests. But now
that Sonia is here with Ben, the guest room is theirs, and Gogol is back in his room, with
a bed he's never shared with Moushumi, or with anyone.
The bed is narrow, covered by a solid brown quilt. He can reach up and touch the
frosted white light fixture suspended from the ceiling, filled with dead moths. The stains
of Scotch tape once attached to his posters are visible on the walls. His desk was the
folding square card table in the corner. Here he had done his homework under the dusty
black gooseneck lamp. There is a thin, peacock blue carpet on the floor, slightly too
large so that one side curls up against the wall. The shelves and drawers are mostly
empty. Unwanted, miscellaneous things are in boxes already: essays written in high
school, under the name Gogol. A report done in elementary school on Greek and
Roman architecture, Corinthian and Ionic and Doric columns copied from an
encyclopedia onto tracing paper. Cross pen-and-pencil sets, records listened to twice
and then abandoned, clothes that were too large, too small—that never seemed worth
transporting to the increasingly cramped apartments he inhabited over the years. All his
old books, the ones he read by flashlight under the covers, and the ones required for
college, only half-read, some with yellow USED stickers on the spines. His mother is
going to donate them all to the library where she works, for their annual book sale in the
spring. She has told him to go through them, make sure there's nothing he wants for
himself. He pokes through the box. The Swiss Family Robinson. On the Road. The
Communist Manifesto. How to Get into an Ivy League School.
And then another book, never read, long forgotten, catches his eye. The jacket is
missing, the title on the spine practically faded. It's a thick clothbound volume topped
with decades-old dust. The ivory pages are heavy, slightly sour, silken to the touch. The
spine cracks faintly when he opens it to the title page. The Short Stories of Nikolai
Gogol. "For Gogol Ganguli," it says on the front endpaper in his father's tranquil hand, in
red ballpoint ink, the letters rising gradually, optimistically, on the diagonal toward the
upper right-hand corner of the page. "The man who gave you his name, from the man
who gave you your name" is written within quotation marks. Underneath the inscription,
which he has never before seen, is his birthday, and the year, 1982. His father had
stood in the doorway, just there, an arm's reach from where he sits now. He had left him
to discover the inscription on his own, never again asking Gogol what he'd thought of
the book, never mentioning the book at all. The handwriting reminds him of the checks
his father used to give him all through college, and for years afterward, to help him
along, to put down a security deposit, to buy his first suit, sometimes for no reason at
all. The name he had so detested, here hidden and preserved—that was the first thing
his father had given him.
The givers and keepers of Gogol's name are far from him now. One dead. Another, a
widow, on the verge of a different sort of departure, in order to dwell, as his father does,
in a separate world. She will call him, once a week, on the phone. She will learn to send
e-mail, she says. Once or twice a week, he will hear "Gogol" over the wires, see it typed
on a screen. As for all the people in the house, all the mashis and meshos to whom he
is still, and will always be, Gogol—now that his mother is moving away, how often will

he see them? Without people in the world to call him Gogol, no matter how long he
himself lives, Gogol Ganguli will, once and for all, vanish from the lips of loved ones,
and so, cease to exist. Yet the thought of this eventual demise provides no sense of
victory, no solace. It provides no solace at all.
Gogol gets up, shuts the door to his room, muffling the noise of the party that swells
below him, the laughter of the children playing down the hall. He sits cross-legged on
the bed. He opens the book, glances at an illustration of Nikolai Gogol, and then at the
chronology of the author's life on the facing page. Born March 20, 1809. The death of
his father, 1825. Publishes his first story, 1830. Travels to Rome, 1837. Dies 1852, one
month before his forty-third birthday. In another ten years, Gogol Ganguli will be that
age. He wonders if he will be married again one day, if he will ever have a child to
name. A month from now, he will begin a new job at a smaller architectural practice,
producing his own designs. There is a possibility, eventually, of becoming an associate,
of the firm incorporating his name. And in that case Nikhil will live on, publicly
celebrated, unlike Gogol, purposely hidden, legally diminished, now all but lost.
He turns to the first story. "The Overcoat." In a few minutes his mother will come
upstairs to find him. "Gogol," she will say, opening the door without knocking, "where is
the camera? What's taking so long? This is no time for books," she will scold, hastily
noting the volume open against the covers, unaware, as her son has been all these
years, that her husband dwells discreetly, silently, patiently, within its pages. "There is a
party downstairs, people to talk to, food to be taken out of the oven, thirty glasses of
water to fill and line up on the sideboard. To think that we will never again all be here
together. If only your father could have stayed with us a bit longer," she will add, her
eyes growing momentarily damp. "But come, see the children under the tree."
He will apologize, put the book aside, a small corner of a page turned over to mark his
place. He will walk downstairs with his mother, join the crowded party, photographing
the people in his parents' life, in this house, one last time, huddled on the sofas, plates
held in their laps, eating with their hands. Eventually, at his mother's insistence, he will
eat as well, seated cross-legged on the floor, and speak to his parents' friends, about
his new job, about New York, about his mother, about Sonia and Ben's wedding. After
dinner he will help Sonia and Ben scrape bay leaves and lamb bones and cinnamon
sticks from plates, pile them on the counters and two burners of the stove. He will watch
his mother do what his father used to do toward the end of every party, spooning fineleaf Lopchu tea into two kettles. He will watch her give away leftovers in the cooking
pots themselves. As the hours of the evening pass he will grow distracted, anxious to
return to his room, to be alone, to read the book he had once forsaken, has abandoned
until now. Until moments ago it was destined to disappear from his life altogether, but he
has salvaged it by chance, as his father was pulled from a crushed train forty years ago.
He leans back against the headboard, adjusting a pillow behind his back. In a few
minutes he will go downstairs, join the party, his family. But for now his mother is
distracted, laughing at a story a friend is telling her, unaware of her son's absence. For
now, he starts to read.
