The Geranium

OLD DUDLEY folded into the chair he was gradually molding to his own shape and
looked  out  the  window  fifteen  feet  away  into  another  window  framed  by
blackened  red  brick.  He  was  waiting  for  the  geranium.  They  put  it  out  every
morning about ten and they took it in at five-thirty. Mrs. Carson back home had a
geranium in her window. There were plenty of geraniums at home, better-looking
geraniums. Ours are sho nuff geraniums, Old Dudley thought, not any er this pale
pink  business  with  green,  paper  bows.  The  geranium  they  would  put  in  the
window reminded him of the Grisby boy at home who had polio and had to be
wheeled out every morning and left in the sun to blink. Lutisha could have taken
that geranium and stuck it in the ground and had something worth looking at in a
few weeks. Those people across the alley had no business with one. They set it
out and let the hot sun bake it all day and they put it so near the ledge the wind
could almost knock it over. They had no business with it, no business with it. It
shouldn’t have been there. Old Dudley felt his throat knotting up. Lutish could root
anything. Rabie too. His throat was drawn taut. He laid his head back and tried to
clear his mind. There wasn’t much he could think of to think about that didn’t do
his throat that way.

His  daughter  came  in.  “Don’t  you  want  to  go  for  a  walk?”  she  asked.  She

looked provoked.

He didn’t answer her.
“Well?”
“No.” He wondered how long she was going to stand there. She made his eyes
feel like his throat. They’d get watery and she’d see. She had seen before and had
looked sorry for him. She’d looked sorry for herself too; but she could er saved
herself, Old Dudley thought, if she’d just have let him alone—let him stay where
he was back home and not be so taken up with her damn duty. She moved out of
the room, leaving an audible sigh, to crawl over him and remind him again of that
one minute—that wasn’t her fault at all—when suddenly he had wanted to go to

New York to live with her.

He could have got out of going. He could have been stubborn and told her he’d
spend his life where he’d always spent it, send him or not send him the money
every month, he’d get along with his pension and odd jobs. Keep her damn money
—she needed it worse than he did. She would have been glad to have had her duty
disposed of like that. Then she could have said if he died without his children near
him, it was his own fault; if he got sick and there wasn’t anybody to take care of
him, well, he’d asked for it, she could have said. But there was that thing inside
him that had wanted to see New York. He had been to Atlanta once when he was a
boy and he had seen New York in a picture show.  Big Town Rhythm it was. Big
towns were important places. The thing inside him had sneaked up on him for just
one instant. The place like he’d seen in the picture show had room for him! It was
an important place and it had room for him! He’d said yes, he’d go.

He must have been sick when he said it. He couldn’t have been well and said
it. He had been sick and she had been so taken up with her damn duty, she had
wangled it out of him. Why did she have to come down there in the first place to
pester him? He had been doing all right. There was his pension that could feed
him and odd jobs that kept him his room in the boarding house.

The window in that room showed him the river—thick and red as it struggled
over rocks and around curves. He tried to think how it was besides red and slow.
He added green blotches for trees on either side of it and a brown spot for trash
somewhere  upstream.  He  and  Rabie  had  fished  it  in  a  flat-bottom  boat  every
Wednesday. Rabie knew the river up and down for twenty miles. There wasn’t
another nigger in Coa County that knew it like he did. He loved the river, but it
hadn’t meant anything to Old Dudley. The fish were what he was after. He liked to
come in at night with a long string of them and slap them down in the sink. “Few
fish I got,” he’d say. It took a man to get those fish, the old girls at the boarding
house always said. He and Rabie would start out early Wednesday morning and
fish all day. Rabie would find the spots and row; Old Dudley always caught them.
Rabie didn’t care much about catching them—he just loved the river. “Ain’t no
use settin’ yo’ line down dere, boss,” he’d say. “Ain’t no fish dere. Dis ol’ riber
ain’t hidin’ none nowhere ’round hyar, nawsuh.” And he would giggle and shift

the boat downstream. That was Rabie. He could steal cleaner than a weasel but he
knew where the fish were. Old Dudley always gave him the little ones.

Old Dudley had lived upstairs in the corner room of the boarding house ever
since  his  wife  died  in  ’22.  He  protected  the  old  ladies.  He  was  the  man  in  the
house and he did the things a man in the house was supposed to do. It was a dull
occupation at night when the old girls crabbed and crocheted in the parlor and the
man in the house had to listen and judge the sparrow-like wars that rasped and
twittered  intermittently.  But  in  the  daytime  there  was  Rabie.  Rabie  and  Lutisha
lived down in the basement. Lutish cooked and Rabie took care of the cleaning
and the vegetable garden; but he was sharp at sneaking off with half his work done
and going to help Old Dudley with some current project—building a hen house or
painting  a  door.  He  liked  to  listen,  he  liked  to  hear  about  Atlanta  when  Old
Dudley had been there and about how guns were put together on the inside and all
the other things the old man knew.

Sometimes at night they would go ’possum hunting. They never got a ’possum
but Old Dudley liked to get away from the ladies once in a while and hunting was
a good excuse. Rabie didn’t like ’possum hunting. They never got a ’possum; they
never even treed one; and besides, he was mostly a water nigger. “We ain’t gonna
go huntin’ no ’possum tonight, is we, boss? I got a lil’ business I wants tuh tend
tuh,”  he’d  say  when  Old  Dudley  would  start  talking  about  hounds  and  guns.
“Whose  chickens  you  gonna  steal  tonight?”  Dudley  would  grin.  “I  reckon  I  be
huntin’ ’possum tonight,” Rabie’d sigh.

Old Dudley would get out his gun and take it apart and, as Rabie cleaned the
pieces,  would  explain  the  mechanism  to  him.  Then  he’d  put  it  together  again.
Rabie  always  marveled  at  the  way  he  could  put  it  together  again.  Old  Dudley
would have liked to have explained New York to Rabie. If he could have showed
it to Rabie, it wouldn’t have been so big—he wouldn’t have felt pressed down
every time he went out in it. “It ain’t so big,” he would have said. “Don’t let it get
you down, Rabie. It’s just like any other city and cities ain’t all that complicated.”
But they were. New York was swishing and jamming one minute and dirty and
dead the next. His daughter didn’t even live in a house. She lived in a building—
the middle in a row of buildings all alike, all blackened-red and gray with rasp-

mouthed people  hanging  out  their  windows  looking  at  other  windows  and  other
people just like them looking back. Inside you could go up and you could go down
and  there  were  just  halls  that  reminded  you  of  tape  measures  strung  out  with  a
door every inch. He remembered he’d been dazed by the building the first week.
He’d wake up expecting the halls to have changed in the night and he’d look out
the door and there they stretched like dog runs. The streets were the same way. He
wondered  where  he’d  be  if  he  walked  to  the  end  of  one  of  them.  One  night  he
dreamed he did and ended at the end of the building—nowhere.

The next week he had become more conscious of the daughter and son-in-law
and their boy—no place to be out of their way. The son-in-law was a queer one.
He drove a truck and came in only on the weekends. He said “nah” for “no” and
he’d never heard of a ’possum. Old Dudley slept in the room with the boy, who
was sixteen and couldn’t be talked to. But sometimes when the daughter and Old
Dudley were alone in the apartment, she would sit down and talk to him. First she
had to think of something to say. Usually it gave out before what she considered
was  the  proper  time  to  get  up  and  do  something  else,  so  he  would  have  to  say
something. He always tried to think of something he hadn’t said before. She never
listened the second time. She was seeing that her father spent his last years with
his  own  family  and  not  in  a  decayed  boarding  house  full  of  old  women  whose
heads jiggled. She was doing her duty. She had brothers and sisters who were not.
Once  she  took  him  shopping  with  her  but  he  was  too  slow.  They  went  in  a
“subway”—a railroad underneath the ground like a big cave. People boiled out of
trains and up steps and over into the streets. They rolled off the street and down
steps and into trains—black and white and yellow all mixed up like vegetables in
soup. Everything was boiling. The trains swished in from tunnels, up canals, and
all of a sudden stopped. The people coming out pushed through the people coming
in and a noise rang and the train swooped off again. Old Dudley and the daughter
had  to  go  in  three  different  ones  before  they  got  where  they  were  going.  He
wondered why people ever went out of their houses. He felt like his tongue had
slipped  down  in  his  stomach.  She  held  him  by  the  coat  sleeve  and  pulled  him
through the people.

They went on an overhead train too. She called it an “El.” They had to go up

on a high platform to catch it. Old Dudley looked over the rail and could see the
people rushing and the automobiles rushing under him. He felt sick. He put one
hand on the rail and sank down on the wooden floor of the platform. The daughter
screamed and pulled him over from the edge. “Do you want to fall off and kill
yourself?” she shouted.

Through a crack in the boards he could see the cars swimming in the street. “I

don’t care,” he murmured, “I don’t care if I do or not.”

“Come on,” she said, “you’ll feel better when we get home.”
“Home?” he repeated. The cars moved in a rhythm below him.
“Come on,” she said, “here it comes; we’ve just got time to make it.” They’d

just had time to make all of them.

They made that one. They came back to the building and the apartment. The
apartment was too tight. There was no place to be where there wasn’t somebody
else.  The  kitchen  opened  into  the  bathroom  and  the  bathroom  opened  into
everything else and you were always where you started from. At home there was
upstairs  and  the  basement  and  the  river  and  downtown  in  front  of  Fraziers  …
damn his throat.

The geranium was late today. It was ten-thirty. They usually had it out by ten-

fifteen.

Somewhere down the hall a woman shrilled something unintelligible out to the
street; a radio was bleating the worn music to a soap serial; and a garbage can
crashed down a fire escape. The door to the next apartment slammed and a sharp
footstep clipped down the hall. “That would be the nigger,” Old Dudley muttered.
“The  nigger  with  the  shiny  shoes.”  He  had  been  there  a  week  when  the  nigger
moved in. That Thursday he was looking out the door at the dog-run halls when
this nigger went into the next apartment. He had on a gray, pin-stripe suit and a tan
tie. His collar was stiff and white and made a clear-cut line next to his neck. His
shoes were shiny tan—they matched his tie and his skin. Old Dudley scratched his
head. He hadn’t known the kind of people that would live thick in a building could
afford  servants.  He  chuckled.  Lot  of  good  a  nigger  in  a  Sunday  suit  would  do
them. Maybe this nigger would know the country around here—or maybe how to
get to it. They might could hunt. They might could find them a stream somewhere.

He shut the door and went to the daughter’s room. “Hey!” he shouted, “the folks
next door got ’em a nigger. Must be gonna clean for them. You reckon they gonna
keep him every day?”

She looked up from making the bed. “What are you talking about?”
“I say they got ’em a servant next door—a nigger—all dressed up in a Sunday

suit.”

She walked to the other side of the bed. “You must be crazy,” she said. “The
next apartment is vacant and besides, nobody around here can afford any servant.”
“I tell you I saw him,” Old Dudley snickered. “Going right in there with a tie

and a white collar on—and sharp-toed shoes.”

“If he went in there, he’s looking at it for himself,” she muttered. She went to

the dresser and started fidgeting with things.

Old Dudley laughed. She could be right funny when she wanted to. “Well,” he
said, “I think I’ll go over and see what day he gets off. Maybe I can convince him
he  likes  to  fish,”  and  he’d  slapped  his  pocket  to  make  the  two  quarters  jingle.
Before he got out in the hall good, she came tearing behind him and pulled him in.
“Can’t you hear?” she’d yelled. “I meant what I said. He’s renting that himself if
he went in there. Don’t you go asking him any questions or saying anything to him.
I don’t want any trouble with niggers.”

“You mean,” Old Dudley murmured, “he’s gonna live next door to you?”
She  shrugged.  “I  suppose  he  is.  And  you  tend  to  your  own  business,”  she

added. “Don’t have anything to do with him.”

That’s just the way she’d said it. Like he didn’t have any sense at all. But he’d
told her off then. He’d stated his say and she knew what he meant. “You ain’t been
raised that way!” he’d said thundery-like. “You ain’t been raised to live tight with
niggers that think they’re just as good as you, and you think I’d go messin’ around
with one er that kind! If you think I want anything to do with them, you’re crazy.”
He had had to slow down then because his throat was tightening. She’d stood stiff
up  and  said  they  lived  where  they  could  afford  to  live  and  made  the  best  of  it.
Preaching to him! Then she’d walked stiff off without a word more. That was her.
Trying to be holy with her shoulders curved around and her neck in the air. Like
he was a fool. He knew Yankees let niggers in their front doors and let them set on

their sofas but he didn’t know his own daughter that was raised proper would stay
next door to them—and then think he didn’t have no more sense than to want to
mix with them. Him!

He got up and took a paper off another chair. He might as well appear to be
reading when she came through again. No use having her standing up there staring
at him, believing she had to think up something for him to do. He looked over the
paper at the window across the alley. The geranium wasn’t there yet. It had never
been this late before. The first day he’d seen it, he had been sitting there looking
out the window at the other window and he had looked at his watch to see how
long it had been since breakfast. When he looked up, it was there. It startled him.
He didn’t like flowers, but the geranium didn’t look like a flower. It looked like
the sick Grisby boy at home and it was the color of the drapes the old ladies had
in the parlor and the paper bow on it looked like the one behind Lutish’s uniform
she  wore  on  Sundays.  Lutish  had  a  fondness  for  sashes.  Most  niggers  did,  Old
Dudley thought.

The  daughter  came  through  again.  He  had  meant  to  be  looking  at  the  paper
when she came through. “Do me a favor, will you?” she asked as if she had just
thought up a favor he could do.

He hoped she didn’t want him to go to the grocery again. He got lost the time

before. All the blooming buildings looked alike. He nodded.

“Go down to the third floor and ask Mrs. Schmitt to lend me the shirt pattern

she uses for Jake.”

Why couldn’t she just let him sit? She didn’t need the shirt pattern. “All right,”

he said. “What number is it?”

“Number 10—just like this. Right below us three floors down.”
Old Dudley was always afraid that when he went out in the dog runs, a door
would suddenly open and one of the snipe-nosed men that hung off the window
ledges in his undershirt would growl, “What are you doing here?” The door to the
nigger’s apartment was open and he could see a woman sitting in a chair by the
window. “Yankee niggers,” he muttered. She had on rimless glasses and there was
a book in her lap. Niggers don’t think they’re dressed up till they got on glasses,
Old Dudley thought. He remembered Lutish’s glasses. She had saved up thirteen

dollars to buy them. Then she went to the doctor and asked him to look at her eyes
and tell her how thick to get the glasses. He made her look at animals’ pictures
through a mirror and he stuck a light through her eyes and looked in her head. Then
he said she didn’t need any glasses. She was so mad she burned the corn bread
three days in a row, but she bought her some glasses anyway at the ten-cent store.
They  didn’t  cost  her  but  $1.98  and  she  wore  them  every  Saddey.  “That  was
niggers,” Old Dudley chuckled. He realized he had made a noise, and covered his
mouth with his hand. Somebody might hear him in one of the apartments.

He turned down the first flight of stairs. Down the second he heard footsteps
coming up. He looked over the banisters and saw it was a woman—a fat woman
with an apron on. From the top, she looked kind er like Mrs. Benson at home. He
wondered if she would speak to him. When they were four steps from each other,
he darted a glance at her but she wasn’t looking at him. When there were no steps
between them, his eyes fluttered up for an instant and she was looking at him cold
in the face. Then she was past him. She hadn’t said a word. He felt heavy in his
stomach.

He  went  down  four  flights  instead  of  three.  Then  he  went  back  up  one  and
found number 10. Mrs. Schmitt said O.K., wait a minute and she’d get the pattern.
She sent one of the children back to the door with it. The child didn’t say anything.
Old Dudley started back up the stairs. He had to take it more slowly. It tired
him going up. Everything tired him, looked like. Not like having Rabie to do his
running for him. Rabie was a light-footed nigger. He could sneak in a hen house
’thout  even  the  hens  knowing  it  and  get  him  the  fattest  fryer  in  there  and  not  a
squawk. Fast too. Dudley had always been slow on his feet. It went that way with
fat people. He remembered one time him and Rabie was hunting quail over near
Molton.  They  had  ’em  a  hound  dog  that  could  find  a  covey  quickern  any  fancy
pointer going. He wasn’t no good at bringing them back but he could find them
every time and then set like a dead stump while you aimed at the birds. This one
time the hound stopped cold-still. “Dat gonna be a big ’un,” Rabie whispered, “I
feels it.” Old Dudley raised the gun slowly as they walked along. He had to be
careful  of  the  pine  needles.  They  covered  the  ground  and  made  it  slick.  Rabie
shifted  his  weight  from  side  to  side,  lifting  and  setting  his  feet  on  the  waxen

needles  with  unconscious  care.  He  looked  straight  ahead  and  moved  forward
swiftly. Old Dudley kept one eye ahead and one on the ground. It would slope and
he would be sliding forward dangerously, or in pulling himself up an incline, he
would slide back down.

“Ain’t  I  better  get  dem  birds  dis  time,  boss?”  Rabie  suggested.  “You  ain’t
never  easy  on  yo’  feets  on  Monday.  If  you  falls  in  one  dem  slopes,  you  gonna
scatter dem birds fo’ you gits dat gun up.”

Old Dudley wanted to get the covey. He could er knocked four out of it easy.
“I’ll  get  ’em,”  he  muttered.  He  lifted  the  gun  to  his  eye  and  leaned  forward.
Something slipped beneath him and he slid backward on his heels. The gun went
off and the covey sprayed into the air.

“Dem was some mighty fine birds we let get away from us,” Rabie sighed.
“We’ll find another covey,” Old Dudley said. “Now get me out of this damn

hole.”

He could er got five er those birds if he hadn’t fallen. He could er shot ’em off
like cans on a fence. He drew one hand back to his ear and extended the other
forward. He could er knocked ’em out like clay pigeons. Bang! A squeak on the
staircase made him wheel around—his arms still holding the invisible gun. The
nigger  was  clipping  up  the  steps  toward  him,  an  amused  smile  stretching  his
trimmed  mustache.  Old  Dudley’s  mouth  dropped  open.  The  nigger’s  lips  were
pulled down like he was trying to keep from laughing. Old Dudley couldn’t move.
He stared at the clear-cut line the nigger’s collar made against his skin.

“What are you hunting, old-timer?” the Negro asked in a voice that sounded

like a nigger’s laugh and a white man’s sneer.

Old Dudley felt like a child with a pop-pistol. His mouth was open and his
tongue was rigid in the middle of it. Right below his knees felt hollow. His feet
slipped and he slid three steps and landed sitting down.

“You better be careful,” the Negro said. “You could easily hurt yourself on
these steps.” And he held out his hand for Old Dudley to pull up on. It was a long
narrow  hand  and  the  tips  of  the  fingernails  were  clean  and  cut  squarely.  They
looked  like  they  might  have  been  filed.  Old  Dudley’s  hands  hung  between  his
knees. The nigger took him by the arm and pulled up. “Whew!” he gasped, “you’re

heavy. Give a little help here.” Old Dudley’s knees unbended and he staggered up.
The nigger had him by the arm. “I’m going up anyway,” he said. “I’ll help you.”
Old Dudley looked frantically around. The steps behind him seemed to close up.
He was walking with the nigger up the stairs. The nigger was waiting for him on
each  step.  “So  you  hunt?”  the  nigger  was  saying.  “Well,  let’s  see.  I  went  deer
hunting once. I believe we used a Dodson .38 to get those deer. What do you use?”
Old  Dudley  was  staring  through  the  shiny  tan  shoes.  “I  use  a  gun,”  he

mumbled.

“I like to fool with guns better than hunting,” the nigger was saying. “Never
was much at killing anything. Seems kind of a shame to deplete the game reserve.
I’d collect guns if I had the time and the money, though.” He was waiting on every
step till Old Dudley got on it. He was explaining guns and makes. He had on gray
socks  with  a  black  fleck  in  them.  They  finished  the  stairs.  The  nigger  walked
down the hall with him, holding him by the arm. It probably looked like he had his
arm locked in the nigger’s.

They went right up to Old Dudley’s door. Then the nigger asked, “You from

around here?”

Old Dudley shook his head, looking at the door. He hadn’t looked at the nigger
yet. All the way up the stairs, he hadn’t looked at the nigger. “Well,” the nigger
said, “it’s a swell place—once you get used to it.” He patted Old Dudley on the
back and went into his own apartment. Old Dudley went into his. The pain in his
throat was all over his face now, leaking out his eyes.

He shuffled to the chair by the window and sank down in it. His throat was
going to pop. His throat was going to pop on account of a nigger—a damn nigger
that patted him on the back and called him “old-timer.” Him that knew such as that
couldn’t be. Him that had come from a good place. A good place. A place where
such as that couldn’t be. His eyes felt strange in their sockets. They were swelling
in them and in a minute there wouldn’t be any room left for them there. He was
trapped in this place where niggers could call you “old-timer.” He wouldn’t be
trapped. He wouldn’t be. He rolled his head on the back of the chair to stretch his
neck that was too full.

A man was looking at him. A man was in the window across the alley looking

straight at him. The man was watching him cry. That was where the geranium was
supposed to be and it was a man in his undershirt, watching him cry, waiting to
watch his throat pop. Old Dudley looked back at the man. It was supposed to be
the geranium. The geranium belonged there, not the man. “Where is the geranium?”
he called out of his tight throat.

“What you cryin’ for?” the man asked. “I ain’t never seen a man cry like that.”
“Where  is  the  geranium?”  Old  Dudley  quavered.  “It  ought  to  be  there.  Not

you.”

“This is my window,” the man said. “I got a right to set here if I want to.”
“Where  is  it?”  Old  Dudley  shrilled.  There  was  just  a  little  room  left  in  his

throat.

“It fell off if it’s any of your business,” the man said.
Old Dudley got up and peered over the window ledge. Down in the alley, way
six floors down, he could see a cracked flower pot scattered over a spray of dirt
and  something  pink  sticking  out  of  a  green  paper  bow.  It  was  down  six  floors.
Smashed down six floors.

Old Dudley looked at the man who was chewing gum and waiting to see the
throat  pop.  “You  shouldn’t  have  put  it  so  near  the  ledge,”  he  murmured.  “Why
don’t you pick it up?”

“Why don’t you, pop?”
Old Dudley stared at the man who was where the geranium should have been.
He would. He’d go down and pick it up. He’d put it in his own window and
look at it all day if he wanted to. He turned from the window and left the room. He
walked slowly down the dog run and got to the steps. The steps dropped down
like a deep wound in the floor. They opened up through a gap like a cavern and
went down and down. And he had gone up them a little behind the nigger. And the
nigger had pulled him up on his feet and kept his arm in his and gone up the steps
with him and said he hunted deer, “old-timer,” and seen him holding a gun that
wasn’t there and sitting on the steps like a child. He had shiny tan shoes and he
was trying not to laugh and the whole business was laughing. There’d probably be
niggers with black flecks in their socks on every step, pulling down their mouths
so as not to laugh. The steps dropped down and down. He wouldn’t go down and

have niggers pattin’ him on the back. He went back to the room and the window
and looked down at the geranium.

The man was sitting over where it should have been. “I ain’t seen you pickin’

it up,” he said.

Old Dudley stared at the man.
“I seen you before,” the man said. “I seen you settin’ in that old chair every
day, starin’ out the window, looking in my apartment. What I do in my apartment
is my business, see? I don’t like people looking at what I do.”

It was at the bottom of the alley with its roots in the air.
“I only tell people once,” the man said and left the window.

The Barber

IT IS trying on liberals in Dilton.

After the Democratic White Primary, Rayber changed his barber. Three weeks
before it, while he was shaving him, the barber asked, “Who you gonna vote for?”

“Darmon,” Rayber said.
“You a nigger-lover?”
Rayber started in the chair. He had not expected to be approached so brutally.
“No,” he said. If he had not been taken off-balance, he would have  said,  “I  am
neither  a  Negro-  nor  a  white-lover.”  He  had  said  that  before  to  Jacobs,  the
philosophy man, and—to show you how trying it is for liberals in Dilton—Jacobs
—a man of his education—had muttered, “That’s a poor way to be.”

“Why?” Rayber had asked bluntly. He knew he could argue Jacobs down.
Jacobs had said, “Skip it.” He had a class. His classes frequently occurred,

Rayber noticed, when Rayber was about to get him in an argument.

“I  am  neither  a  Negro-  nor  a  white-lover,”  Rayber  would  have  said  to  the

barber.

The barber drew a clean path through the lather and then pointed the razor at
Rayber.  “I’m  tellin’  you,”  he  said,  “there  ain’t  but  two  sides  now,  white  and
black. Anybody can see that from this campaign. You know what Hawk said? Said
a hunnert and fifty years ago, they was runnin’ each other down eatin’ each other
—throwin’ jewel rocks at birds—skinnin’ horses with their teeth. A nigger come
in a white barber shop in Atlanta and says, ‘Gimme a haircut.’ They throwed him
out but it just goes to show you. Why listen, three black hyenas over in Mulford
last month shot a white man and took half of what was in his house and you know
where  they  are  now?  Settin’  in  their  county  jail  eatin’  like  the  President  of  the
United States—they might get dirty in the chain gang; or some damn nigger-lover
might come by and be heart-broke to see ’em pickin’ rock. Why, lemme tell you
this—ain’t nothin’ gonna be good again until we get rid of them Mother Hubbards
and get us a man can put these niggers in their places. Shuh.”

“You hear that, George?” he shouted to the colored boy wiping up the floor

around the basins.

“Sho do,” George said.
It was time for Rayber to say something but nothing appropriate would come.
He wanted to say something that George would understand. He was startled that
George  had  been  brought  into  the  conversation.  He  remembered  Jacobs  telling
about lecturing at a Negro college for a week. They couldn’t say Negro—nigger—
colored—black.  Jacobs  said  he  had  come  home  every  night  and  shouted,
“NIGGER  NIGGER  NIGGER”  out  the  back  window.  Rayber  wondered  what
George’s leanings were. He was a trim-looking boy.

“If a nigger come in my shop with any of that haircut sass, he’d get it cut all
right.” The barber made a noise between his teeth. “You a Mother Hubbard?” he
asked.

“I’m voting for Darmon, if that’s what you mean,” Rayber said.
“You ever heard Hawkson talk?”
“I’ve had that pleasure,” Rayber said.
“You heard his last one?”
“No, I understand his remarks don’t alter from speech to speech,” Rayber said

curtly.

“Yeah?” the barber said. “Well, this last speech was a killeroo! Ol’ Hawk let

them Mother Hubbards have it.”

“A good many people,” Rayber said, “consider Hawkson a demagogue.” He
wondered  if  George  knew  what  demagogue  meant.  Should  have  said,  “lying
politician.”

“Demagogue!” The barber slapped his knee and whooped. “That’s what Hawk
said!”  he  howled.  “Ain’t  that  a  shot!  ‘Folks,’  he  says,  ‘them  Mother  Hubbards
says  I’m  a  demagogue.’  Then  he  rears  back  and  says  sort  of  soft-like,  ‘Am  I  a
demagogue, you people?’ And they yells, ‘Naw, Hawk, you ain’t no demagogue!’
And he comes forward shouting, ‘Oh yeah I am, I’m the best damn demagogue in
this state!’ And you should hear them people roar! Whew!”
“Quite a show,” Rayber said, “but what is it but a.…”
“Mother Hubbard,” the barber muttered. “You been taken in by ’em all right.

Lemme tell you somethin’.…” He reviewed Hawkson’s Fourth of July speech. It
had been another killeroo, ending with poetry. Who was Darmon? Hawk wanted
to know. Yeah, who was Darmon?  the crowd had roared. Why, didn’t they know?
Why, he was Little Boy Blue, blowin’ his horn. Yeah. Babies in the meadow and
niggers in the corn. Man! Rayber should have heard that one. No Mother Hubbard
could have stood up under it.

Rayber thought that if the barber would read a few.…
Listen, he didn’t have to read nothin.’ All he had to do was think. That was the
trouble  with  people  these  days—they  didn’t  think,  they  didn’t  use  their  horse
sense. Why wasn’t Rayber thinkin’? Where was his horse sense?

Why am I straining myself? Rayber thought irritably.
“Nossir!” the barber said. “Big words don’t do nobody no good. They don’t

take the place of thinkin’.”

“Thinking!” Rayber shouted. “You call yourself thinking?”
“Listen,”  the  barber  said,  “do  you  know  what  Hawk  told  them  people  at
Tilford?” At Tilford Hawk had told them that he liked niggers fine in their place
and if they didn’t stay in that place, he had a place to put ’em. How about that?

Rayber wanted to know what that had to do with thinking.
The barber thought it was plain as a pig on a sofa what that had to do with
thinking. He thought a good many other things too, which he told Rayber. He said
Rayber should have heard the Hawkson speeches at Mullin’s Oak, Bedford, and
Chickerville.

Rayber settled down in his chair again and reminded the barber that he had

come in for a shave.

The barber started back shaving him. He said Rayber should have heard the
one at Spartasville. “There wasn’t a Mother Hubbard left standin’, and all the Boy
Blues got their horns broke. Hawk said,” he said, “that the time had come when
you had to sit on the lid with.…”

“I have an appointment,” Rayber said. “I’m in a hurry.” Why should he stay

and listen to that tripe?

As much rot as it was, the whole asinine conversation stuck with him the rest
of the day and went through his mind in persistent detail after he was in bed that

night.  To  his  disgust,  he  found  that  he  was  going  through  it,  putting  in  what  he
would have said if he’d had an opportunity to prepare himself. He wondered how
Jacobs would have handled it. Jacobs had a way about him that made people think
he  knew  more  than  Rayber  thought  he  knew.  It  was  not  a  bad  trick  in  his
profession. Rayber often amused himself analyzing it. Jacobs would have handled
the barber calmly enough. Rayber started through the conversation again, thinking
how Jacobs would have done it. He ended doing it himself.

The next time he went to the barber’s, he had forgotten about the argument. The
barber seemed to have forgotten it too. He disposed of the weather and stopped
talking.  Rayber  was  wondering  what  was  going  to  be  for  supper.  Oh.  It  was
Tuesday. On Tuesday his wife had canned meat. Took canned meat and baked it
with cheese—slice of meat and a slice of cheese—turned out striped—why do we
have to have this stuff every Tuesday?—if you don’t like it you don’t have to—

“You still a Mother Hubbard?”
Rayber’s head jerked. “What?”
“You still for Darmon?”
“Yes,” Rayber said and his brain darted to its store of preparations.
“Well,  look-a-here,  you  teachers,  you  know,  looks  like,  well.…”  He  was
confused. Rayber could see that he was not so sure of himself as he’d been the last
time. He probably thought he had a new point to stress. “Looks like you fellows
would  vote  for  Hawk  on  account  of  you  know  what  he  said  about  teachers’
salaries. Seems like you would now. Why not? Don’t you want more money?”

“More money!” Rayber laughed. “Don’t you know that with a rotten governor
I’d lose more money than he’d give me?” He realized that he was finally on the
barber’s  level.  “Why,  he  dislikes  too  many  different  kinds  of  people,”  he  said.
“He’d cost me twice as much as Darmon.”

“So what if he would?” the barber said. “I ain’t one to pinch money when it

does some good. I’ll pay for quality any day.”

“That’s not what I meant!” Rayber began. “That’s not.…”
“That  raise  Hawk’s  promised  don’t  apply  to  teachers  like  him  anyway,”
somebody  said  from  the  back  of  the  room. A  fat  man  with  an  air  of  executive
assurance came over near Rayber. “He’s a college teacher, ain’t he?”

“Yeah,” the barber said, “that’s right. He wouldn’t get Hawk’s raise; but say,

he wouldn’t get one if Darmon was elected neither.”

“Ahh, he’d get something. All the schools are supporting Darmon. They stand
to get their cut—free textbooks or new desks or something. That’s the rules of the
game.”

“Better schools,” Rayber sputtered, “benefit everybody.”
“Seems like I been hearin’ that a long time,” the barber said.
“You  see,”  the  man  explained,  “you  can’t  put  nothing  over  on  the  schools.

That’s the way they throw it off—benefits everybody.”

The barber laughed.
“If you ever thought…” Rayber began.
“Maybe  there’d  be  a  new  desk  at  the  head  of  the  room  for  you,”  the  man

chortled. “How about that, Joe?” He nudged the barber.

Rayber  wanted  to  lift  his  foot  under  the  man’s  chin.  “You  ever  heard  about

reasoning?” he muttered.

“Listen,” the man said, “you can talk all you want. What you don’t realize is,
we’ve got an issue here. How’d you like a couple of black faces looking at you
from the back of your classroom?”

Rayber had a blind moment when he felt as if something that wasn’t there was
bashing him to the ground. George came in and began washing basins. “Willing to
teach any person willing to learn—black or white,” Rayber said. He wondered if
George had looked up.

“All  right,”  the  barber  agreed,  “but  not  mixed  up  together,  huh?  How’d  you

like to go to a white school, George?” he shouted.

“Wouldn’t like that,” George said. “We needs sommo powders. These here the

las’ in this box.” He dusted them out into the basin.

“Go get some then,” the barber said.
“The time has come,” the executive went on, “just like Hawkson said, when
we  got  to  sit  on  the  lid  with  both  feet  and  a  mule.”  He  went  on  to  review
Hawkson’s Fourth of July speech.

Rayber would like to have pushed him into the basin. The day was hot and full
enough of flies without having to spend it listening to a fat fool. He could see the

courthouse square, blue-green cool, through the tinted glass window. He wished
to hell the barber would hurry. He fixed his attention on the square outside, feeling
himself there where, he could tell from the trees, the air was moving slightly. A
group of men sauntered up the courthouse walk. Rayber looked more closely and
thought  he  recognized  Jacobs.  But  Jacobs  had  a  late  afternoon  class.  It  was
Jacobs, though. Or was it. If it were, who was he talking to? Blakeley? Or was
that  Blakeley.  He  squinted.  Three  colored  boys  in  zoot  suits  strolled  by  on  the
sidewalk. One dropped down on the pavement so that only his head was visible to
Rayber,  and  the  other  two  lounged  over  him,  leaning  against  the  barbershop
window and making a hole in the view. Why the hell can’t they park somewhere
else?  Rayber  thought  fiercely.  “Hurry  up,”  he  said  to  the  barber,  “I  have  an
appointment.”

“What’s your hurry?” the fat man said. “You better stay and stick up for Boy

Blue.”

“You  know  you  never  told  us  why  you’re  gonna  vote  for  him,”  the  barber

chuckled, taking the cloth from around Rayber’s neck.

“Yeah,” the fat man said, “see can you tell us without sayin’, goodgovermint.”
“I have an appointment,” Rayber said. “I can’t stay.”
“You just know Darmon is so sorry you won’t be able to say a good word for

him,” the fat man howled.

“Listen,”  Rayber  said,  “I’ll  be  back  in  here  next  week  and  I’ll  give  you  as
many  reasons  for  voting  for  Darmon  as  you  want—better  reasons  than  you’ve
given me for voting for Hawkson.”

“I’d like to see you do that,” the barber said. “Because I’m telling you, it can’t

be done.”

“All right, we’ll see,” Rayber said.
“Remember,” the fat man carped, “you ain’t gonna say, goodgovermint.”
“I  won’t  say  anything  you  can’t  understand,”  Rayber  muttered  and  then  felt
foolish for showing his irritation. The fat man and the barber were grinning. “I’ll
see you Tuesday,” Rayber said and left. He was disgusted with himself for saying
he  would  give  them  reasons.  Reasons  would  have  to  be  worked  out—
systematically. He couldn’t open his head in a second like they did. He wished to

hell  he  could.  He  wished  to  hell  “Mother  Hubbard”  weren’t  so  accurate.  He
wished to hell Darmon spit tobacco juice. The reasons would have to be worked
out—time and trouble. What was the matter with him? Why not work them out? He
could make everything in that shop squirm if he put his mind to it.

By the time he got home, he had the beginnings of an outline for an argument. It
would be filled in with no waste words, no big words—no easy job, he could see.
He  got  right  to  work  on  it.  He  worked  on  it  until  suppertime  and  had  four
sentences—all crossed out. He got up once in the middle of the meal to go to his
desk and change one. After supper he crossed the correction out.

“What is the matter with you?” his wife wanted to know.
“Not a thing,” Rayber said, “not a thing. I just have to work.”
“I’m not stopping you,” she said.
When she went out, he kicked the board loose on the bottom of the desk. By
eleven o’clock he had one page. The next morning it came easier, and he finished
it by noon. He thought it was blunt enough. It began, “For two reasons, men elect
other men to power,” and it ended, “Men who use ideas without measuring them
are  walking  on  wind.”  He  thought  the  last  sentence  was  pretty  effective.  He
thought the whole thing was effective enough.

In the afternoon he took it around to Jacob’s office. Blakeley was there but he

left. Rayber read the paper to Jacobs.

“Well,”  Jacobs  said,  “so  what?  What  do  you  call  yourself  doing?”  He  had

been jotting figures down on a record sheet all the time Rayber was reading.

Rayber  wondered  if  he  were  busy.  “Defending  myself  against  barbers,”  he

said. “You ever tried to argue with a barber?”

“I never argue,” Jacobs said.
“That’s  because  you  don’t  know  this  kind  of  ignorance,”  Rayber  explained.

“You’ve never experienced it.”

Jacobs snorted. “Oh yes I have,” he said.
“What happened?”
“I never argue.”
“But you know you’re right,” Rayber persisted.
“I never argue.”

“Well, I’m going to argue,” Rayber said. “I’m going to say the right thing as
fast as they can say the wrong. It’ll be a question of speed. Understand,” he went
on, “this is no mission of conversion; I’m defending myself.”

“I understand that,” Jacobs said. “I hope you’re able to do it.”
“I’ve already done it! You read the paper. There it is.” Rayber wondered if

Jacobs were dense or preoccupied.

“Okay, then leave it there. Don’t spoil your complexion arguing with barbers.”
“It’s got to be done,” Rayber said.
Jacobs shrugged.
Rayber had counted on discussing it with him at length. “Well, I’ll see you,”

he said.

“Okay,” Jacobs said.
Rayber wondered why he had ever read the paper to him in the first place.
Before he left for the barber’s Tuesday afternoon, Rayber was nervous and he
thought that by way of practice he’d try the paper out on his wife. He didn’t know
but what she was for Hawkson herself. Whenever he mentioned the election, she
made  it  a  point  to  say,  “Just  because  you  teach  doesn’t  mean  you  know
everything.” Did he ever say he knew anything at all? Maybe he wouldn’t call her.
But he wanted to hear how the thing was actually going to sound said casually. It
wasn’t long; wouldn’t take up much of her time. She would probably dislike being
called. Still, she might possibly be affected by what he said. Possibly. He called
her.

She said all right, but he’d just have to wait until she got through what she was
doing; it looked like every time she got her hands in something, she had to leave
and go do something else.

He said he didn’t have all day to wait—it was only forty-five minutes until the

shop closed—and would she please hurry up?

She  came  in  wiping  her  hands  and  said  all  right;  all  right,  she  was  there,

wasn’t she? Go ahead.

He began saying it very easily and casually, looking over her head. The sound
of  his  voice  playing  over  the  words  was  not  bad.  He  wondered  if  it  were  the
words themselves or his tones that made them sound the way they did. He paused

in the middle of a sentence and glanced at his wife to see if her face would give
him any clue. Her head was turned slightly toward the table by her chair where an
open magazine was lying. As he paused, she got up. “That was very nice,” she
said and went back to the kitchen. Rayber left for the barber’s.

He walked slowly, thinking what he was going to say in the shop and now and
then stopping to look absently at a store window. Block’s Feed Company had a
display  of  automatic  chicken-killers—“So  Timid  Persons  Can  Kill  Their  Own
Fowl”  the  sign  over  them  read.  Rayber  wondered  if  many  timid  persons  used
them. As he neared the barber’s, he could see obliquely through the door the man
with  the  executive  assurance  was  sitting  in  the  corner  reading  a  newspaper.
Rayber went in and hung up his hat.

“Howdy,” the barber said. “Ain’t this the hottest day in the year, though!”
“It’s hot enough,” Rayber said.
“Hunting season soon be over,” the barber commented.
All right, Rayber wanted to say, let’s get this thing going. He thought he would

work into his argument from their remarks. The fat man hadn’t noticed him.

“You should have seen the covey this dog of mine flushed the other day,” the
barber went on as Rayber got in the chair. “The birds spread once and we got four
and they spread again and we got two. That ain’t bad.”

“Never hunted quail,” Rayber said hoarsely.
“There ain’t nothing like taking a nigger and a hound dog and a gun and going

after quail,” the barber said. “You missed a lot out of life if you ain’t had that.”

Rayber cleared his throat and the barber went on working. The fat man in the
corner turned a page. What do they think I came in here for? Rayber thought. They
couldn’t have forgotten. He waited, hearing the noises flies make and the mumble
of the men talking in the back. The fat man turned another page. Rayber could hear
George’s broom slowly stroking the floor somewhere in the shop, then stop, then
scrape, then.… “You er, still a Hawkson man?” Rayber asked the barber.

“Yeah!” the barber laughed. “Yeah! You know I had forgot. You was gonna
tell us why you are voting for Darmon. Hey, Roy!” he yelled to the fat man, “come
over here. We gonna hear why we should vote for Boy Blue.”

Roy grunted and turned another page. “Be there when I finish this piece,” he

mumbled.

“What you got there, Joe?” one of the men in the back called, “one of them

goodgovermint boys?”

“Yeah,” the barber said. “He’s gonna make a speech.”
“I’ve heard too many of that kind already,” the man said.
“You  ain’t  heard  one  by  Rayber,”  the  barber  said.  “Rayber’s  all  right.  He

don’t know how to vote, but he’s all right.”

Rayber reddened.  Two  of  the  men  strolled  up.  “This  is  no  speech,”  Rayber

said. “I only want to discuss it with you—sanely.”
“Come on over here, Roy,” the barber yelled.
“What are you trying to make of this?” Rayber muttered; then he said suddenly,
“If  you’re  calling  everybody  else,  why  don’t  you  call  your  boy,  George.  You
afraid to have him listen?”

The barber looked at Rayber for a second without saying anything.
Rayber felt as if he had made himself too much at home.
“He can hear,” the barber said. “He can hear back where he is.”
“I just thought he might be interested,” Rayber said.
“He can hear,” the barber repeated. “He can hear what he hears and he can
hear two times that much. He can hear what you don’t say as well as what you
do.”

Roy  came  over  folding  his  newspaper.  “Howdy,  boy,”  he  said,  putting  his

hand on Rayber’s head, “let’s get on with this speech.”

Rayber felt as if he were fighting his way out of a net. They were over him
with their red faces grinning. He heard the words drag out—“Well, the way I see
it,  men  elect.…”  He  felt  them  pull  out  of  his  mouth  like  freight  cars,  jangling,
backing  up  on  each  other,  grating  to  a  halt,  sliding,  clinching  back,  jarring,  and
then  suddenly  stopping  as  roughly  as  they  had  begun.  It  was  over.  Rayber  was
jarred that it was over so soon. For a second—as if they were expecting him to go
on—no one said anything.

Then, “How many yawl gonna vote for Boy Blue!” the barber yelled.
Some of the men turned around and snickered. One doubled over.
“Me,” Roy said. “I’m gonna run right down there now so I’ll be first to vote

for Boy Blue tomorrow morning.”

“Listen!” Rayber shouted, “I’m not trying.…”
“George,” the barber yelled, “you heard that speech?”
“Yessir,” George said.
“Who you gonna vote for, George?”
“I’m not trying to.…” Rayber yelled.
“I don’t know is they gonna let me vote,” George said. “Do, I gonna vote for

Mr. Hawkson.”

“Listen!”  Rayber  yelled,  “do  you  think  I’m  trying  to  change  your  fat  minds?
What do you think I am?” He jerked the barber around by the shoulder. “Do you
think I’d tamper with your damn fool ignorance?”

The barber shook Rayber’s grip off his shoulder. “Don’t get excited,” he said,
“we all thought it was a fine speech. That’s what I been saying all along—you got
to think, you got to.…” He lurched backward when Rayber hit him, and landed
sitting on the footrest of the next chair. “Thought it was fine,” he finished, looking
steadily  at  Rayber’s  white,  half-lathered  face  glaring  down  at  him.  “It’s  what  I
been saying all along.”

The blood began pounding up Rayber’s neck just under his skin. He turned and
pushed  quickly  through  the  men  around  him  to  the  door.  Outside,  the  sun  was
suspending everything in a pool of heat, and before he had turned the first corner,
almost running, lather began to drip inside his collar and down the barber’s bib,
dangling to his knees.

Wildcat

OLD GABRIEL shuffled across the room waving his stick slowly sideways in front
of him.

“Who that?” he whispered, appearing in the doorway. “I smells fo’ niggers.”
Their soft, minor-toned laughter rose above the frog’s hum and blended into

voices.

“Cain’t you do no bettern that, Gabe?”
“Is you goin’ with us, Granpaw?”
“You oughter be able to smell good enough to git our names.”
Old Gabriel moved out on the porch a little way. “That Matthew an’ George

an’ Willie Myrick. An’ who that other?”

“This Boon Williams, Granpaw.”
Gabriel felt for the edge of the porch with his stick. “What yawl doin’? Set

down a spell.”

“We waitin’ on Mose an’ Luke.”
“We goin’ huntin’ that cat.”
“What yawl huntin’ him with?” old Gabriel muttered. “Yawl ain’t got nothin’
fit to kill a wildcat with.” He sat down on the edge of the porch and hung his feet
over the side. “I done tol’ Mose an’ Luke that.”

“How many wildcats you killed, Gabrul?” Their voices, rising to him through

the darkness, were full of gentle mockery.

“When I was a boy, there was a cat once,” Gabriel started. “It come ’round
here huntin’ blood. Come in through the winder of a cabin one night an’ sprung in
bed with a nigger an’ tore that nigger’s throat open befo’ he could holler good.”

“This cat in the woods, Granpaw. It jus’ come out to git cows. Jupe Williams

seen it when he gone through to the sawmill.”

“What he done about it?”
“Started  runnin’.”  Their  laughter  broke  over  the  night  sounds  again.  “He

thought it was after him.”

“It was,” old Gabriel murmured.
“It after cows.”
Gabriel sniffed. “It comin’ out the woods for mo’ than cows. It gonna git itssef
some  folks’  blood. You  watch. An’  yawl  goin’  off  huntin’  it  ain’t  gonna  do  no
good. It goin’ huntin’ itssef. I been smellin’ it.”

“How you know that it you smellin’?”
“Ain’t no mistakin’ a wildcat. Ain’t been one ’round here since I was a boy.

Why don’t yawl set a spell?” he added.

“You ain’t afraid to stay here by yosef, is you, Granpaw?”
Old  Gabriel  stiffened.  He  felt  for  the  post  to  pull  himself  up  on.  “Ef  you
waitin’  on  Mose  an’  Luke,”  he  said,  “you  better  git  goin’.  They  started  over  to
yawl’s place an hour ago.”

II
“Come in here, I say! Come in here right now!”

The blind boy sat alone on the steps, staring ahead. “All the men gone?” he

called.

“All gone but ol’ Hezuh. Come in.”
He hated to go in—among the women.
“I smells it,” he said.
“You come in here, Gabriel.”
He went in and walked to where the window was. The women were muttering

at him.

“You stay in here, boy.”
“You be ’tractin’ that cat right in this room, settin’ out there.”
No air was coming through the window, and he scratched at the shutter latch to

open it.

“Don’t open that winder, boy. Us don’t want no wildcat jumpin’ in here.”
“I could er gone wit ’em,” he said sullenly. “I could er smelled it out. I ain’t

afraid.” Shut up wit these women like he one too.

“Reba say she kin smell it herself.”

He heard the old woman groan in the corner. “They ain’t gonna do no good out
huntin’ it,” she whined. “It here. It right around here. Ef it jump in this room it
gonna git me fust, then it gonna git that boy, then it gonna git.…”

“Hush yo’ mouth, Reba,” he heard his mother say. “I look after my boy.”
He could look after hissef. He warn’t afraid. He could smell it—him an’ Reba
could. It’d jump on them fust; fust Reba an’ then him. It was the shape of a reg’lar
cat only bigger, his mother said. An’ where you felt the sharp points on a house
cat’s  foot,  you  felt  big  knife  claws  in  a  wildcat’s,  an’  knife  teeth,  too;  an’  it
breathed heat an’ spit wet lime. Gabriel could feel its claws in his shoulders and
its  teeth  in  his  throat.  But  he  wouldn’t  let  ’em  stay  there.  He’d  lock  his  arms
’round its body an’ feel up for its neck an’ jerk its head back an’ go down wit it on
the  floor  until  its  claws  dropped  away  from  his  shoulders.  Beat,  beat,  beat  its
head, beat, beat beat.…

“Who wit ol’ Hezuh?” one of the women asked.
“Jus’ Nancy.”
“Oughter be somebody else down there,” his mother said softly.
Reba moaned. “Anybody go out gonna git sprung on befo’ they gits there. It

around here, I say. It gittin’ closer an’ closer. It gonna git me sho.”

He could smell it strong.
“How it gonna git in here? Yawl jus’ frettin’ for nothin’.”
That was Thin Minnie. Nothin’ could git her. She’d had a spell on her since

when she was small—put there by a conjer woman.

“It come in easy ef it wanter,” Reba snorted. “It tear up that cat hole an’ come

through.”

“We could be down to Nancy’s by then,” Minnie sniffed.
“Yawl could,” the old woman muttered.
Him an’ her couldn’t, he knew. But he’d stay an’ fight it. You see that blin’

boy there? He the one kill the wildcat!

Reba started groaning.
“Hush that!” his mother ordered.
The groaning turned into singing—low in her throat.

“Lord, Lord,
Gonna see yo’ pilgrim today.
Lord, Lord,
Gonna see yo’…”

“Hush!” his mother hissed. “What that I hear?”
Gabriel leaned forward in the silence; stiff, ready.
It was a thump, thump and maybe a snarl, away, muffled, and then a shriek, far
away, then louder and louder, closer and closer, over the edge of the hill into the
yard and up on the porch. The cabin was shaking with the weight of a body against
the door. There was the feel of a rush inside the room and the scream was let in.
Nancy!

“It got him!” she screamed. “Got him, sprung in through the winder, got him in

the throat. Hezuh,” she wailed, “ol’ Hezuh.”

Later in the night the men returned, carrying a rabbit and two squirrels.

III
Old Gabriel crept back through the darkness to his bed. He could sit in the chair a
while or he could lie down. He eased down in the bed and pushed his nose into
the feel and smell of the quilt. They won’t no use to do that. He could smell the
other  jus’  the  same.  He  had  been  smellin’  it,  been  smellin’  it  ever  since  they
started  talkin’  about  it.  There  it  was  one  evenin’—different  from  all  the  smells
around,  different  from  niggers’  and  cows’  an’  ground  smells.  Wildcat.  Tull
Williams seen it jump on a bull.

Gabriel sat up suddenly. It was nearer. He got out the bed and pushed to the
door. He had bolted that one; the other must be open. A breeze was coming in and
he walked in it until he felt the night air full in his face. This one was open. He
slammed it shut and pushed the bolt in. What was the use to do that? Ef the cat
aimed on comin’ in, it could git there. He went back to the chair and sat down. It
come in east ef it wanta. There were little drafts all around him. By the door there
was a hole the hound could git under; that cat could gnaw it through an’ be in befo’
he got out. Maybe ef he sat by the back do’, he could git away quicker. He got up
and dragged his chair after him across the room. The smell was near. Maybe he’d

count. He could count to a thousand. Won’t no nigger for five miles could count
that fur. He started counting.

Mose  an’  Luke  wouldn’t  be  back  for  six  hours  yet.  Tomorrow  night  they
wouldn’t go; but the cat was gonna git him tonight. Lemme go wit you boys an’
smell him out for you. I the onliest one kin smell ’round here.

They’d lose him in the woods, they’d said. Huntin’ wildcats won’t no business

for him.

I  ain’t  afraid  er  no  wildcat  er  no  woods  neither.  Lemme  go  wit  you  boys,

lemme go.

Ain’t no reason to be ’fraid to stay here by yosef, they’d laughed. Ain’t nothin’

gonna git you. We take you up the road to Mattie’s ef you scaird.

Mattie’s! Take him to Mattie’s! Settin’ wit the women. What yawl think I is? I
ain’t afraid er no wildcat. But it comin’, boys; an’ it ain’t gonna be in no woods—
it gonna be here. Yawl wastin’ yo’ time in the woods. Stay here an’ you ketch it.

He suppose to be countin’. Where he lef’ off at? Five hunnert an’ five, five
hunnert  an’  six  …  Mattie’s!  What  they  think  he  is?  Five  hunnert  an’  two,  five
hunnert an’.…

He  sat  stiff  in  the  chair  with  his  hands  gripped  tight  to  the  stick  across  his
knees. It won’t gonna git him like he was a woman. His shirt was stuck wet to him,
making him smell higher. The men had come back later in the night with a rabbit
and two squirrels. He began to remember the other wildcat and he remembered as
if he had been in Hezuh’s cabin instead of with the women. He wondered was he
Hezuh. He was Gabrul. It won’t gonna git him like Hezuh. He was gonna hit it. He
was gonna pull it off. He was gonna … how he gonna do all that? He hadn’t been
able to wring a chicken’s neck for fo’ years. It was gonna git him. Won’t nothin’ to
do but wait. The smell was near. Won’t nothin’ for old people to do but wait. It
was gonna git him tonight. The teeth would be hot an’ the claws cold. The claws
would sink in soft, an’ the teeth would cut sharp an’ scrape his bones inside.

Gabriel  felt  the  sweat  on  himself.  It  kin  smell  me  good’s  I  kin  smell  it,  he
thought. I settin’ here smellin’ an’ it comin’ here smellin’. Two hunnert an’ fo’;
where he lef’ off at? Fo’ hunnert an’ five.…

There was a sudden scratching by the chimney. He sat forward, tense, tight-

throated.  “Come  on,”  he  whispered,  “I  here.  I  waitin’.”  He  couldn’t  move.  He
couldn’t  make  himself  move.  There  was  another  scratching.  It  was  the  pain  he
didn’t  want.  But  he  didn’t  want  the  waiting  either.  “I  here,”  he—there  was
another, just a small noise and then a flutter. Bats. His grip on the stick loosened.
He should have known that won’t it. It won’t no farther than the barn yet. What ail
his  nose?  What  ail  him?  Won’t  no  nigger  for  hunnert  miles  could  smell  like  he
could. He heard the scratching again, coming differently, coming from the corner
of the house where the cat hole was. Pick … pick … pick. That was a bat. He
knowd that was a bat. Pick … pick. “Here I is,” he whispered. Won’t no bat. He
braced his feet to get up. Pick. “Lord waitin’ on me,” he whispered. “He don’t
want me with my face tore open. Why don’t you go on, Wildcat, why you want
me?” He was on his feet now. “Lord don’t want me with no wildcat marks.” He
was moving toward the cat hole. Across on the river bank the Lord was waiting
on him with a troupe of angels and golden vestments for him to put on and when he
came,  he’d  put  on  the  vestments  and  stand  there  with  the  Lord  and  the  angels,
judging  life.  Won’t  no  nigger  for  fifty  miles  fitter  to  judge  than  him.  Pick.  He
stopped.  He  smelled  it  right  outside,  nosing  the  hole.  He  had  to  climb  onto
something! What he going toward it for? He had to get on something high! There
was a shelf nailed over the chimney and he turned wildly and fell against a chair
and shoved it up to the fireplace. He caught hold of the shelf and pulled himself
onto the chair and sprang up and backwards and felt the narrow shelf board under
him  for  an  instant  and  then  felt  it  sag  and  jerked  his  feet  up  and  felt  it  crack
somewhere from the wall. His stomach flew inside him and stopped hard and the
shelf board fell across his feet and the rung of the chair hit against his head and
then, after a second of stillness, he heard a low, gasping animal cry wail over two
hills and fade past him; then snarls, tearing short, furious, through the pain wails.
Gabriel sat stiff on the floor.

“Cow,” he breathed finally. “Cow.”
Gradually he felt his muscles loosen. It got to her befo’ him. It would go on off
now,  but  it  would  be  back  tomorrer  night.  He  rose  shaking  from  the  chair  and
stumbled to his bed. The cat had been a half mile away. He won’t sharp like he
used to be. They shouldn’t leave old people by theyselves. He done tole ’em they

won’t gonna ketch nothin’ off in no woods. Tomorrer night it would come back.
Tomorrer night they would stay here an’ kill it. Now he want to sleep. He done
tole ’em they couldn’t get no wildcat in no woods. He the one tole ’em where it
gonna be. They’d a listened to him, they’d done had it by now. When he die he
want to be sleepin’ in a bed; didn’t want to be on no floor with a wildcat stuck in
his face. Lord waitin’.

When he woke up, the darkness was full of morning things. He heard Mose and
Luke at the stove and smelled the side meat in the skillet. He reached for his snuff
and filled his lip. “What yawl ketch?” he asked trenchantly.

“Ain’t caught nothin’ las’ night.” Luke put the  plate  in  his  hands.  “Here  yo’

side meat. How you bust that shelf?”

“Ain’t busted no shelf,” old Gabriel muttered. “Wind to’ it down and waked
me up in the middle of the night. It been due to fall. You ain’t never built nothin’
yet stayed together.”

“We sot a trap,” Mose said. “We git that cat tonight.”
“Yawl sho will, boys,” Gabriel said. “It’ll be right here tonight. Ain’t it done

kill a cow a half a mile from here las’ night?”

“That don’t mean it comin’ this way,” Luke said.
“It comin’ this way,” Gabriel said.
“How many wildcats you killed, Granpaw?”
Gabriel stopped; the plate of side meat tremored in his hand. “I knows what I

knows, boy.”

“We git it soon. We sot a trap over in Ford’s Woods. It been around there. We

goin’ up in a tree over the trap every night an’ wait ’til we gits it.”

Their forks were scraping back and forth over their tin plates like knife teeth

against stone.

“You wants sommo’ side meat, Granpaw?”
Gabriel  put  his  fork  down  on  the  quilt.  “No,  boy,”  he  said,  “no  mo’  side
meat.” The darkness was hollow around him and through its depth, animal cries
wailed and mingled with the beats pounding in his throat.

The Crop

MISS  WILLERTON  always  crumbed  the  table.  It  was  her  particular  household
accomplishment and she did it with great thoroughness. Lucia and Bertha did the
dishes  and  Garner  went  into  the  parlor  and  did  the Morning  Press  crossword
puzzle.  That  left  Miss  Willerton  in  the  dining  room  by  herself  and  that  was  all
right with Miss Willerton. Whew! Breakfast in that house was always an ordeal.
Lucia  insisted  that  they  have  a  regular  hour  for  breakfast  just  like  they  did  for
other meals. Lucia said a regular breakfast made for other regular habits, and with
Garner’s tendency to upsets, it was imperative that they establish some system in
their eating. This way she could also see that he put the Agar-Agar on his Cream
of Wheat. As if, Miss Willerton thought, after having done it for fifty years, he’d
be  capable  of  doing  anything  else.  The  breakfast  dispute  always  started  with
Garner’s Cream of Wheat and ended with her three spoonfuls of pineapple crush.
“You  know  your  acid,  Willie,”  Miss  Lucia  would  always  say,  “you  know  your
acid”; and then Garner would roll his eyes and make some sickening remark and
Bertha would jump and Lucia would look distressed and Miss Willerton would
taste the pineapple crush she had already swallowed.

It was a relief to crumb the table. Crumbing the table gave one time to think,
and if Miss Willerton were going to write a story, she had to think about it first.
She could usually think best sitting in front of her typewriter, but this would do for
the time being. First, she had to think of a subject to write a story about. There
were so many subjects to write stories about that Miss Willerton never could think
of one. That was always the hardest part of writing a story, she always said. She
spent  more  time  thinking  of  something  to  write  about  than  she  did  writing.
Sometimes she discarded subject after subject and it usually took her a week or
two to decide finally on something. Miss Willerton got out the silver crumber and
the crumb-catcher and started stroking the table. I wonder, she mused, if a baker
would make a good subject? Foreign bakers were very picturesque, she thought.
Aunt Myrtile Filmer had left her four color-tints of French bakers in mushroom-

looking hats. They were great tall fellows—blond and.…

“Willie!” Miss Lucia screamed, entering the dining room with the saltcellars.
“For  heaven’s  sake,  hold  the  catcher  under  the  crumber  or  you’ll  have  those
crumbs on the rug. I’ve Bisseled it four times in the last week and I am not going
to do it again.”

“You  have  not  Bisseled  it  on  account  of  any  crumbs  I  have  spilled,”  Miss
Willerton said tersely. “I always pick up the crumbs I drop,” and she added, “I
drop relatively few.”

“And wash the crumber before you put it up this time,” Miss Lucia returned.
Miss  Willerton  drained  the  crumbs  into  her  hand  and  threw  them  out  the
window. She took the catcher and crumber to the kitchen and ran them under the
cold-water faucet. She dried them and stuck them back in the drawer. That was
over. Now she could get to the typewriter. She could stay there until dinnertime.

Miss Willerton sat down at her typewriter and let out her breath. Now! What
had she been thinking about?  Oh.  Bakers.  Hmmm.  Bakers.  No,  bakers  wouldn’t
do.  Hardly  colorful  enough.  No  social  tension  connected  with  bakers.  Miss
Willerton sat staring through her typewriter. A S D F G—her eyes wandered over
the keys. Hmmm. Teachers? Miss Willerton wondered. No. Heavens no. Teachers
always made Miss Willerton feel peculiar. Her teachers at Willowpool Seminary
had  been  all  right  but  they  were  women.  Willowpool  Female  Seminary,  Miss
Willerton remembered. She didn’t like the phrase, Willowpool Female Seminary
—it sounded biological. She always just said she was a graduate of Willowpool.
Men  teachers  made  Miss  Willerton  feel  as  if  she  were  going  to  mispronounce
something. Teachers weren’t timely anyhow. They weren’t even a social problem.
Social problem. Social problem. Hmmm. Sharecroppers! Miss Willerton had
never been intimately connected with sharecroppers but, she reflected, they would
make as arty a subject as any, and they would give her that air of social concern
which  was  so  valuable  to  have  in  the  circles  she  was  hoping  to  travel!  “I  can
always capitalize,” she muttered, “on the hookworm.” It was coming to her now!
Certainly! Her fingers plinked excitedly over the keys, never touching them. Then
suddenly she began typing at great speed.

“Lot Motun,” the typewriter registered, “called his dog.” “Dog” was followed

by an abrupt pause. Miss Willerton always did her best work on the first sentence.
“First sentences,” she always said, “came to her—like a flash! Just like a flash!”
she would say and snap her fingers, “like a flash!” And she built her story up from
them. “Lot Motun called his dog” had been automatic with Miss Willerton, and
reading the sentence over, she decided that not only was “Lot Motun” a good name
for a sharecropper, but also that having him call his dog was an excellent thing to
have a sharecropper do. “The dog pricked up its ears and slunk over to Lot.” Miss
Willerton had the sentence down before she realized her error—two “Lots” in one
paragraph. That was displeasing to the ear. The typewriter grated back and Miss
Willerton applied three x’s to “Lot.” Over it she wrote in pencil, “him.” Now she
was ready to go again. “Lot Motun called his dog. The dog pricked up its ears and
slunk over to him.” Two dogs, too, Miss Willerton thought. Ummm. But that didn’t
affect the ears like two “Lots,” she decided.

Miss  Willerton  was  a  great  believer  in  what  she  called  “phonetic  art.”  She
maintained that the ear was as much a reader as the eye. She liked to express it
that way. “The eye forms a picture,” she had told a group at the United Daughters
of the Colonies, “that can be painted in the abstract, and the success of a literary
venture”  (Miss  Willerton  liked  the  phrase,  ‘literary  venture’)  “depends  on  the
abstract  created  in  the  mind  and  the  tonal  quality”  (Miss  Willerton  also  liked
‘tonal  quality’)  “registered  in  the  ear.”  There  was  something  biting  and  sharp
about “Lot Motun called his dog”; followed by “the dog pricked up its ears and
slunk over to him,” it gave the paragraph just the send-off it needed.

“He  pulled  the  animal’s  short,  scraggy  ears  and  rolled  over  with  it  in  the
mud.”  Perhaps,  Miss  Willerton  mused,  that  would  be  overdoing  it.  But  a
sharecropper,  she  knew,  might  reasonably  be  expected  to  roll  over  in  the  mud.
Once she had read a novel dealing with that kind of people in which they had done
just as bad and, throughout three-fourths of the narrative, much worse. Lucia found
it in cleaning out one of Miss Willerton’s bureau drawers and after glancing at a
few random pages took it between thumb and index finger to the furnace and threw
it in. “When I was cleaning your bureau out this morning, Willie, I found a book
that  Garner  must  have  put  there  for  a  joke,”  Miss  Lucia  told  her  later.  “It  was
awful, but you know how Garner is. I burned it.” And then, tittering, she added, “I

was sure it couldn’t be yours.” Miss Willerton was sure it could be none other’s
than hers but she hesitated in claiming the distinction. She had ordered it from the
publisher because she didn’t want to ask for it at the library. It had cost her $3.75
with the postage and she had not finished the last four chapters. At least, she had
got enough from it, though, to be able to say that Lot Motun might reasonably roll
over in the mud with his dog. Having him do that would give more point to the
hookworm, too, she decided. “Lot Motun called his dog. The dog pricked up its
ears and slunk over to him. He pulled the animal’s short, scraggy ears and rolled
over with it in the mud.”

Miss Willerton settled back. That was a good beginning. Now she would plan
her action. There had to be a woman, of course. Perhaps Lot could kill her. That
type  of  woman  always  started  trouble.  She  might  even  goad  him  on  to  kill  her
because  of  her  wantonness  and  then  he  would  be  pursued  by  his  conscience
maybe.

He  would  have  to  have  principles  if  that  were  going  to  be  the  case,  but  it
would be fairly easy to give him those. Now how was she going to work that in
with all the love interest there’d have to be, she wondered. There would have to
be some quite violent, naturalistic scenes, the sadistic sort of thing one read of in
connection with that class. It was a problem. However, Miss Willerton enjoyed
such problems. She liked to plan passionate scenes best of all, but when she came
to write them, she always began to feel peculiar and to wonder what the family
would say when they read them. Garner would snap his fingers and wink at her at
every opportunity; Bertha would think she was terrible; and Lucia would say in
that silly voice of hers, “What have you been keeping from us, Willie? What have
you  been  keeping  from  us?”  and  titter  like  she  always  did.  But  Miss  Willerton
couldn’t think about that now; she had to plan her characters.

Lot would be tall, stooped, and shaggy but with sad eyes that made him look
like  a  gentleman  in  spite  of  his  red  neck  and  big  fumbling  hands.  He’d  have
straight teeth and, to indicate that he had some spirit, red hair. His clothes would
hang  on  him  but  he’d  wear  them  nonchalantly  like  they  were  part  of  his  skin;
maybe,  she  mused,  he’d  better  not  roll  over  with  the  dog  after  all.  The  woman
would be more or less pretty—yellow hair, fat ankles, muddy-colored eyes.

She would get supper for him in the cabin and he’d sit there eating the lumpy
grits she hadn’t bothered to put salt in and thinking about something big, something
way off—another cow, a painted house, a clean well, a farm of his own even. The
woman would yowl at him for not cutting enough wood for her stove and would
whine about the pain in her back. She’d sit and stare at him eating the sour grits
and say he didn’t have nerve enough to steal food. “You’re just a damn beggar!”
she’d sneer. Then he’d tell her to keep quiet. “Shut your mouth!” he’d shout. “I’ve
taken all I’m gonna.” She’d roll her eyes, mocking him, and laugh—“I ain’t afraid
er  nothin’  that  looks  like  you.”  Then  he’d  push  his  chair  behind  him  and  head
toward  her.  She’d  snatch  a  knife  off  the  table—Miss  Willerton  wondered  what
kind of a fool the woman was—and back away holding it in front of her. He’d
lunge forward but she’d dart from him like a wild horse. Then they’d face each
other  again—their  eyes  brimming  with  hate—and  sway  back  and  forth.  Miss
Willerton could hear the seconds dropping on the tin roof outside. He’d dart at her
again but she’d have the knife ready and would plunge it into him in an instant—
Miss Willerton could stand it no longer. She struck the woman a terrific blow on
the head from behind. The knife dropped out of her hands and a mist swept her
from the room. Miss Willerton turned to Lot. “Let me get you some hot grits,” she
said. She went over to the stove and got a clean plate of smooth white grits and a
piece of butter.

“Gee, thanks,” Lot said and smiled at her with his nice teeth. “You always fix
’em  just  right. You  know,”  he  said,  “I  been  thinkin’—we  could  get  out  of  this
tenant farm. We could have a decent place. If we made anything this year over, we
could  put  it  in  a  cow  an’  start  buildin’  things  up.  Think  what  it  would  mean,
Willie, just think.”

She sat down beside him and put her hand on his shoulder. “We’ll do it,” she
said. “We’ll make better than we’ve made any year and by spring we should have
us that cow.”

“You always know how I feel, Willie,” he said. “You always have known.”
They sat there for a long time thinking of how well they understood each other.

“Finish your food,” she said finally.

After he had eaten, he helped her take the ashes out the stove and then, in the

hot July evening, they walked down the pasture toward the creek and talked about
the place they were going to have some day.

When  late  March  came  and  the  rainy  season  was  almost  there,  they  had
accomplished almost more than was believable. For the past month, Lot had been
up  every  morning  at  five,  and  Willy  an  hour  earlier  to  get  in  all  the  work  they
could while the weather was clear. Next week, Lot said, the rain would probably
start and if they didn’t get the crop in by then, they would lose it—and all they had
gained  in  the  past  months.  They  knew  what  that  meant—another  year  of  getting
along with no more than they’d had the last. Then too, there’d be a baby next year
instead of a cow. Lot had wanted the cow anyway. “Children don’t cost all that
much to feed,” he’d argued, “an’ the cow would help feed him,” but Willie had
been firm—the cow could come later—the child must have a good start. “Maybe,”
Lot had said finally, “we’ll have enough for both,” and he had gone out to look at
the new-plowed ground as if he could count the harvest from the furrows.

Even with as little as they’d had, it had been a good year. Willie had cleaned
the shack, and Lot had fixed the chimney. There was a profusion of petunias by the
doorstep and a colony of snapdragons under the window. It had been a peaceful
year.  But  now  they  were  becoming  anxious  over  the  crop.  They  must  gather  it
before the rain. “We need another week,” Lot muttered when he came in that night.
“One more week an’ we can do it. Do you feel like gatherin’? It isn’t right that you
should have to,” he sighed, “but I can’t hire any help.”

“I’m all right,” she said, hiding her trembling hands behind her. “I’ll gather.”
“It’s cloudy tonight,” Lot said darkly.
The  next  day  they  worked  until  nightfall—worked  until  they  could  work  no

longer and then stumbled back to the cabin and fell into bed.

Willie woke in the night conscious of a pain. It was a soft, green pain with
purple lights running through it. She wondered if she were awake. Her head rolled
from side to side and there were droning shapes grinding boulders in it.

Lot sat up. “Are you bad off?” he asked, trembling.
She raised herself on her elbow and then sank down again. “Get Anna up by

the creek,” she gasped.

The droning became louder and the shapes grayer. The pain intermingled with

them for seconds first, then interminably. It came again and again. The sound of the
droning grew more distinct and toward morning she realized that it was rain. Later
she asked hoarsely, “How long has it been raining?”

“Most two days, now,” Lot answered.
“Then we lost.” Willie looked listlessly out at the dripping trees. “It’s over.”
“It isn’t over,” he said softly. “We got a daughter.”
“You wanted a son.”
“No,  I  got  what  I  wanted—two  Willies  instead  of  one—that’s  better  than  a
cow, even,” he grinned. “What can I do to deserve all I got, Willie?” He bent over
and kissed her forehead.

“What can I?” she asked slowly. “And what can I do to help you more?”
“How about your going to the grocery, Willie?”
Miss Willerton shoved Lot away from her. “W-what did you say, Lucia?” she

stuttered.

“I said how about your going to the grocery this time? I’ve been every morning

this week and I’m busy now.”

Miss  Willerton  pushed  back  from  the  typewriter.  “Very  well,”  she  said

sharply. “What do you want there?”

“A dozen eggs and two pounds of tomatoes—ripe tomatoes—and you’d better
start  doctoring  that  cold  right  now. Your  eyes  are  already  watering  and  you’re
hoarse.  There’s  Empirin  in  the  bathroom.  Write  a  check  on  the  house  for  the
groceries. And wear your coat. It’s cold.”

Miss  Willerton  rolled  her  eyes  upward.  “I  am  forty-four  years  old,”  she

announced, “and able to take care of myself.”

“And get ripe tomatoes,” Miss Lucia returned.
Miss Willerton, her coat buttoned unevenly, tramped up Broad Street and into
the supermarket. “What was it now?” she muttered. “Two dozen eggs and a pound
of tomatoes, yes.” She passed the lines of canned vegetables and the crackers and
headed for the box where the eggs were kept. But there were no eggs. “Where are
the eggs?” she asked a boy weighing snapbeans.

“We ain’t got nothin’ but pullet eggs,”  he said, fishing up another handful of

beans.

“Well, where are they and what is the difference?” Miss Willerton demanded.
He threw several beans back into the bin, slouched over to the egg box and
handed her a carton. “There ain’t no difference really,” he said, pushing his gum
over his front teeth. “A teen-age chicken or  somethin’,  I  don’t  know. You  want
’em?”

“Yes,  and  two  pounds  of  tomatoes.  Ripe  tomatoes,”  Miss  Willerton  added.
She did not like to do the shopping. There was no reason those clerks should be so
condescending.  That  boy  wouldn’t  have  dawdled  with  Lucia.  She  paid  for  the
eggs and tomatoes and left hurriedly. The place depressed her somehow.

Silly  that  a  grocery  should  depress  one—nothing  in  it  but  trifling  domestic
doings—women  buying  beans—riding  children  in  those  grocery  go-carts—
higgling about an eighth of a pound more or less of squash—what did they get out
of it? Miss Willerton wondered. Where was there any chance for self-expression,
for creation, for art? All around her it was the same—sidewalks full of people
scurrying about with their hands full of little packages and their minds full of little
packages—that woman there with the child on the leash, pulling him, jerking him,
dragging  him  away  from  a  window  with  a  jack-o’-lantern  in  it;  she  would
probably be pulling and jerking him the rest of her life. And there was another,
dropping a shopping bag all over the street, and another wiping a child’s nose,
and up the street an old woman was coming with three grandchildren jumping all
over her, and behind them was a couple walking too close for refinement.

Miss Willerton looked at the couple sharply as they came nearer and passed.
The woman was plump with yellow hair and fat ankles and muddy-colored eyes.
She had on high-heel pumps and blue anklets, a too-short cotton dress, and a plaid
jacket. Her skin was mottled and her neck thrust forward as if she were sticking it
out to smell something that was always being drawn away. Her face was set in an
inane grin. The man was long and wasted and shaggy. His shoulders were stooped
and  there  were  yellow  knots  along  the  side  of  his  large,  red  neck.  His  hands
fumbled  stupidly  with  the  girl’s  as  they  slumped  along,  and  once  or  twice  he
smiled sickly at her and Miss Willerton could see that he had straight teeth and
sad eyes and a rash over his forehead.

“Ugh,” she shuddered.

Miss Willerton laid the  groceries  on  the  kitchen  table  and  went  back  to  her
typewriter. She looked at the paper in it. “Lot Motun called his dog,” it read. “The
dog  pricked  up  its  ears  and  slunk  over  to  him.  He  pulled  the  animal’s  short,
scraggy ears and rolled over with it in the mud.”

“That  sounds  awful!”  Miss  Willerton  muttered.  “It’s  not  a  good  subject
anyway,”  she  decided.  She  needed  something  more  colorful—more  arty.  Miss
Willerton looked at her typewriter for a long time. Then of a sudden her fist hit the
desk  in  several  ecstatic  little  bounces.  “The  Irish!”  she  squealed.  “The  Irish!”
Miss Willerton had always admired the Irish. Their brogue, she thought, was full
of  music;  and  their  history—splendid!  And  the  people,  she  mused,  the  Irish
people!  They  were  full  of  spirit—red-haired,  with  broad  shoulders  and  great,
drooping mustaches.

The Turkey

HIS guns glinted sun steel in the ribs of the tree and, half aloud through a crack in
his mouth, he growled, “All right, Mason, this is as far as you go. The jig’s up.”
The six-shooters in Mason’s belt stuck out like waiting rattlers but he flipped them
into the air and, when they fell at his feet, kicked them behind him like so many
dried steer skulls. “You varmit,” he muttered, drawing his rope tight around the
captured  man’s  ankles,  “this  is  the  last  rustlin’  you’ll  do.”  He  took  three  steps
backward  and  leveled  one  gun  to  his  eye.  “Okay,”  he  said  with  cold,  slow
precision, “this is.…” And then he saw it, just moving slightly through the bushes
farther over, a touch of bronze and a rustle and then, through another gap in the
leaves, the eye, set in red folds that covered the head and hung down along the
neck, trembling slightly. He stood perfectly still and the turkey took another step,
then stopped, with one foot lifted, and listened.

If he only had a gun, if he only had a gun! He could level aim and shoot it right
where it was. In a second, it would slide through the bushes and be up in a tree
before he could tell which direction it had gone in. Without moving his head, he
strained his eyes to the ground to see if there were a stone near, but the ground
looked as if it might just have been swept. The turkey moved again. The foot that
had been poised half way up went down and the wing dropped over it, spreading
so that Ruller could see the long single feathers, pointed at the end. He wondered
if he dived into the bush on top of it.… It moved again and the wing came up again
and it went down.

It’s limping, he thought quickly. He moved a little nearer, trying to make his
motion imperceptible. Suddenly its head pierced out of the bush—he was about
ten feet from it—and drew back and then abruptly back into the bush. He began
edging nearer with his arms rigid and his fingers ready to clutch. It was lame, he
could tell. It might not be able to fly. It shot its head out once more and saw him
and shuttled back into the bushes and out again on the other side. Its motion was
half lopsided and the left wing was dragging. He was going to get it. He was going

to get it if he had to chase it out of the county. He crawled through the brush and
saw it about twenty feet away, watching him warily, moving its neck up and down.
It stooped and tried to spread its wings and stooped again and went a little way to
the  side  and  stooped  again,  trying  to  make  itself  go  up;  but,  he  could  tell,  it
couldn’t fly. He was going to have it. He was going to have it if he had to run it
out  of  the  state.  He  saw  himself  going  in  the  front  door  with  it  slung  over  his
shoulder, and them all screaming, “Look at Ruller with that wild turkey! Ruller!
where did you get that wild turkey?”

Oh, he had caught it in the woods; he had thought they might like to have him

catch them one.

“You crazy bird,” he muttered, “you can’t fly. I’ve already got you.” He was
walking in a wide circle, trying to get behind it. For a second, he almost thought
he could go pick it up. It had dropped down and one foot was sprawled, but when
he got near enough to pounce, it shot off in a heavy speed that made him start. He
tore after it, straight out in the open for a half acre of dead cotton; then it went
under a fence and into some woods again and he had to get on his hands and knees
to get under the fence but still keep his eye on the turkey but not tear his shirt; and
then dash after it again with his head a little dizzy, but faster to catch up with it. If
he lost it in the woods, it would be lost for good; it was going for the bushes on
the other side. It would go on out in the road. He was going to have it. He saw it
dart through a thicket and he headed for the thicket and when he got there it darted
out again and in a second disappeared under a hedge. He went through the hedge
fast  and  heard  his  shirt  rip  and  felt  cool  streaks  on  his  arms  where  they  were
getting scratched. He stopped a second and looked down at his torn shirt sleeves
but the turkey was only a little ahead of him and he could see it go over the edge
of the hill and down again into an open space and he darted on. If he came in with
the  turkey,  they  wouldn’t  pay  any  attention  to  his  shirt.  Hane  hadn’t  ever  got  a
turkey. Hane hadn’t ever caught anything. He guessed they’d be knocked out when
they saw him; he guessed they’d talk about it in bed. That’s what they did about
him and Hane. Hane didn’t know; he never woke up. Ruller woke up every night
exactly at the time they started talking. He and Hane slept in one room and their
mother and father in the next and the door was left open between and every night

Ruller listened. His father would say finally, “How are the boys doing?” and their
mother would say, Lord, they were wearing her to a frazzle, Lord, she guessed she
shouldn’t  worry  but  how  could  she  help  worrying  about  Hane,  the  way  he  was
now? Hane had always been an unusual boy, she said. She said he would grow up
to  be  an  unusual  man  too;  and  their  father  said  yes,  if  he  didn’t  get  put  in  the
penitentiary  first,  and  their  mother  said  how  could  he  talk  that  way?  and  they
argued just like Ruller and Hane and sometimes Ruller couldn’t get back to sleep
for thinking. He always felt tired when he got through listening but he woke up
every  night  and  listened  just  the  same,  and  whenever  they  started  talking  about
him, he sat up in bed so he could hear better. Once his father asked why Ruller
played  by  himself  so  much  and  his  mother  said  how  was  she  to  know?  if  he
wanted to play by himself, she didn’t see any reason he shouldn’t; and his father
said that worried him and she said well, if that was all he had to worry about,
he’d do well to stop; someone told her, she said, that they had seen Hane at the
Ever-Ready; hadn’t they told him he couldn’t go there?

His father asked Ruller the next day what he had been doing lately and Ruller
said, “playing by himself,” and walked off sort of like he had a limp. He guessed
his  father  had  looked  pretty  worried.  He  guessed  he’d  think  it  was  something
when  he  came  home  with  the  turkey  slung  over  his  shoulder.  The  turkey  was
heading out into a road and for a gutter along the side of it. It ran along the gutter
and Ruller was gaining on it all the time until he fell over a root sticking up and
spilled the things out of his pockets and had to snatch them up. When he got up, it
was out of sight.

“Bill, you take a posse and go down South Canyon; Joe, you cut around by the
gorge and head him off,” he shouted to his men. “I’ll follow him this way.” And he
dashed off again along the ditch.

The turkey was in the ditch, not thirty feet from him, lying almost on its neck
panting, and he was nearly a yard from it before it darted off again. He chased it
straight  until  the  ditch  ended  and  then  it  went  out  in  the  road  and  slid  under  a
hedge on the other side. He had to stop at the hedge and catch his breath and he
could  see  the  turkey  on  the  other  side  through  the  leaves,  lying  on  its  neck,  its
whole  body  moving  up  and  down  with  the  panting.  He  could  see  the  tip  of  its

tongue going up and down in its opened bill. If he could stick his arm through, he
might could get it while it was still too tired to move. He pushed up closer to the
hedge and eased his hand through and then gripped it quickly around the turkey’s
tail. There was no movement from the other side. Maybe the turkey had dropped
dead.  He  put  his  face  close  to  the  leaves  to  look  through.  He  pushed  the  twigs
aside with one hand but they would not stay. He let go the turkey and pulled his
other hand through to hold them. Through the hole he had made, he saw the bird
wobbling  off  drunkenly.  He  ran  back  to  where  the  hedge  began  and  got  on  the
other side. He’d get it yet. It needn’t think it was so smart, he muttered.

It zigged across the middle of the field and toward the woods again. It couldn’t
go into the woods! He’d never get it! He dashed behind it, keeping his eyes sharp
on it until suddenly something hit his chest and knocked the breath black out of
him. He fell back on the ground and forgot the turkey for the cutting in his chest.
He lay there for a while with things rocking on either side of him. Finally he sat
up. He was facing the tree he had run into. He rubbed his hands over his face and
arms and the long scratches began to sting. He would have taken it in slung over
his  shoulder  and  they  would  have  jumped  up  and  yelled,  “Good  Lord  look  at
Ruller! Ruller! Where did you get that wild turkey?” and his father would have
said, “Man! That’s a bird if I ever saw one!” He kicked a stone away from his
foot. He’d never see the turkey now. He wondered why he had seen it in the first
place if he wasn’t going to be able to get it.

It was like somebody had played a dirty trick on him.
All that running for nothing. He sat there looking sullenly at his white ankles
sticking out of his trouser legs and into his shoes. “Nuts,” he muttered. He turned
over on his stomach and let his cheek rest right on the ground, dirty or not. He had
torn his shirt and scratched his arms and got a knot on his forehead—he could feel
it rising just a little, it was going to be a big one all right—all for nothing. The
ground was cool to his face, but the grit bruised it and he had to turn over. Oh hell,
he thought.

“Oh hell,” he said cautiously.
Then in a minute he said just, “Hell.”
Then he said it like Hane said it, pulling the e-ull out and trying to get the look

in his eye that Hane got. Once Hane said, “God!” and his mother stomped after
him and said, “I don’t want to hear you say that again. Thou shalt not take the name
of the Lord, Thy God, in vain. Do you hear me?” and he guessed that shut Hane up.
Ha! He guessed she dressed him off that time.

“God,” he said.
He looked studiedly at the ground, making circles in the dust with his finger.

“God!” he repeated.

“God dammit,” he said softly. He could feel his face getting hot and his chest
thumping all of a sudden inside. “God dammit to hell,” he said almost inaudibly.
He looked over his shoulder but no one was there.

“God  dammit  to  hell,  good  Lord  from  Jerusalem,”  he  said.  His  uncle  said

“Good Lord from Jerusalem.”

“Good Father, good God, sweep the chickens out the yard,” he said and began
to giggle. His face was very red. He sat up and looked at his white ankles sticking
out of his pants legs into his shoes. They looked like they didn’t belong to him. He
gripped a hand around each ankle and bent his knees up and rested his chin on a
knee. “Our Father Who art in heaven, shoot ’em six and roll ’em seven,” he said,
giggling again. Boy, she’d smack his head in if she could hear him. God dammit,
she’d smack his goddam head in. He rolled over in a fit of laughter. God dammit,
she’d  dress  him  off  and  wring  his  goddam  neck  like  a  goddam  chicken.  The
laughing cut his side and he tried to hold it in, but every time he thought of his
goddam  neck,  he  shook  again.  He  lay  back  on  the  ground,  red  and  weak  with
laughter, not able not to think of her smacking his goddam head in. He said the
words over and over to himself and after a while he stopped laughing. He said
them again but the laughing had gone out. He said them again but it wouldn’t start
back up. All that chasing for nothing, he thought again. He might as well go home.
What did he want to be sitting around here for? He felt suddenly like he would if
people  had  been  laughing  at  him. Aw,  go  to  hell,  he  told  them.  He  got  up  and
kicked  his  foot  sharply  into  somebody’s  leg  and  said,  “Take  that,  sucker,”  and
turned into the woods to take the short trail home.

And as soon as he got in the door, they would holler, “How did you tear your
clothes and where did you get that knot on your forehead?” He was going to say he

fell in a hole. What difference would it make? Yeah, God, what difference would
it make?

He  almost  stopped.  He  had  never  heard  himself  think  that  tone  before.  He
wondered should he take the thought back. He guessed it was pretty bad; but heck,
it was the way he felt. He couldn’t help feeling that way. Heck … hell, it was the
way he felt. He guessed he couldn’t help that. He walked on a little way, thinking,
thinking  about  it.  He  wondered  suddenly  if  he  were  going  “bad.”  That’s  what
Hane  had  done.  Hane  played  pool  and  smoked  cigarettes  and  sneaked  in  at
twelve-thirty and boy he thought he was something. “There’s nothing you can do
about,”  their  grandmother  had  told  their  father,  “he’s  at  that  age.”  What  age?
Ruller wondered. I’m eleven, he thought. That’s pretty young. Hane hadn’t started
until he was fifteen. I guess it’s worse in me, he thought. He wondered would he
fight  it.  Their  grandmother  had  talked  to  Hane  and  told  him  the  only  way  to
conquer the devil was to fight him—if he didn’t, he couldn’t be her boy any more
—Ruller sat down on a stump—and she said she’d give him one more chance, did
he want it? and he yelled at her, no! and would she leave him alone? and she told
him, well, she loved him even if he didn’t love her and he was her boy anyway
and so was Ruller. Oh no, I ain’t, Ruller thought quickly. Oh no. She’s not pinning
any of that stuff on me.

Boy, he could shock the pants off her. He could make her teeth fall in her soup.
He started giggling. The next time she asked him if he wanted to play a game of
parcheesi, he’d say, hell no, goddammit, didn’t she know any good games? Get out
her goddam cards and he’d show her a few. He rolled over on the ground, choking
with  laughter.  “Let’s  have  some  booze,  kid,”  he’d  say.  “Let’s  get  stinky.”  Boy,
he’d knock her out of her socks! He sat on the ground, red and grinning to himself,
bursting  every  now  and  then  into  a  fresh  spasm  of  giggles.  He  remembered  the
minister had said young men were going to the devil by the dozens this day and
age; forsaking gentle ways; walking in the tracks of Satan. They would rue the day,
he  said.  There  would  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  “Weeping,”  Ruller
muttered. Men didn’t weep.

How do you gnash your teeth? he wondered. He grated his jaws together and

made an ugly face. He did it several times.

He bet he could steal.
He thought about chasing the turkey for nothing. It was a dirty trick. He bet he
could be a jewel thief. They were smart. He bet he could have all Scotland Yard
on his tail. Hell.

He got up. God could go around sticking things in your face and making you

chase them all afternoon for nothing.

You shouldn’t think that way about God, though.
But that was the way he felt. If that was the way he felt, could he help it? He
looked around quickly as if someone might be hiding in the bushes; then suddenly
he started.

It was rolled over at the edge of a thicket—a pile of ruffled bronze with a red
head  lying  limp  along  the  ground.  Ruller  stared  at  it,  unable  to  think;  then  he
leaned forward suspiciously. He wasn’t going to touch it. Why was it there now
for him to take? He wasn’t going to touch it. It could just lie there. The picture of
himself  walking  in  the  room  with  it  slung  over  his  shoulder  came  back  to  him.
Look at Ruller with that turkey! Lord, look at Ruller! He squatted down beside it
and looked without touching it. He wondered what had been wrong with its wing.
He lifted it up by the tip and looked under. The feathers were blood-soaked. It had
been shot. It must weigh ten pounds, he figured.

Lord, Ruller! It’s a huge turkey! He wondered how it would feel slung over his

shoulder. Maybe, he considered, he was supposed to take it.

Ruller gets our turkeys for us. Ruller got it in the woods, chased it dead. Yes,

he’s a very unusual child.

Ruller wondered suddenly if he were an unusual child.
It came down on him in an instant: he was … an … unusual … child.
He reckoned he was more unusual than Hane.
He had to worry more than Hane because he knew more how things were.
Sometimes  when  he  was  listening  at  night,  he  heard  them  arguing  like  they
were going to kill each other; and the next day his father would go out early and
his mother would have the blue veins out on her forehead and look like she was
expecting a snake to jump from the ceiling any minute. He guessed he was one of
the  most  unusual  children  ever.  Maybe  that  was  why  the  turkey  was  there.  He

rubbed his hand along the neck. Maybe it was to keep him from going bad. Maybe
God wanted to keep him from that.

Maybe God had knocked it out right there where he’d see it when he got up.
Maybe God was in the bush now, waiting for him to make up his mind. Ruller
blushed. He wondered if God could think he was a very unusual child. He must.
He found himself suddenly blushing and grinning and he rubbed his hand over his
face quick to make himself stop. If You want me to take it, he said, I’ll be glad  to.
Maybe finding the turkey was a sign. Maybe God wanted him to be a preacher. He
thought of Bing Crosby and Spencer Tracy. He might found a place for boys to
stay  who  were  going  bad.  He  lifted  the  turkey  up—it  was  heavy  all  right—and
fitted it over his shoulder. He wished he could see how he looked with it slung
over like that. It occurred to him that he might as well go home the long way—
through town. He had plenty of time. He started off slowly, shifting the turkey until
it  fit  comfortably  over  his  shoulder.  He  remembered  the  things  he  had  thought
before he found the turkey. They were pretty bad, he guessed.

He guessed God had stopped him before it was too late. He should be very

thankful. Thank You, he said.

Come  on,  boys,  he  said,  we  will  take  this  turkey  back  for  our  dinner.  We
certainly are much obliged to You, he said to God. This turkey weighs ten pounds.
You were mighty generous.

That’s okay, God said. And listen, we ought to have a talk about these boys.
They’re entirely in your hands, see? I’m leaving the job strictly up to you. I have
confidence in you, McFarney.

You can trust me, Ruller said. I’ll come through with the goods.
He  went  into  town  with  the  turkey  over  his  shoulder.  He  wanted  to  do
something for God but he didn’t know what he could do. If anybody was playing
the accordion on the street today, he’d give them his dime. He only had one dime,
but he’d give it to them. Maybe he could think of something better, though. He had
been going to keep the dime for something. He might could get another one from
his grandmother. How about a goddam dime, kid? He pulled his mouth piously out
of the grin. He wasn’t going to think that way any more. He couldn’t get a dime
from her anyway. His mother was going to whip him if he asked his grandmother

for money again. Maybe something would turn up that he could do. If God wanted
him to do something, He’d turn something up.

He  was  getting  into  the  business  block  and  through  the  corner  of  his  eye  he
noticed  people  looking  at  him.  There  were  eight  thousand  people  in  Mulrose
County and on Saturday every one of them was in Tilford on the business block.
They turned as Ruller passed and looked at him. He glanced at himself reflected in
a store window, shifted the turkey slightly, and walked quickly ahead. He heard
someone  call,  but  he  walked  on,  pretending  he  was  deaf.  It  was  his  mother’s
friend, Alice Gilhard, and if she wanted him, let her catch up with him.

“Ruller!” she cried. “My goodness, where did you get that turkey?” She came
up behind him fast and put her hand on his shoulder. “That’s some bird,” she said.
“You must be a good shot.”

“I didn’t shoot it,” Ruller said coldly. “I captured it. I chased it dead.”
“Heavens,” she said. “You wouldn’t capture me one sometime, would you?”
“I might if I ever have time,” Ruller said. She thought she was so cute.
Two men came over and whistled at the turkey. They yelled at some other men
on the corner to look. Another of his mother’s friends stopped and some country
boys who had been sitting on the curb got up and tried to see the turkey without
showing  they  were  interested. A  man  with  a  hunting  suit  and  gun  stopped  and
looked at Ruller and walked around behind him and looked at the turkey.

“How much do you think it weighs?” a lady asked.
“At least ten pounds,” Ruller said.
“How long did you chase it?”
“About an hour,” Ruller said.
“The goddam imp,” the man in the hunting suit muttered.
“That’s really amazing,” a lady commented.
“About that long,” Ruller said.
“You must be very tired.”
“No,” Ruller said. “I have to go. I’m in a hurry.” He worked his face to look
as if he were thinking something out and hurried down the street until he was out
of their view. He felt warm all over and nice as if something very fine were going
to  be  or  had  been.  He  looked  back  once  and  saw  that  the  country  boys  were

following him. He hoped they would come up and ask to look at the turkey. God
must  be  wonderful,  he  felt  suddenly.  He  wanted  to  do  something  for  God.  He
hadn’t seen anyone playing the accordion, though, or selling pencils and he was
past the business block. He might see one before he really got to the streets where
people  lived  at.  If  he  did,  he’d  give  away  the  dime—even  while  he  knew  he
couldn’t get another one any time soon. He began to wish he would see somebody
begging.

Those country kids were still trailing along behind him. He thought he might
stop and ask them did they want to see the turkey; but they might just stare at him.
They were tenants’ children and sometimes tenants’ children just stared at you. He
might  found  a  home  for  tenants’  children.  He  thought  about  going  back  through
town to see if he had passed a beggar without seeing him, but he decided people
might think he was showing off with the turkey.

Lord, send me a beggar, he prayed suddenly. Send me one before I get home.
He had never thought before of praying on his own, but it was a good idea. God
had put the turkey there. He’d send him a beggar. He knew for a fact God would
send him one. He was on Hill Street now and there were nothing but houses on
Hill Street. It would be strange to find a beggar here. The sidewalks were empty
except for a few children and some tricycles. Ruller looked back; the country boys
were still following him. He decided to slow down. It might make them catch up
with him and it might give a beggar more time to get to him. If one were coming.
He wondered if one were coming. If one came, it would mean God had gone out
of His way to get one. It would mean God was really interested. He had a sudden
fear one wouldn’t come; it was a whole fear quick.

One will come, he told himself. God was interested in him because he was a
very unusual child. He went on. The streets were deserted now. He guessed one
wouldn’t come. Maybe God didn’t have confidence in—no, God did. Lord, please
send  me  a  beggar!  he  implored.  He  squinched  his  face  rigid  and  strained  his
muscles in a knot and said, “Please! one right now”; and the minute he said it—the
minute—Hetty  Gilman  turned  around  the  corner  before  him,  heading  straight  to
where he was.

He felt almost like he had when he ran into the tree.

She was walking down the street right toward him. It was just like the turkey
lying there. It was just as if she had been hiding behind a house until he came by.
She was an old woman whom everybody said had more money than anybody in
town because she had been begging for twenty years. She sneaked into people’s
houses  and  sat  until  they  gave  her  something.  If  they  didn’t,  she  cursed  them.
Nevertheless, she was a beggar. Ruller walked faster. He took the dime out of his
pocket so it would be ready. His heart was stomping up and down in his chest. He
made a noise to see if he could talk. As they neared each other, he stuck out his
hand. “Here!” he shouted. “Here!”

She was a tall, long-faced old woman in an antique black cloak. Her face was
the  color  of  a  dead  chicken’s  skin.  When  she  saw  him,  she  looked  as  if  she
suddenly  smelled  something  bad.  He  darted  at  her  and  thrust  the  dime  into  her
hand and dashed on without looking back.

Slowly his heart calmed and he began to feel full of a new feeling—like being
happy and embarrassed at the same time. Maybe, he thought, blushing, he would
give all his money to her. He felt as if the ground did not need to be under him any
longer. He noticed suddenly that the country boys’ feet were shuffling just behind
him, and almost without thinking, he turned and asked graciously, “You all wanta
see this turkey?”

They  stopped  where  they  were  and  stared  at  him.  One  in  front  spit.  Ruller
looked down at it quickly. There was real tobacco juice in it! “Wheered you git
that turkey?” the spitter asked.

“I found it in the woods,” Ruller said. “I chased it dead. See, it’s been shot
under the wing.” He took the turkey off his shoulder and held it down where they
could see. “I think it was shot twice,” he went on excitedly, pulling the wing up.

“Lemme see it here,” the spitter said.
Ruller handed him the turkey. “You see down there where the bullet hole is?”
he asked. “Well, I think it was shot twice in the same hole, I think it was.…” The
turkey’s head flew in his face as the spitter slung it up in the air and over his own
shoulder and turned. The others turned with him and together they sauntered off in
the direction they had come, the turkey sticking stiff out on the spitter’s back and
its head swinging slowly in a circle as he walked away.

They were in the next block before Ruller moved. Finally, he realized that he
could  not  even  see  them  any  longer,  they  were  so  far  away.  He  turned  toward
home, almost creeping. He walked four blocks and then suddenly, noticing that it
was dark, he began to run. He ran faster and faster, and as he turned up the road to
his  house,  his  heart  was  running  as  fast  as  his  legs  and  he  was  certain  that
Something Awful was tearing behind him with its arms rigid and its fingers ready
to clutch.

The Train

THINKING about the porter, he had almost forgotten the berth. He had an upper one.
The man in the station had said he could give him a lower and Haze had asked
didn’t he have no upper ones; the man said sure if that was what he wanted, and
gave him an upper one. Leaning back on the seat, Haze had seen how the ceiling
was rounded over him. It was in there. They pulled the ceiling down and it was in
there, and you climbed up to it on a ladder. He hadn’t seen any ladders around; he
reckoned they kept them in the closet. The closet was up where you came in. When
he  first  got  on  the  train,  he  had  seen  the  porter  standing  in  front  of  the  closet,
putting on his porter’s jacket. Haze had stopped right then—right where he was.

The turn of his head was like and the back of his neck was like and the short
reach of his arm. He turned away from the closet and looked at Haze and Haze
saw his eyes and they were like; they were the same—same as old Cash’s for the
first instant, and then different. They turned different while he was looking at them;
hardened flat. “Whu … what time do you pull down the beds?” Haze mumbled.

“Long time yet,” the porter said, reaching into the closet again.
Haze didn’t know what else to say to him. He went on to his section.
Now the train was greyflying past instants of trees and quick spaces of field
and  a  motionless  sky  that  sped  darkening  away  in  the  opposite  direction.  Haze
leaned his head back on the seat and looked out the window, the yellow light of
the train lukewarm on him. The porter had  passed  twice,  twice  back  and  twice
forward, and the second time forward he had looked sharply at Haze for an instant
and passed on without saying anything; Haze had turned and stared after him as he
had  done  the  time  before.  Even  his  walk  was  like.  All  them  gulch  niggers
resembled. They looked like their own kind of nigger—heavy and bald, rock all
through. Old Cash in his day had been two hundred pounds heavy—no fat on him
—and five feet high with not more than two inches over. Haze wanted to talk to
the porter. What would the porter say when he told him: I’m from Eastrod? What
would he say?

The train had come to Evansville. A lady got on and sat opposite Haze. That
meant she would have the berth under him. She said she thought it was going to
snow. She said her husband had driven her down to the station and he said if it
didn’t snow before he got home, he’d be surprised. He had ten miles to go; they
lived in the suburbs. She was going to Florida to visit her daughter. She had never
had time to take a trip that far off. The way things happened, one thing right after
another, it seemed like time went by so fast you couldn’t tell if you were old or
young. She looked as if it had been cheating her, going double quick when she was
asleep and couldn’t watch it. Haze was glad to have someone there talking.

He remembered when he was a little boy, him and his mother and the other
children would go into Chattanooga on the Tennessee Railroad. His mother had
always started up a conversation with the other people on the train. She was like
an  old  bird  dog  just  unpenned  that  raced,  sniffing  up  every  rock  and  stick  and
sucking  in  the  air  around  everything  she  stopped  at.  There  wasn’t  a  person  she
hadn’t spoken to by the time they were ready to get off. She remembered them too.
Long years after, she would say she wondered where the lady was who was going
to Fort West, or she wondered if the man who was selling Bibles had ever got his
wife out the hospital. She had a hankering for people—as if what happened to the
ones she talked to happened to her then. She was a Jackson. Annie Lou Jackson.

My mother was a Jackson, Haze said to himself. He had stopped listening to
the lady although he was still looking at her and she thought he was listening. My
name is Hazel Wickers, he said. I’m nineteen. My mother was a Jackson. I was
raised in Eastrod, Eastrod, Tennessee; he thought about the porter again. He was
going to ask the porter. It struck him suddenly that the porter might even be Cash’s
son. Cash had a son run away. It happened before Haze’s time. Even so, the porter
would know Eastrod.

Haze glanced out the window at the shapes black-spinning past him. He could
shut his eyes and make Eastrod at night out of any of them—he could find the two
houses with the road between and the store and the nigger houses and the one barn
and the piece of fence that started off into the pasture, gray-white when the moon
was on it. He could put the mule face, solid, over the fence and let it hang there,
feeling how the night was. He felt it himself. He felt it light-touching around him.

He seen his ma coming up the path, wiping her hands on an apron she had taken
off, looking like the night change was on her, and then standing in the doorway:
Haaazzzzeeeee, Haazzzeee, come in here. The train said it for him. He wanted to
get up and go find the porter.

“Are you going home?” Mrs. Hosen asked him. Her name was Mrs. Wallace

Ben Hosen; she had been a Miss Hitchcock before she married.

“Oh!” Haze said, startled—“I get off at, I get off at Taulkinham.”
Mrs. Hosen knew some people in Evansville who had a cousin in Taulkinham
—a Mr. Henrys, she thought. Being from Taulkinham, Haze might know him. Had
he ever heard the.…

“Taulkinham  ain’t  where  I’m  from,”  Haze  muttered.  “I  don’t  know  nothin’
about Taulkinham.” He didn’t look at Mrs. Hosen. He knew what she was going to
ask next and he felt it coming and it came, “Well, where do you live?”

He wanted to get away from her. “It was there,” he mumbled, squirming in the
seat. Then he said, “I don’t rightly know, I was there but … this is just the third
time I been at Taulkinham,” he said quickly—her face had crawled out and was
staring at him—“I ain’t been since I went when I was six. I don’t know nothin’
about it. Once I seen a circus there but not.…” He heard a clanking at the end of
the car and looked to see where it was coming from. The porter was pulling the
walls of the sections farther out. “I got to see the porter a minute,” he said and
escaped down the aisle. He didn’t know what he’d say to the porter. He got to him
and he still didn’t know what he’d say. “I reckon you’re fixing to make them up
now,” he said.

“That’s right,” the porter said.
“How long does it take you to make one up?” Haze asked.
“Seven minutes,” the porter said.
“I’m from Eastrod,” Haze said. “I’m from Eastrod, Tennessee.”
“That  isn’t  on  this  line,”  the  porter  said.  “You  on  the  wrong  train  if  you

counting on going to any such place as that.”

“I’m going to Taulkinham,” Haze said. “I was raised in Eastrod.”
“You want your berth made up now?” the porter asked.
“Huh?” Haze said. “Eastrod, Tennessee; ain’t you ever heard of Eastrod?”

The porter wrenched one side of the seat flat. “I’m from Chicago,” he said. He
jerked  the  shades  down  on  either  window  and  wrenched  the  other  seat  down.
Even the back of his neck was like. When he bent over, it came out in three bulges.
He was from Chicago. “You standing in the middle of the aisle. Somebody gonna
want to get past you,” he said, suddenly turning on Haze.
“I reckon I’ll go sit down some,” Haze said, blushing.
He  knew  people  were  staring  at  him  as  he  went  back  to  his  section.  Mrs.
Hosen was looking out the window. She turned and eyed him suspiciously; then
she  said  it  hadn’t  snowed  yet,  had  it?  and  relaxed  into  a  stream  of  talk.  She
guessed her husband was getting his own supper tonight. She was paying a girl to
come cook his dinner but he was having to get his own supper. She didn’t think
that hurt a man once in a while. She thought it did him good. Wallace wasn’t lazy
but he didn’t think what it took to keep going with housework all day. She didn’t
know how it would feel to be in Florida with somebody waiting on her.

He was from Chicago.
This was her first vacation in five years. Five years ago she had gone to visit
her  sister  in  Grand  Rapids.  Time  flies.  Her  sister  had  left  Grand  Rapids  and
moved  to  Waterloo.  She  didn’t  suppose  she’d  recognize  her  sister’s  children  if
she  saw  them  now.  Her  sister  wrote  they  were  as  big  as  their  father.  Things
changed fast, she said. Her sister’s husband had worked with the city water supply
in Grand Rapids—he had a good place—but in Waterloo, he.…

“I  went  back  there  last  time,”  Haze  said.  “I  wouldn’t  be  getting  off  at

Taulkinham if it was there; it went apart like, you know, it.…”

Mrs.  Hosen  frowned.  “You  must  be  thinking  of  another  Grand  Rapids,”  she
said. “The Grand Rapids I’m talking about is a large city and it’s always where
it’s always been.” She stared at him for a moment and then went on: when they
were  in  Grand  Rapids  they  got  along  fine,  but  in  Waterloo  he  suddenly  took  to
liquor. Her sister had to support the house and educate the children. It beat Mrs.
Hosen how he could sit there year after year.

Haze’s  mother  had  never  talked  much  on  the  train;  she  mostly  listened.  She

was a Jackson.

After a while Mrs. Hosen said she was hungry and asked him if he wanted to

go into the diner. He did.

The dining car was full and people were waiting to get in it. Haze and Mrs.
Hosen stood in line for a half hour, rocking in the narrow passageway and every
few  minutes  flattening  themselves  against  the  side  to  let  a  trickle  of  people
through.  Mrs.  Hosen  began  talking  to  the  lady  on  the  side  of  her.  Haze  stared
stupidly at the wall. He would never have had the courage to come to the diner by
himself; it was fine he had met Mrs. Hosen. If she hadn’t been talking, he would
have told her intelligently that he had gone there the last time and that the porter
was not from there but that he looked near enough like a gulch nigger to be one,
near enough like old Cash to be his child. He’d tell her while they were eating. He
couldn’t see inside the diner from where he was; he wondered what it would be
like in there. Like a restaurant, he reckoned. He thought of the berth. By the time
they got through eating, the berth would probably be made up and he could get in
it. What would his ma say if she seen him having a berth in a train! He bet she
never reckoned that would happen. As they got nearer the entrance to the diner he
could see in. It was like a city restaurant! He bet she never reckoned it was like
that.

The head man was beckoning to the people at the first of the line every time
someone left—sometimes for one person, sometimes for more. He motioned for
two people and the line moved up so that Haze and Mrs. Hosen and the lady she
was talking to were standing at the end of the diner, looking in. In a minute, two
more people left. The man beckoned and Mrs. Hosen and the lady walked in, and
Haze  followed  them.  The  man  stopped  Haze  and  said,  “Only  two,”  and  pushed
him back to the doorway. Haze’s face went an ugly red. He tried to get behind the
next person and then he tried to get through the line to go back to the car he had
come  from,  but  there  were  too  many  people  bunched  in  the  opening.  He  had  to
stand there while everyone around looked at him. No one left for a while and he
had to stand there. Mrs. Hosen did not look at him again. Finally a lady up at the
far end got up and the head man jerked his hand and Haze hesitated and saw the
hand jerk again and then lurched up the aisle, falling against two tables on the way
and getting his hand wet with somebody’s coffee. He didn’t look at the people he
sat down with. He ordered the first thing on the menu and, when it came, ate it

without thinking what it might be. The people he was sitting with had finished and,
he could tell, were waiting, watching him eat.

When  he  got  out  the  diner  he  was  weak  and  his  hands  were  making  small
jittery movements by themselves. It seemed a year ago that he had seen the head
man beckon to him to sit down. He stopped between two cars and breathed in the
cold air to clear his head. It helped. When he got back to his car all the berths
were  made  up  and  the  aisles  were  dark  and  sinister,  hung  in  heavy  green.  He
realized again that he had a berth, an upper one, and that he could get in it now. He
could lie down and raise the shade just enough to look out from and watch—what
he had planned to do—and see how everything went by a train at night. He could
look right into the night, moving.

He got his sack and went to the men’s room and put on his night clothes. A sign
said to get the porter to let you into the upper berths. The porter might be a cousin
of some of them gulch niggers, he thought suddenly; he might ask him if he had any
cousins  around  Eastrod,  or  maybe  just  in  Tennessee.  He  went  down  the  aisle,
looking for him. They might have a little conversation before he got in the berth.
The porter was not at that end of the car and he went back to look at the other end.
Going  around  the  corner,  he  ran  into  something  heavily  pink;  it  gasped  and
muttered, “Clumsy!” It was Mrs. Hosen in a pink wrapper with her hair in knots
around  her  head.  He  had  forgotten  about  her.  She  was  terrifying  with  her  hair
slicked back and the knobs like dark toadstools framing her face. She tried to get
past him and he tried to let her but they were both moving the same way each time.
Her face became purplish except for little white marks over it that didn’t heat up.
She drew herself stiff and stopped still and said, “What IS the matter with you?”
He slipped past her and dashed down the aisle and ran suddenly into the porter so
that the porter slipped and he fell on top of him and the porter’s face was right
under his and it was old Cash Simmons. For a minute he couldn’t move off the
porter for thinking it was Cash and he breathed, “Cash,” and the porter pushed him
off and got up and went down the aisle quick and Haze scrambled off the floor and
went after him saying he wanted to get in the berth and thinking, this is Cash’s kin,
and then suddenly, like something thrown at him when he wasn’t looking: this is
Cash’s son run away; and then: he knows about Eastrod and doesn’t want it, he

doesn’t want to talk about it, he doesn’t want to talk about Cash.

He stood staring while the porter put the ladder up to the berth and  then  he
started up it, still looking at the porter, seeing Cash there, only different, not in the
eyes, and halfway up the ladder he said, still looking at the porter, “Cash is dead.
He got the cholera from a pig.” The porter’s mouth perked down and he muttered,
looking at Haze with his eyes thin, “I’m from Chicago. My father was a railroad
man.” And Haze stared at him and then laughed: a nigger being a railroad “man”:
and laughed again, and the porter jerked the ladder off suddenly with a wrench of
his arm that sent Haze clutching at the blanket into the berth.

He  lay  on  his  stomach  in  the  berth,  trembling  from  the  way  he  had  got  in.
Cash’s son. From Eastrod. But not wanting Eastrod; hating it. He lay there for a
while on his stomach, not moving. It seemed a year since he had fallen over the
porter in the aisle.

After a while he remembered that he was actually in the berth and he turned

and found the light and looked around him. There was no window.

The side wall did not have a window in it. It didn’t push up to be a window.
There was no window concealed in it. There was a fish-net thing stretched across
the side wall; but no windows. For a second it flashed through his mind that the
porter had done this—given him this berth that there were no windows to and had
just a fish net strung the length of—because he hated him. But they must all be like
this.

The top of the berth was low and curved over. He lay down. The curved top
looked like it was not quite closed; it looked like it was closing. He lay there for a
while not moving. There was something in his throat like a sponge with an egg
taste. He had eggs for supper. They were in the sponge in his throat. They were
right  in  his  throat.  He  didn’t  want  to  turn  over  for  fear  they  would  move;  he
wanted the light off; he wanted it dark. He reached up without turning and felt for
the  button  and  snapped  it  and  the  darkness  sank  down  on  him  and  then  faded  a
little with light from the aisle that came in through the foot of space not closed. He
wanted  it  all  dark,  he  didn’t  want  it  diluted.  He  heard  the  porter’s  footsteps
coming down the aisle, soft into the rug, coming steadily down, brushing against
the  green  curtains  and  fading  up  the  other  way  out  of  hearing.  He  was  from

Eastrod. From Eastrod but he hated it. Cash wouldn’t have put any claim on him.
He  wouldn’t  have  wanted  him.  He  wouldn’t  have  wanted  anything  that  wore  a
monkey  white  coat  and  toted  a  whisk  broom  in  his  pocket.  Cash’s  clothes  had
looked  like  they’d  set  a  while  under  a  rock;  and  they  smelled  like  nigger.  He
thought  how  Cash  smelled,  but  he  smelled  the  train.  No  more  gulch  niggers  in
Eastrod. In Eastrod. Turning in the road, he saw in the dark, half dark, the store
boarded  and  the  barn  open  with  the  dark  free  in  it,  and  the  smaller  house  half
carted away, the porch gone and no floor in the hall. He had been supposed to go
to his sister’s in Taulkinham on his last furlough when he came up from the camp
in  Georgia  but  he  didn’t  want  to  go  to  Taulkinham  and  he  had  gone  back  to
Eastrod even though he knew how it was: the two families scattered in towns and
even the niggers from up and down the road gone into Memphis and Murfreesboro
and  other  places.  He  had  gone  back  and  slept  in  the  house  on  the  floor  in  the
kitchen and a board had fallen on his head out of the roof and cut his face. He
jumped, feeling the board, and the train jolted and unjolted  and  went  again.  He
went looking through the house to see they hadn’t left nothing in it ought to been
taken.

His  ma  always  slept  in  the  kitchen  and  had  her  walnut  shifferrobe  in  there.
Wasn’t  another  shifferrobe  nowhere  around.  She  was  a  Jackson.  She  had  paid
thirty dollars for it and hadn’t bought herself nothing else big again. And they had
left it. He reckoned they hadn’t had room on the truck for it. He opened all the
drawers. There were two lengths of wrapping cord in the top one and nothing in
the others. He was surprised nobody had come and stolen a shifferrobe like that.
He  took  the  wrapping  cord  and  tied  the  legs  through  the  floorboards  and  left  a
piece  of  paper  in  each  of  the  drawers: THIS  SHIFFERROBE  BELONGS  TO  HAZEL
WICKERS. DO NOT STEAL IT OR YOU WILL BE HUNTED DOWN AND KILLED.

She could rest easier knowing it was guarded some. If she come looking any
time at night, she would see. He wondered if she walked at night and came there
ever—came with that look on her face, unrested and looking, going up the path and
through the barn open all around and stopping in the shadow by the store boarded
up,  coming  on  unrested  with  that  look  on  her  face  like  he  had  seen  through  the
crack going down. He seen her face through the crack when they were shutting the

top on her, seen the shadow that came down over her face and pulled her mouth
down like she wasn’t satisfied with resting, like she was going to spring up and
shove the lid back and fly out like a spirit going to be satisfied: but they shut it on
down. She might have been going to fly out of there, she might have been going to
spring—he saw her terrible like a huge bat darting from the closing—fly out of
there  but  it  was  falling  dark  on  top  of  her,  closing  down  all  the  time,  closing
down; from inside he saw it closing, coming closer, closer down and cutting off
the  light  and  the  room  and  the  trees  seen  through  the  window  through  the  crack
faster and darker closing down. He opened his eyes and saw it closing down and
he sprang up between the crack and wedged his body through it and hung there
moving,  dizzy,  with  the  dim  light  of  the  train  slowly  showing  the  rug  below,
moving, dizzy. He hung there wet and cold and saw the porter at the other end of
the  car,  a  white  shape  in  the  darkness,  standing  there,  watching  him  and  not
moving. The tracks curved and he fell back sick into the rushing stillness of the
train.

The Peeler

HAZEL MOTES walked along downtown, close to the store fronts but not looking at
them. His neck was thrust forward as if he were trying to smell something that was
always being drawn away. He had on a blue suit that was glare-blue in the day
time, but looked purplish with the night lights on it, and his hat was a fierce black
wool hat like a preacher’s hat. The stores in Taulkinham stayed open on Thursday
nights and a lot of people were shopping. Haze’s shadow was now behind him
and now before him and now and then broken up by other people’s shadows, but
when it was by itself, stretching behind him, it was a thin nervous shadow walking
backwards.

After a while he stopped where a lean-faced man had a card table set up in
front of a Lerner’s Dress Shop and was demonstrating a potato peeler. The man
had  on  a  small  canvas  hat  and  a  shirt  patterned  with  bunches  of  upsidedown
pheasants and quail and bronze turkeys. He was pitching his voice under the street
noises so that it reached every ear distinctly as in a private conversation. A few
people gathered around. There were two buckets on the card table, one empty and
the other full of potatoes. Between the two buckets there was a pyramid of green
cardboard boxes and on top of the stack, one peeler was open for demonstration.
The  man  stood  in  front  of  this  altar,  pointing  over  it  at  different  people.  “How
about you?” he said, pointing at a damp-haired pimpled boy, “you ain’t gonna let
one of these go by?” He stuck a brown potato in one side of the open machine. The
machine was a square tin box with a red handle, and as he turned the handle, the
potato went into the box and then in a second, backed out the other side, white.
“You ain’t gonna let one of these go by!” he said.

The  boy  guffawed  and  looked  at  the  other  people  gathered  around.  He  had

yellow slick hair and a fox-shaped face.

“What’s yer name?” the peeler man asked.
“Name Enoch Emery,” the boy said and snuffled.
“Boy with a pretty name like that ought to have one of these,” the man said,

rolling his eyes, trying to warm up the others. Nobody laughed but the boy. Then a
man  standing  across  from  Hazel  Motes  laughed.  He  was  a  tall  man  with  light
green glasses and a black suit and a black wool hat like a preacher’s hat, and he
was leaning on a white cane. The laugh sounded as if it came from something tied
up in a croker sack. It was evident he was a blind man. He had his hand on the
shoulder of a big-boned child with a black knitted cap pulled down low on her
forehead and a fringe of orange hair sticking out from it on either side. She had a
long  face  and  a  short  sharp  nose.  The  people  began  to  look  at  the  two  of  them
instead of the man selling peelers. This irritated the man selling peelers. “How
about you, you there,” he said, pointing at Hazel Motes. “You’ll never be able to
get a bargain like this in any store.”

“Hey!” Enoch Emery said, reaching across a woman and punching Haze’s arm.
“He’s talking to you! He’s talking to you!” Haze was looking at the blind man and
the child. Enoch Emery had to punch him again.

“Whyn’t you take one of these home to yer wife?” the peeler man was saying.
“I  ain’t  none,”  Haze  muttered  without  drawing  his  attention  from  the  blind

man.

“Well, you got a dear old mother, ain’t you?”
“No.”
“Well shaw,” the man said, with his hand cupped to the people, “he needs one

theseyer just to keep him company.”

Enoch Emery thought that was so funny that  he  leaned  over  and  slapped  his
knee,  but  Hazel  Motes  didn’t  look  as  if  he  had  heard  it  yet.  “I’m  going  to  give
away  half  a  dozen  peeled  potatoes  to  the  first  person  purchasing  one  theseyer
machines,” the man said. “Who’s gonna step up first? Only a dollar and a half for
a machine’d cost you three dollars in any store!” Enoch Emery began fumbling in
his pockets. “You’ll thank the day you ever stopped here,” the man said, “you’ll
never forget it. Ever one of you people purchasing one theseyer machines’ll never
forget it.”

The blind man began to move straight forward suddenly and the peeler man got
ready  to  hand  him  one  of  the  green  boxes,  but  he  went  past  the  card  table  and
turned,  moving  at  a  right  angle  back  in  among  the  people.  He  was  handing

something out. Then Haze saw that the child was moving around too, giving out
white leaflets. There were not many people gathered there, but the ones who were
began to move off. When the machine-seller saw this, he leaned, glaring, over the
card  table.  “Hey  you!”  he  yelled  at  the  blind  man,  “what  you  think  you  doing?
Who you think you are, running people off from here?”

The blind man didn’t pay him any mind. He kept on handing out the pamphlets.
He handed one at Enoch Emery and then he came toward Haze, hitting the white
cane at an angle from his leg.

“What the hell  you  think  you  doing?”  the  man  selling  peelers  yelled.  “I  got

these people together, how you think you can horn in?”

The  blind  man  had  a  peculiar  boiled  looking  red  face.  He  thrust  one  of  the
pamphlets  a  little  to  the  side  of  Haze  and  Haze  grabbed  it.  It  was  a  tract.  The
words on the outside of it said, “Jesus Calls You.”

“I’d like to know who the hell you think you are!” the man with the peelers
was  yelling.  The  child  passed  the  card  table  again  and  handed  him  a  tract.  He
looked at it for an instant with his lip curled, and then he charged around the card
table,  upsetting  the  bucket  of  potatoes.  “These  damn  Jesus  fanatics,”  he  yelled,
glaring around, trying to find the blind man. More people had gathered, hoping to
see  a  disturbance,  and  the  blind  man  had  disappeared  among  them.  “These
goddam Communist Jesus Foreigners!” the peeler man screamed. “I got this crowd
together!” He stopped, realizing there was a crowd.

“Listen folks,” he said, “one at a time, there’s plenty to go around, just don’t
push, a half dozen peeled potatoes to the first person stepping up to buy.” He got
back behind the card table quietly and started holding up the peeler boxes. “Step
on up, plenty to go around,” he said, “no need to crowd.”

Hazel Motes didn’t open his tract. He looked at the outside of it and then he
tore it across. He put the two pieces together and tore them across again. He kept
restacking the pieces and tearing them again until he had a little handful of confetti.
He turned his hand over and let the shredded leaflet sprinkle to the ground. Then
he looked up and saw the blind man’s child not three feet away, watching him.
Her mouth was open and her eyes glittered on him like two chips of green bottle
glass. She had on a black dress and there was a white gunny sack hung over her

shoulder. Haze scowled and began rubbing his sticky hands on his pants.

“I seen you,” she said. Then she moved quickly over to where the blind man

was standing now, beside the card table. Most of the people had moved off.

The peeler man leaned over the card table and said, “Hey!” to the blind man.
“I reckon that showed you. Trying to horn in.” But the blind man stood there with
his chin tilted back slightly as if he saw something over their heads.

“Lookerhere,” Enoch Emery said, “I ain’t got but a dollar sixteen cent but I.

…”

“Yah,” the man said, as if he were going to make the blind man see him, “I

reckon that’ll show you you can’t muscle in on me. Sold eight peelers, sold.…”

“Give me one of them,” the child said, pointing to the peelers.
“Hanh?” he said.
She reached in her pocket and drew out a long coin purse and opened it. “Give

me one of them,” she said, holding out two fifty cent pieces.

The  man  eyed  the  money  with  his  mouth  hiked  on  one  side.  “A  buck  fifty,

sister,” he said.

She pulled her hand in quickly and all at once glared around at Hazel Motes as
if he had made a noise at her. The blind man was moving off. She stood a second
glaring red-faced at Haze and then she turned and followed the blind man. Haze
started suddenly.

“Listen,” Enoch Emery said, “I ain’t got but a dollar sixteen cent and I want

me one of them.…”

“You  can  keep  it,”  the  man  said,  taking  the  bucket  off  the  card  table.  “This

ain’t no cut-rate joint.”

Hazel Motes stood staring after the blind man, jerking his hands in and out of
his pockets. He looked as if he were trying to move forward and backward at the
same  time.  Then  suddenly  he  thrust  two  bills  at  the  man  selling  peelers  and
snatched  a  box  off  the  card  table  and  started  down  the  street.  In  just  a  second
Enoch Emery was panting at his elbow.

“My, I reckon you got a heap of money,” Enoch Emery said. Haze turned the
corner and saw them about a block ahead of him. Then he slowed down some and
saw Enoch Emery there. Enoch had on a yellowish white suit with a pinkish white

shirt  and  his  tie  was  a  greenpeaish  color.  He  was  grinning.  He  looked  like  a
friendly hound dog with light mange. “How long you been here?” he inquired.

“Two days,” Haze muttered.
“I been here two months,” Enoch said. “I work for the city. Where you work?”
“Not working,” Haze said.
“That’s too bad,” Enoch said. “I work for the city.” He skipped a step to get in
line with Haze, then he said, “I’m eighteen year old and I ain’t been here but two
months and I already work for the city.”

“That’s  fine,”  Haze  said.  He  pulled  his  hat  down  farther  on  the  side  Enoch

Emery was on and walked faster.

“I didn’t ketch your name good,” Enoch said.
Haze said his name.
“You look like you might be follering them hicks,” Enoch remarked. “You go

in for a lot of Jesus?”
“No,” Haze said.
“No, me neither, not much,” Enoch agreed. “I went to thisyer Rodemill Boys’
Bible Academy for four weeks. Thisyer woman that traded me from my daddy she
sent me; she was a Welfare woman. Jesus, four weeks and I thought I was gonna
be sanctified crazy.”

Haze  walked  to  the  end  of  the  block  and  Enoch  stayed  all  the  time  at  his
elbow,  panting  and  talking.  When  Haze  started  across  the  street,  Enoch  yelled,
“Don’t you see theter light! That means you got to wait!” A cop blew a whistle
and a car blasted its horn and stopped short. Haze went on across,  keeping  his
eyes on the blind man in the middle of the block. The policeman kept blowing the
whistle. He crossed the street over to where Haze was and stopped him. He had a
thin face and oval-shaped yellow eyes.

“You know what that little thing hanging up there is for?” he asked, pointing to

the traffic light over the intersection.

“I didn’t see it,” Haze said.
The policeman looked at him without saying anything. A few people stopped.
He rolled his eyes at them. “Maybe you thought the red ones was for white folks
and the green ones for colored,” he said.

“Yeah, I thought that,” Haze said. “Take your hand off me.”
The  policeman  took  his  hand  off  and  put  it  on  his  hip.  He  backed  one  step
away and said, “You tell all your friends about these lights. Red is to stop, green
is to go—men and women, white folks and niggers, all go on the same light. You
tell  all  your  friends  so  when  they  come  to  town,  they’ll  know.”  The  people
laughed.

“I’ll  look  after  him,”  Enoch  Emery  said,  pushing  in  by  the  policeman.  “He

ain’t been here but only two days. I’ll look after him.”

“How long you been here?” the cop asked.
“I was born and raised here,” Enoch said. “This is my ole home town. I’ll take
care of him for you. Hey wait!” he yelled at Haze. “Wait on me!” He pushed out
the crowd and caught up with him. “I reckon I saved you that time,” he said.

“I’m obliged,” Haze said.
“It wasn’t nothing,” Enoch said. “Why don’t we go in Walgreen’s and get us a

soda? Ain’t no nightclubs open this early.”

“I don’t like no drugstores,” Haze said. “Goodby.”
“That’s all right,” Enoch said. “I reckon I’ll go along and keep you company
for a while.” He looked up ahead at the couple and said, “I sho wouldn’t want to
get messed up with no hicks this time of night, particularly the Jesus kind. I done
had enough of them myself. Thisyer woman that traded me from my daddy didn’t
do nothing but pray. Me and daddy, we moved around with a sawmill where we
worked  and  it  set  up  outside  Boonville  one  summer  and  here  come  thisyer
woman.” He caught hold of Haze’s coat. “Only objection I got to Taulkinham is
there’s too many people on the street,” he said confidentially, “look like they ain’t
satisfied until they knock you down—well, here she come and I reckon she took a
fancy to me. I was twelve year old and I could sing some hymns good I learnt off a
nigger. So here she comes taking a fancy to me and traded me off my daddy and
took me to Boonville to live with her. She had a brick house but it was Jesus all
day long.” While he was talking he was looking up at Haze, studying his face. All
of a sudden he bumped into a little man lost in a pair of faded overalls. “Whyn’t
you look where you going?” he growled.

The little man stopped short and raised his arm in a vicious gesture and a mean

dog look came on his face. “Who you tellin what?” he snarled.

“You see,” Enoch said, jumping to catch up with Haze, “all they want to do is
knock you down. I ain’t never been to such a unfriendly place before. Even with
that woman. I stayed with her for two months in that house of hers,” he went on,
“and  then  come  fall  she  sent  me  to  the  Rodemill  Boys’  Bible  Academy  and  I
thought that sho was gonna be some relief. This woman was hard to get along with
—she wasn’t old, I reckon she was forty year old—but she sho was ugly. She had
theseyer brown glasses and her hair was so thin it looked like ham gravy trickling
over  her  skull.  I  thought  it  was  gonna  be  some  certain  relief  to  get  to  that
Academy. I had run away oncet on her and she got me back and come to find out
she had papers on me and she could send me to the penitentiary if I didn’t stay
with  her  so  I  sho  was  glad  to  get  to  theter  Academy.  You  ever  been  to  a
academy?”

Haze didn’t seem to hear the question. He still had his eye on the blind man in

the next block.

“Well, it won’t no relief,” Enoch said. “Good Jesus, it won’t no relief. I run
away from there after four weeks and durn if she didn’t get me back and brought
me to that house of hers again. I got out though.” He waited a minute. “You want to
know how?”

After a second he said, “I scared hell out of that woman, that’s how. I studied
on it and studied on it. I even prayed. I said, ‘Jesus, show me the way to get out of
here without killing thisyer woman and getting sent to the penitentiary.’ And durn
if He didn’t. I got up one morning at just daylight and I went in her room without
my pants on and pulled the sheet off her and giver a heart attackt. Then I went back
to my daddy and we ain’t seen hide of her since.

“Your jaw just crawls,” he observed, watching the side of Haze’s face. “You

don’t never laugh. I wouldn’t be surprised if you wasn’t a real wealthy man.”

Haze turned down a side street. The blind man and the girl were on the corner

a block ahead.

“Well, I reckon we gonna ketch up with em after all,” Enoch said. “Ain’t that
girl ugly, though? You seen them shoes she has on? Men’s shoes, looks like. You
know many people here?”

“No,” Haze said.
“You  ain’t  gonna  know  none  neither.  This  is  one  more  hard  place  to  make
friends  in.  I  been  here  two  months  and  I  don’t  know  nobody,  look  like  all  they
want to do is knock you down. I reckon you got a right heap of money,” he said. “I
ain’t  got  none.  Had,  I’d  sho  know  what  to  do  with  it.”  The  man  and  the  girl
stopped on the corner and turned up the left side of the street. “We catching up,”
he said. “I bet we’ll be at some meeting singing hymns with her and her daddy if
we don’t watch out.”

Up in the next block there was a large building with columns and a dome. The
blind man and the child were going toward it. There was a car parked in every
space around the building and on the other side the street and up and down the
streets near it. “That ain’t no picture show,” Enoch said. The blind man and the
girl turned up the steps to the building. The steps went all the way across the front,
and on either side there were stone lions sitting on pedestals. “Ain’t no church,”
Enoch said. Haze stopped at the steps. He looked as if he were trying to settle his
face  into  an  expression.  He  pulled  the  black  hat  forward  at  a  nasty  angle  and
started toward the two, who had sat down in the corner by one of the lions.

As they came nearer the blind man leaned forward as if he were listening to

the footsteps, then he stood up, holding a tract out in his hand.

“Sit  down,”  the  child  said  in  a  loud  voice.  “It  ain’t  nobody  but  them  two

boys.”

“Nobody but us,” Enoch Emery said. “Me and him been follerin you all about

a mile.”

“I knew somebody was following me,” the blind man said. “Sit down.”
“They ain’t here for nothing but to make fun,” the child said. She looked as if
she smelled something bad. The blind man was feeling out to touch them. Haze
stood just out of reach of his hands, squinting at him as if he were trying to see the
empty eye sockets under the green glasses.

“It ain’t me, it’s him,” Enoch said. “He’s been running after yawl ever since

back yonder by them potato peelers. We bought one of em.”

“I  knew  somebody  was  following  me!”  the  blind  man  said.  “I  felt  it  all  the

way back yonder.”

“I  ain’t  followed  you,”  Haze  said.  He  felt  the  peeler  box  in  his  hand  and
looked  at  the  girl.  The  black  knitted  cap  came  down  almost  to  her  eyes.  She
looked  as  if  she  might  be  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  old.  “I  ain’t  followed  you
nowhere,” he said sourly. “I followed her.” He stuck the peeler box out at her.

She  jumped  back  and  looked  as  if  she  were  going  to  swallow  her  face.  “I
don’t want that thing,” she said. “What you think I want with that thing? Take it. It
ain’t mine. I don’t want it!”

“I take it with thanks for her,” the blind man said. “Put it in your sack,” he said

to her.

Haze thrust the peeler at her again, but he was still looking at the blind man.
“I won’t have it,” she muttered.
“Take it like I told you,” the blind man said shortly.
After a second she took it and shoved it in the sack where the tracts were. “It

ain’t mine,” she said. “I don’t want none of it. I got it but it ain’t mine.”

“She thanks you for it,” the blind man said. “I knew somebody was following

me.”

“I  ain’t  followed  you  nowhere,”  Haze  said.  “I  followed  her  to  say  I  ain’t
beholden for none of her fast eye like she gave me back yonder.” He didn’t look at
her, he looked at the blind man.

“What do you mean?” she shouted. “I never gave you no fast eye. I only watch
you tearing up that tract. He tore it up in little pieces,” she said, pushing the blind
man’s shoulder. “He tore it up and sprinkled it over the ground like salt and wiped
his hands on his pants.”

“He followed me,” the blind man said. “Wouldn’t anybody follow you. I can

hear the urge for Jesus in his voice.”

“Jesus,” Haze muttered, “my Jesus.” He sat down by the girl’s leg. His head
was at her knee and he set his hand on the step next to her foot. She had on men’s
shoes  and  black  cotton  stockings.  The  shoes  were  laced  up  tight  and  tied  in
precise  bows.  She  moved  herself  away  roughly  and  sat  down  behind  the  blind
man.

“Listen at his cursing,” she said in a low tone. “He never followed you.”
“Listen,” the blind man said, “you can’t run away from Jesus. Jesus is a fact. If

who you’re looking for is Jesus, the sound of it will be in your voice.”

“I don’t hear nothing in his voice,” Enoch Emery said. “I know a whole heap
about  Jesus  because  I  attended  thisyer  Rodemill  Boys’  Bible  Academy  that  a
woman sent me to. If it was anything about Jesus in his voice I  could  certainly
hear  it.”  He  had  got  up  onto  the  lion’s  back  and  he  was  sitting  there  sideways
cross-legged.

The blind man reached out again and his hands suddenly covered Haze’s face.
For a second Haze didn’t move or make any sound. Then he knocked the hands off.
“Quit it,” he said in a faint voice. “You don’t know nothing about me.”

“You got a secret need,” the blind man said. “Them that know Jesus once can’t

escape Him in the end.”

“I ain’t never known Him,” Haze said.
“You got a least knowledge,” the blind man said. “That’s enough. You know
His name and you’re marked. If Jesus has marked you there ain’t nothing you can
do  about  it.  Them  that  have  knowledge  can’t  swap  it  for  ignorance.”  He  was
leaning forward but in the wrong direction so that he appeared to be talking to the
step  below  Haze’s  foot.  Haze  sat  leaning  backward  with  the  black  hat  tilted
forward over his face.

“My daddy looks just like Jesus,” Enoch said from the lion’s back. “His hair
hangs to his shoulders. Only difference is he’s got a scar acrost his chin. I ain’t
never seen who my mother is.”

“You’re marked with knowledge,” the blind man said. “You know what sin is
and only them that know what it is can commit it. I knew all the time we were
walking here somebody was following me,” he said. “You couldn’t have followed
her. Wouldn’t anybody follow her. I could feel there was somebody near with an
urge for Jesus.”

“There  ain’t  nothing  for  your  pain  but  Jesus,”  the  girl  said  suddenly.  She
leaned forward and stuck her arm out with her finger pointed at Haze’s shoulder,
but he spat down the steps and didn’t look at her. “Listen,” she said in a louder
voice, “this here man and woman killed this little baby. It was her own child but it
was  ugly  and  she  never  give  it  any  love.  This  child  had  Jesus  and  this  woman
didn’t have nothing but good looks and a man she was living in Sin with. She sent

the child away and it come back and she sent it away again and it come back again
and ever time she sent it away it come back to where her and this man was living
in  Sin.  They  strangled  it  with  a  silk  stocking  and  hung  it  up  in  the  chimney.  It
didn’t  give  her  any  peace  after  that,  though.  Everything  she  looked  at  was  that
child. Jesus made it beautiful to haunt her. She couldn’t lie with that man without
she  saw  it,  staring  through  the  chimney  at  her,  shining  through  the  brick  in  the
middle of the night.” She moved her feet around so that just the tips of them stuck
out from her skirt which she had pulled  tight  around  her  legs.  “She  didn’t  have
nothing  but  good  looks,”  she  said  in  a  loud  fast  voice.  “That  ain’t  enough.  No
sirree.”

“My Jesus,” Haze said.
“It ain’t enough,” she repeated.
“I hear them scraping their feet inside there,” the blind man said. “Get out the

tracts, they’re fixing to come out.”

“What we gonna do?” Enoch asked. “What’s inside theter building?”
“A program letting out,” the blind man said. The child took the tracts out the
gunny sack and gave him two bunches of them, tied with a string. “You and Enoch
Emery go over on that side and give out,” he said to her. “Me and this boy’ll stay
over here.”

“He don’t have no business touching them,” she  said.  “He  don’t  want  to  do

nothing but shred them up.”

“Go like I told you,” the blind man said.
She stood there a second, scowling. Then she said, “You come on if you’re
coming,” to Enoch Emery and Enoch jumped off the lion and followed her over to
the other side.

The blind man was reaching forward. Haze ducked to the side but the blind
man was next to him on the step with his hand clamped around his arm. He leaned
forward so that he was facing Haze’s knee and he said in a fast whisper, “You
followed me here because you’re in Sin but you can be a testament to the Lord.
Repent! Go to the head of the stairs and renounce your sins and distribute these
tracts to the people,” and he thrust the stack of pamphlets into Haze’s hand.

Haze jerked his arm away but he only pulled the blind man nearer. “Listen,” he

said, “I’m as clean as you are.”

“Fornication,” the blind man said.
“That ain’t nothing but a word,” Haze said. “If I was in Sin I was in it before I
ever committed any. Ain’t no change come in me.” He was trying to pry the fingers
off  from  around  his  arm  but  the  blind  man  kept  wrapping  them  tighter.  “I  don’t
believe in Sin,” he said. “Take your hand off me.”
“You do,” the blind man said, “you’re marked.”
“I ain’t marked,” Haze said, “I’m free.”
“You’re  marked  free,”  the  blind  man  said.  “Jesus  loves  you  and  you  can’t

escape his mark. Go to the head of the stairs and.…”

Haze jerked his arm free and jumped up. “I’ll take them up there and throw

them over into the bushes,” he said. “You be looking! See can you see.”

“I can see more than you!” the blind man shouted. “You got eyes and see not,

ears and hear not, but Jesus’ll make you see!”

“You be watching if you can see!” Haze said, and started running up the steps.
People  were  already  coming  out  the  auditorium  doors  and  some  were  halfway
down the steps. He pushed through them with his elbows out like sharp wings and
when he got to the top, a new surge of them pushed him back almost to where he
had  started  up.  He  fought  through  them  again  until  somebody  hollered,  “Make
room  for  this  idiot!”  and  people  got  out  of  his  way.  He  rushed  to  the  top  and
pushed his way over to the side and stood there, glaring and panting.

“I never followed him,” he said aloud. “I wouldn’t follow a blind fool like
that. My Jesus.” He stood against the building, holding the stack of leaflets by the
string. A fat man stopped near him to light a cigar, and Haze pushed his shoulder.
“Look  down  yonder,”  he  said.  “See  that  blind  man  down  there,  he’s  giving  out
tracts. Jesus. You ought to see him and he’s got this here ugly child dressed up in
woman’s clothes, giving them out too. My Jesus.”

“There’s always fanatics,” the fat man said, moving on.
“My Jesus,” Haze said. He leaned forward near an old woman with orange
hair and a collar of red wooden beads. “You better get on the other side, lady,” he
said.  “There’s  a  fool  down  there  giving  out  tracts.”  The  crowd  behind  the  old
woman pushed her on, but she looked at him for an instant with two bright flea

eyes. He started toward her through the people but she was already too far away,
and he pushed back to where he had been standing against the wall. “Sweet Jesus
Christ  crucified,”  he  said,  and  felt  something  turn  in  his  chest.  The  crowd  was
moving  fast.  It  was  like  a  big  spread  ravelling  and  the  separate  threads
disappeared  down  the  dark  streets  until  there  was  nothing  left  of  it  and  he  was
standing on the porch of the auditorium by himself. The tracts were speckled all
over  the  steps  and  on  the  sidewalk  and  out  into  the  street.  The  blind  man  was
standing  down  on  the  first  step,  bent  over,  feeling  for  the  crumpled  pamphlets
scattered around him. Enoch Emery was over on the other side, standing on the
lion’s  head  and  trying  to  balance  himself,  and  the  child  was  picking  up  the
pamphlets  that  were  not  too  crushed  to  use  again  and  putting  them  back  in  the
gunny sack.

I don’t need no Jesus, Haze said. I don’t need no Jesus. I got Leora Watts.
He  ran  down  the  steps  to  where  the  blind  man  was,  and  stopped.  He  stood
there  for  a  second  just  out  of  reach  of  his  hands  which  had  begun  to  grope
forward, hunting the sound of his step, and then he started across the street. He
was on the other side before the voice pierced after him. He turned and saw the
blind man standing in the middle of the street, shouting, “Shrike! Shrike! My name
is Asa Shrike when you want me!” A car had to swerve to the side to keep from
hitting him.

Haze drew his head down nearer his hunched shoulders and went on quickly.

He didn’t look back until he heard the footsteps coming behind him.

“Now that we got shut of them,” Enoch Emery panted, “whyn’t we go sommer

and have us some fun?”

“Listen,”  Haze  said  roughly,  “I  got  business  of  my  own.  I  seen  all  of  you  I

want.” He began walking very fast.

Enoch kept skipping steps to keep up. “I been here two months,” he said, “and
I don’t know nobody. People ain’t friendly here. I got me a room and there ain’t
never nobody in it but me. My daddy said I had to come. I wouldn’t never have
come  but  he  made  me.  I  think  I  seen  you  sommers  before.  You  ain’t  from
Stockwell, are you?”

“No.”

“Melsy?”
“No.”
“Sawmill set up there oncet,” Enoch said. “Look like you had a kind of familer

face.”

They walked on without saying anything until they got on the main street again.

It was almost deserted. “Goodby,” Haze said and quickened his walk again.

“I’m going thisaway too,” Enoch said in a sullen voice. On the left there was a
movie house where the electric bill was being changed. “We hadn’t got tied up
with them hicks, we could have gone to a show,” he muttered. He strode along at
Haze’s elbow, talking in a half mumble, half whine. Once he caught at his sleeve
to slow him down and Haze jerked it away. “He made me come,” he said in a
cracked voice. Haze looked at him and saw he was crying, his face seamed and
wet and a purple-pink color. “I ain’t but eighteen year,” he cried, “and he made
me come and I don’t know nobody, nobody here’ll have nothing to do with nobody
else. They ain’t friendly. He done gone off with a woman and made me come but
she ain’t gonna stay for long, he’s gonna beat hell out of her before she gets herself
stuck  to  a  chair.  You  the  first  familer  face  I  seen  in  two  months,  I  seen  you
sommers before. I know I seen you sommers before.”

Haze looked straight ahead with his face set hard, and Enoch kept up the half
mumble, half blubber. They passed a church and a hotel and an antique shop and
turned up a street full of brick houses, each alike in the darkness.

“If you want you a woman you don’t have to be follerin nothing looked like
her,” Enoch said. “I heard about where there’s a house full of two-dollar ones.
Whyn’t we go have us some fun? I could pay you back next week.”

“Look,”  Haze  said,  “I’m  going  where  I  stay—two  doors  from  here.  I  got  a

woman. I got a woman, you understand? I don’t need to go with you.”

“I could pay you back next week,” Enoch said. “I work at the city zoo. I guard

a gate and I get paid ever week.”

“Get away from me,” Haze said.
“People  ain’t  friendly  here.  You  ain’t  from  here  and  you  ain’t  friendly

neither.”

Haze didn’t answer him. He went on with his neck drawn close to his shoulder

blades as if he were cold.

“You don’t know nobody neither,” Enoch said. “You ain’t got no woman or
nothing to do. I knew when I first seen you you didn’t have nobody or nothing. I
seen you and I knew it.”

“This  is  where  I  live,”  Haze  said,  and  he  turned  up  the  walk  of  the  house

without looking back at Enoch.

Enoch stopped. “Yeah,” he cried, “oh yeah,” and he ran his sleeve under his
nose to stop the snivel. “Yeah,” he cried. “Go on where you goin but looker here.”
He  slapped  at  his  pocket  and  ran  up  and  caught  Haze’s  sleeve  and  rattled  the
peeler box at him. “She give me this. She give it to me and there ain’t nothing you
can do about it. She invited me to come to see them and not you and it was you
follerin them.” His eyes glinted through his tears and his face stretched in an evil
crooked grin.

Haze’s mouth jerked but he didn’t say anything. He stood there for an instant,
small in the middle of the steps, and then he raised his arm and hurled the stack of
tracts he had been carrying. It hit Enoch in the chest and knocked his mouth open.
He stood looking, with his mouth hanging open, at where it had hit his front, and
then he turned and tore off down the street; and Haze went into the house.

The  night  before  was  the  first  time  he  had  slept  with  Leora  Watts  or  any
woman, and he had not been very successful with her. When he finished, he was
like something washed ashore on her, and she had made obscene comments about
him, which he remembered gradually during the day. He was uneasy in the thought
of going to her again. He didn’t know what she would say when she opened the
door and saw him there.

When she opened the door and saw him there, she said, “Ha ha.” She was a

big blonde woman with a green nightgown on. “What do YOU want?” she said.

He put his face into what he thought was an all-knowing expression but it was
only stretched a little on one side. The black wool hat sat on his head squarely.
Leora left the door open and went back to the bed. He came in with his hat on and
when it knocked the sacked electric lightbulb, he took it off. Leora rested her face
on her hand and watched him. He began to move around the room examining this
and  that.  His  throat  got  dryer  and  his  heart  began  to  grip  him  like  a  little  ape

clutching the bars of its cage. He sat down on the edge of her bed, with his hat in
his hand.

Leora’s eyes had narrowed some and her mouth had widened and got thin as a
knife  blade.  “That  Jesus-seeing  hat!”  she  said.  She  sat  up  and  pulled  her
nightgown from under her and took it off. She reached for his hat and put it on her
head and sat with her hands on her hips, watching him. Haze stared blank-faced
for a minute, then he made three quick noises that were laughs. He jumped for the
electric light cord and undressed in the dark.

Once when he was small, his father took him and his sister, Ruby, to a carnival
that stopped in Melsy. There was one tent that cost more money, a little off to the
side. A dried-up man with a horn voice was barking it. He never said what was
inside. He said it was so SINsational that it would cost any man wanted to see it
thirty-five cents, and it was so EXclusive, only fifteen could get in at a time. His
father sent him and Ruby to a tent where two monkeys danced, and then he made
for it, moving shuttle-faced and close to the walls of things, like he moved. Haze
left the monkeys and followed him, but he didn’t have thirty-five cents. He asked
the barker what was inside.

“Beat it,” the man said, “there ain’t no pop and there ain’t no monkeys.”
“I already seen them,” he said.
“That’s fine,” the man said, “beat it.”
“I got fifteen cents,” he said. “Whyn’t you lemme in and I could see half of it.”
It’s something about a privy, he was thinking. It’s some men in a privy. Then he
thought, maybe it’s a man and a woman in a privy. She wouldn’t want me in there.
“I got fifteen cents,” he said.

“It’s more than half over,” the man said, fanning with his straw hat. “You run

along.”

“That’ll be fifteen cents worth then,” Haze said.
“Scram,” the man said.
“Is it a nigger?” Haze asked. “Are they doing something to a nigger?”
The  man  leaned  off  his  platform  and  his  dried-up  face  drew  into  a  glare.

“Where’d you get that idear?” he said.

“I don’t know,” Haze said.

“How old are you?” the man asked.
“Twelve,” Haze said. He was ten.
“Gimme that fifteen cents,” the man said, “and get in there.”
He slid the money on the platform and scrambled to get in before it was over.
He went through the flap of the tent and inside there was another tent and he went
through that. His face was hot through to the back of his head. All he could see
were the backs of the men. He climbed up on a bench and looked over their heads.
They were looking down into a lowered place where something white was lying,
squirming a little, in a box lined with black cloth. For a second he thought it was a
skinned animal and then he saw it was a woman. She was fat and she had a face
like  an  ordinary  woman  except  there  was  a  mole  on  the  corner  of  her  lip,  that
moved when she grinned, and one on her side, that was moving too. Haze’s head
became so heavy he couldn’t turn it away from her.

“Had  one  of  themther  built  in  ever  casket,”  his  father,  up  toward  the  front,

said, “be a heap ready to go sooner.”

He  recognized  the  voice  without  looking.  He  fell  down  off  the  bench  and
scrambled out the tent. He crawled out under the side of the outside one because
he didn’t want to pass the barker. He got in the back of a truck and sat down in the
far corner of it. The carnival was making a tin roar outside.

His mother was standing by the washpot in the yard, looking at him, when he
got  home.  She  wore  black  all  the  time  and  her  dresses  were  longer  than  other
women’s. She was standing there straight, looking at him. He slid behind a tree
and  got  out  of  her  view,  but  in  a  few  minutes  he  could  feel  her  watching  him
through the tree. He saw the lowered place and the casket again and a thin woman
in the casket who was too long for it. Her head stuck up at one end and her knees
were raised to make her fit. She had a cross-shaped face and hair pulled close to
her head, and she was twisting and trying to cover herself while the men looked
down. He stood flat against the tree, dry-throated. She left the washpot and come
toward him with a stick. She said, “What you seen?”

“What you seen?” she said.
“What you seen?” she said, using the same tone of voice all the time. She hit
him across the legs with the stick, but he was like part of the tree. “Jesus died to

redeem you,” she said.

“I never ast Him,” he muttered.
She  didn’t  hit  him  again  but  she  stood  looking  at  him,  shut-mouthed,  and  he
forgot  the  guilt  of  the  tent  for  the  nameless  unplaced  guilt  that  was  in  him.  In  a
minute  she  threw  the  stick  away  from  her  and  went  back  to  the  washpot,  shut-
mouthed.

The next day he took his shoes in secret out into the woods. He never wore
them except for revivals and in winter. He took them out of the box and filled the
bottoms of them with stones and small rocks and then he put them on. He laced
them up tight and walked in them through the woods what he knew to be a mile,
until he came to a creek, and then he sat down and took them off and eased his feet
in the wet sand. He thought, that ought to satisfy Him. Nothing happened. If a stone
had fallen he would have taken it for a sign. After a while he drew his feet out the
sand and let them dry, and then he put the shoes on again with the rocks still in
them and he walked a half mile back before he took them off.

The Heart of the Park

ENOCH EMERY knew when he woke up that today the person he could show it to
was going to come. He knew by his blood. He had wise blood like his daddy.

At  two  o’clock  that  afternoon,  he  greeted  the  second-shift  gate  guard.  “You
ain’t but only fifteen minutes late,” he said irritably. “But I stayed. I could of went
on but  I  stayed.”  He  wore  a  green  uniform  with  yellow  piping  on  the  neck  and
sleeves and a yellow stripe down the outside of each leg. The second-shift guard,
a  boy  with  a  jutting  shale-textured  face  and  a  toothpick  in  his  mouth,  wore  the
same. The gate they were standing by was made of iron bars and the concrete arch
that held it was fashioned to look like two trees; branches curved to form the top
of it where twisted letters said, CITY FOREST PARK.  The second-shift guard leaned
against one of the trunks and began prodding between his teeth with the pick.

“Ever day,” Enoch complained; “look like ever day I lose fifteen good minutes

standing here waiting on you.”

Every day when he got off duty, he went into the park and every day when he
went  in,  he  did  the  same  things.  He  went  first  to  the  swimming  pool.  He  was
afraid of the water but he liked to sit up on the bank above it if there were any
women  in  the  pool,  and  watch  them.  There  was  one  woman  who  came  every
Monday who wore a bathing suit that was split on each hip. At first he thought she
didn’t know it, and instead of watching openly on the bank, he had crawled into
some bushes, snickering to himself and had watched from there. There had been
no one else in the pool—the crowds didn’t come until four o’clock—to tell her
about the split and she had splashed around in the water and then lain up on the
edge of the pool asleep for almost an hour, all the time without suspecting there
was somebody in the bushes looking at where she came out of the suit. Then on
another day when he stopped a little later, he saw three women, all with their suits
split, the pool full of people, and nobody paying them any mind. That was how the
city  was—always  surprising  him.  He  visited  a  whore  every  time  he  had  two
dollars to spare but he was continually being shocked by the looseness he saw in

the open. He crawled into the bushes out of a sense of propriety. Very often the
women would pull the suit straps down off their shoulders and lie stretched out.

The park was the heart of the city. He had come to the city—with a knowing in
his blood—he had established himself at the heart of it. Every day he looked at the
heart of it; every day; and he was so stunned and awed and overwhelmed that just
to think about it made him sweat. There was something, in the center of the park,
that he had discovered. It was a mystery, although it was right there in a glass case
for  everybody  to  see  and  there  was  a  typewritten  card  telling  all  about  it  right
there. But there was something the card couldn’t say and what it couldn’t say was
inside  him,  a  terrible  knowledge  without  any  words  to  it,  a  terrible  knowledge
like  a  big  nerve  growing  inside  him.  He  could  not  show  the  mystery  to  just
anybody;  but  he  had  to  show  it  to  somebody.  Who  he  had  to  show  it  to  was  a
special person. This person could not be from the city but he didn’t know why. He
knew he would know him when he saw him and he knew that he would have to see
him soon or the nerve inside him would grow so big that he would be forced to
rob a bank or jump on a woman or drive a stolen car into the side of a building.
His blood all morning had been saying the person would come today.

He  left  the  second-shift  guard  and  approached  the  pool  from  a  discreet
footpath that led behind the ladies’ end of the bath house to a small clearing where
the  entire  pool  could  be  seen  at  once.  There  was  nobody  in  it—the  water  was
bottle-green and motionless—but he saw, coming up the other side and heading
for the bath house, the woman with the two little boys. She came every other day
or so and brought the two children. She would go in the water with them and swim
down the pool and then she would lie up on the side in the sun. She had a stained
white  bathing  suit  that  fit  her  like  a  sack,  and  Enoch  had  watched  her  with
pleasure on several occasions. He moved from the clearing up a slope to some
abelia bushes. There was a nice tunnel under them and he crawled into it until he
came to a slightly wider place where he was accustomed to sit. He settled himself
and  adjusted  the  abelia  so  that  he  could  see  through  it  properly.  His  face  was
always very red in the bushes. Anyone who parted the abelia sprigs at just that
place would think he saw a devil and would fall down the slope and into the pool.
The woman and the two little boys entered the bath house.

Enoch never went immediately to the dark secret center of the park. That was
the  peak  of  the  afternoon.  The  other  things  he  did  built  up  to  it  and  they  had
become very formal and necessary. When he left the bushes, he would go to the
FROSTY BOTTLE, a hot-dog stand in the shape of an Orange Crush with frost painted
in blue around the top of it. Here he would have a chocolate malted milkshake and
would  make  a  few  suggestive  remarks  to  the  waitress  whom  he  believed  to  be
secretly in love with him. After that he would go to see the animals. They were in
a long set of steel cages like Alcatraz Penitentiary in the movies. The cages were
electrically heated in the winter and air-conditioned in the summer and there were
six men hired to wait on the animals and feed them T-bone steaks. The animals
didn’t do anything but lie around. Enoch watched them every day, full of awe and
hate. Then he went there.

The  two  little  boys  ran  out  the  bath  house  and  dove  into  the  water,  and
simultaneously a grating noise issued from the driveway on the other side of the
pool. Enoch’s head pierced out the bushes. He saw a high rat-colored car passing,
which sounded as if its motor were dragging out the back. The car passed and he
could hear it rattle around the turn in the drive and on away. He listened carefully,
trying to hear if it would stop. The noise receded and then gradually grew louder.
The car passed again. Enoch saw this time that there was only one person in it, a
man. The sound of it died away again and then grew louder. The car came around
a third time and stopped almost directly opposite Enoch across the pool. The man
in the car looked out the window and down the grass slope to the water where the
two  little  boys  were  splashing  and  screaming.  Enoch’s  head  was  as  far  out  the
bushes as it could come and he was squinting. The door by the man was tied on
with a rope. The man got out the other door and walked in front of the car and
came halfway down the slope to the pool. He stood there a minute as if he were
looking for somebody and then he sat down stiffly on the grass. He had on a suit
that looked as if it had glare in it. He sat with his knees drawn up. “Well, I’ll be
dog,” Enoch said. “Well, I’ll be dog.”

He began crawling out of the bushes immediately, his heart moving so fast it
was like one of those motorcycles at fairs that the fellow drives around the walls
of a pit. He even remembered the man’s name—Mr. Hazel Weaver. In a second he

appeared on all fours at the end of the abelia and looked across the pool. The blue
figure was still sitting there in the same position. He had the look of being held
there, like by an invisible hand, like if the hand lifted up, the figure would spring
across the pool in one leap without the expression on his face changing once.

The woman came out the bath house and went straight to the diving board. She
spread her arms out and began to bounce, making a big heavy flapping sound with
the  board.  Then  suddenly  she  swirled  backwards  and  disappeared  below  the
water.  Mr.  Hazel  Weaver’s  head  turned  very  slowly,  following  her  down  the
pool.

Enoch  got  up  and  went  down  the  path  behind  the  bath  house.  He  came
stealthily out on the other side and started walking toward Haze. He stayed on the
top of the slope, moving softly in the grass just off the sidewalk, and making no
noise. When he was directly behind him, he sat down on the edge of the sidewalk.
If  his  arms  had  been  ten  feet  long,  he  could  have  put  his  hands  on  Haze’s
shoulders. He studied him quietly.

The woman was climbing out the pool, chinning herself up on the side. First
her face appeared, long and cadaverous, with a bandage-like bathing cap coming
down almost to her eyes, and sharp teeth protruding from her mouth. Then she rose
on her hands until a large foot and leg came up from behind her and another on the
other  side  and  she  was  out,  squatting  there,  panting.  She  stood  up  loosely  and
shook herself, and stamped in the water dripping off her. She was facing them and
she grinned. Enoch could see a part of Hazel Weaver’s face watching the woman.
It didn’t grin in return but it kept on watching her as she padded over to a spot of
sun almost directly under where they were sitting. Enoch had to move a little to
see.

The woman sat down in the spot of sun and took off her bathing cap. Her hair
was short and matted and all sorts of colors, from deep rust to a polluted lemon
yellow.  She  shook  her  head  and  then  she  looked  up  at  Hazel  Weaver  again,
grinning  through  her  pointed  teeth.  She  stretched  herself  out  in  the  spot  of  sun,
raising her knees and settling her backbone down against the concrete. The two
little boys, at the other end of the water, were knocking each other’s heads against
the side of the pool. She settled herself until she was flat against the concrete and

then she reached up and pulled the bathing suit straps off her shoulders.

“King  Jesus!”  Enoch  whispered  and  before  he  could  get  his  eyes  off  the
woman, Haze Weaver had sprung up and was almost to his car. The woman was
sitting straight up with the suit half off her in front, and Enoch was looking both
ways at once. He wrenched his attention loose from the woman and darted after
Hazel Weaver.

“Wait on me!” he shouted and waved his arms in front of the car which was
already  rattling  and  starting  to  go.  Hazel  Weaver  cut  off  the  motor.  His  face
behind the windshield was sour and froglike; it looked like it had a shout closed
up in it, it looked like one of those closet doors in gangster pictures where there is
somebody tied to a chair behind it with a towel in his mouth.

“Well,” Enoch said, “I declare if it ain’t Hazel Weaver. How are you, Hazel?”
“The guard said I’d find you at the swimming pool,” Hazel Weaver said. “He

said you hid in the bushes and watched the swiming.”

Enoch blushed. “I allus have admired swimming,” he said. Then he stuck his

head farther through the window. “You were looking for me?” he exclaimed.

“Those  people,”  Haze  said,  “those  people  named  Moats—did  she  tell  you

where they lived?”

Enoch didn’t seem to hear. “You came out here special to see me?” he said.
“Asa  and  Sabbath  Moats—she  gave  you  the  peeler.  Did  she  tell  you  where

they lived?”

Enoch eased his head out the car. He opened the door and climbed in beside
Haze. For a minute he only looked at him, wetting his lips. Then he whispered, “I
got to show you something.”

“I’m looking for those people,” Haze said. “I got to see that man. Did she tell

you where they live?”

“I got to show you this thing,” Enoch said. “I got to show it to you, here, this
afternoon.  I  got  to.”  He  gripped  Hazel  Weaver’s  arm  and  Hazel  Weaver  shook
him off.

“Did she tell you where they live?” he said again.
Enoch kept wetting his lips. They were pale except for his fever blister, which
was purple. “Sho,” he said. “Ain’t she invited me to come see her and bring my

harp? I got to show you this thing,” he said, “then I’ll tell you.”

“What thing?” Haze muttered.
“This thing I got to show you,” Enoch said. “Drive straight on ahead and I’ll

tell you where to stop.”

“I don’t want to see anything of yours,” Hazel Weaver said. “I got to have that

address.”

“I won’t be able to remember it unless you come,” Enoch said. He didn’t look
at Hazel Weaver. He looked out the window. In a minute the car started. Enoch’s
blood was beating fast. He knew he had to go to the FROSTY BOTTLE and the zoo
before  there,  and  he  foresaw  a  terrible  struggle  with  Hazel  Weaver.  He  would
have to get him there, even if he had to hit him over the head with a rock, and
carry him on his back right up to it.

Enoch’s brain was divided into two parts. The part in communication with his
blood  did  the  figuring  but  it  never  said  anything  in  words.  The  other  part  was
stocked up with all kinds of words and phrases. While the first part was figuring
how  to  get  Hazel  Weaver  through  the  FROSTY  BOTTLE  and  the  zoo,  the  second
inquired, “Where’d you git thisyer fine car? You ought to paint you some signs on
the outside it, like ‘step-in, baby’—I seen one with that on it, then I seen another
with.…”

Hazel Weaver’s face might have been cut out the side of a rock.
“My daddy once owned a yeller Ford automobile he won on a ticket,” Enoch
murmured. “It had a roll-up top and two arials and a squirril tail all come with it.
He  swapped  it  off.  Stop  here!  Stop  here!”  he  yelled—they  were  passing  the
FROSTY BOTTLE.

“Where is it?” Hazel Weaver said as soon as they were inside. They were in a
dark room with a counter across the back of it and brown stools like toadstools in
front of the counter. On the wall facing the door there was a large advertisement
for ice cream, showing a cow dressed like a housewife.

“It  ain’t  here,”  Enoch  said.  “We  have  to  stop  here  on  the  way  and  get

something to eat. What you want?”

“Nothing,” Haze muttered. He stood stiffly in the middle of the room with his

hands in his pockets and his neck drawn down inside his collar.

“Well, sit down,” Enoch said. “I have to have a little drink.”
Something  stirred  behind  the  counter  and  a  woman  with  bobbed  hair  like  a
man’s got up from a chair where she had been reading the newspaper, and came
forward.  She  looked  sourly  at  Enoch.  She  had  on  a  once-white  uniform  clotted
with brown stains. “What you want?” she said in a loud voice, leaning close to his
ear as if he were deaf. She had a man’s face and big muscled arms.

“I want a chocolate malted milkshake, baby girl,” Enoch said softly. “I want a

lot of ice cream in it.”

She turned fiercely from him and glared at Haze.
“He says he don’t want nothing but to sit down and look at you for a while,”

Enoch said. “He ain’t hungry but for just to see you.”

Haze  looked  woodenly  at  the  woman  and  she  turned  her  back  on  him  and
began mixing the milkshake. He sat down on the last stool in the row and started
cracking his knuckles.

Enoch  watched  him  carefully.  “I  reckon  you  done  changed  some,”  he

murmured after a few minutes.

Haze’s neck jerked around and he started forward. “Give me those people’s

address. Right now,” he said.

It  came  to  Enoch  in  an  instant.  The  police.  His  face  was  suddenly  suffused
with secret knowledge. “I reckon you ain’t as uppity as you used to be,” he said.
“I reckon maybe,” he said, “you ain’t got so much cause now as you had then.”
Stole theter automobile, he thought.

Hazel Weaver sat back down. There was no expression on his face but inside

his sour wet eyes, something moved. He turned away from Enoch.

“How come you jumped up so fast down yonder at the pool?” Enoch asked.
The woman turned around to him with the malted milk in her hand. “Of course,” he
said evilly, “I wouldn’t have had no truck with a ugly dish like that neither.”

The woman thumped the malted milk on the counter in front of him. “Fifteen

cents,” she roared.

“You’re worth more than that, baby girl,” Enoch said. He snickered and began

gassing his malted milk through the straw.

The woman strode over to where Haze was. “What do you come in here with a

son of a bitch like that for?” she shouted. “A nice quiet boy like you to come in
here with a son of a bitch. You ought to mind the company you keep.” Her name
was  Maude  and  she  drank  whiskey  all  day  from  a  fruit  jar  under  the  counter.
“Jesus,” she said, wiping her hand under her nose. She sat down in a straight chair
in  front  of  Haze  but  facing  Enoch,  and  folded  her  arms  across  her  chest.  “Ever
day,” she said to Haze, looking at Enoch, “ever day that son of a bitch comes in
here.”

Enoch was thinking about the animals. They had to go next to the animals. He
hated them; just thinking about them made his face turn a chocolate purple color as
if the malted milk were rising in his head.

“You’re a nice boy,” she said, “I can see you got a clean nose, well keep it
clean,  don’t  go  messin  with  a  son  of  a  bitch  like  that  yonder.  I  always  know  a
clean boy when I see one.” She was shouting at Enoch, but Enoch watched Hazel
Weaver. It was like something inside Hazel Weaver was winding up, although he
didn’t move on the outside, not even his hands. He just looked pressed down in
that  blue  suit,  like  inside  it,  the  thing  winding  was  getting  tighter  and  tighter.
Enoch’s blood told him to hurry. He raced the milkshake up the straw.

“Yes sir,” she said, “there ain’t anything sweeter than a clean boy. God for my
witness. And I know a clean one when I see him and I know a son a bitch when I
see  him  and  there’s  a  lot  of  difference  and  that  pus-marked  bastard  zlurping
through  that  straw  is  a  goddammed  son  a  bitch  and  you  a  clean  boy  had  better
mind how you keep him company. I know a clean boy when I see one.”

Enoch screeched in the bottom of his glass. He fished fifteen cents from his
pocket and laid it on the counter and got up. But Hazel Weaver was already up; he
was leaning over the counter toward the woman. She didn’t see him right away
because she was looking at Enoch. He leaned on his hands over the counter until
his face was just a foot from hers. She turned around and stared at him.

“Come on,” Enoch started, “we don’t have no time to be sassing around with

her. I got to show you this right away, I got.…”

“I ain’t clean,” Haze said.
It was not until he said it again that Enoch heard the words.
“I  ain’t  clean,”  he  said  again,  without  any  expression  on  his  face  or  in  his

voice, just looking at the woman as if he were looking at a piece of wood.

She stared at him, startled and then outraged. “What do you think I care!” she

screamed. “Why should I give a goddamm what you are?”

“Come on,” Enoch whined, “come on or I won’t tell you where them people
live.” He caught Haze’s arm and pulled him back from the counter and toward the
door.

“You bastard!” the woman screamed, “what do you think I care about any of

you filthy boys?”

Hazel Weaver pushed the door open quickly and went out. He got back in his
car,  and  Enoch  jumped  in  behind  him.  “Okay,”  Enoch  said,  “drive  straight  on
ahead down this road.”

“What do you want for telling me?” Haze said. “I’m not staying here. I have to

go. I can’t stay here any longer.”

Enoch shuddered. He began wetting his lips. “I got to show it to you,” he said
hoarsely. “I can’t show it to nobody but you. I had a sign it was you when I seen
you drive up at the pool. I knew all morning somebody was gonna come and then
when I saw you at the pool, I had thisyer sign.”
“I don’t care about your signs,” Haze said.
“I go to see it ever day,” Enoch said. “I go ever day but I ain’t ever been able
to take nobody else with me. I had to wait on the sign. I’ll tell you them people’s
address just as soon as you see it. You got to see it,” he said. “When you see it,
something’s going to happen.”

“Nothing’s going to happen,” Haze said.
He started the car again and Enoch sat forward on the seat. “Them animals,”
he muttered. “We got to walk by them first. It won’t take long for that. It won’t
take a minute.” He saw the animals waiting evil-eyed for him, ready to throw him
off time. He thought what if the police were screaming out here now with sirens
and squad cars and they got to Hazel Weaver just before he showed it to him.

“I got to see those people,” Haze said.
“Stop here! Stop here!” Enoch cried.
There was a long shining row of steel cages over to the left and behind the
bars, black figures were sitting or pacing. “Get out,” Enoch said. “This won’t take

one second.”

Haze got out. Then he stopped. “I got to see those people,” he said.
“Okay, okay, come on,” Enoch whined.
“I don’t believe you know the address.”
“I do! I do!” Enoch cried. “It begins with a two, now come on!” He pulled
Haze toward the cages. There were two black bears in the first one. They were
sitting facing each other like two matrons having tea, their faces polite and self-
absorbed. “They don’t do nothing but sit there all day and stink,” Enoch said. “A
man comes and washes theseyer cages out ever morning with a hose and it stinks
just as much as if he’d left it.” Every animal there had a personal haughty hatred
for him like society people have for climbers. He went on past two more cages of
bears, not even looking at them, and then he stopped at the next cage where there
were two yellow-eyed wolves nosing around the edges of the concrete. “Hyenas,”
he said. “I ain’t got no use for hyenas.” He leaned closer and spit into the cage,
hitting one of the wolves on the leg. It shuttled to one side, giving him a slanted
evil look. For a second he forgot Hazel Weaver. Then he looked back quickly to
make sure he was still there. He was right behind him. He was not looking at the
animals. Thinking about them police, Enoch thought. He said, “Come on, we don’t
have to look at all theseyer monkeys that come next.” Usually he stopped at every
cage and made an obscene comment aloud to himself, but today the animals were
only a form he had to get through. He hurried past the cages of monkeys, looking
back two or three times to make sure Hazel Weaver was behind him. At the last of
the monkey cages, he stopped as if he couldn’t help himself.

“Look  at  that  ape,”  he  said,  glaring.  The  animal  had  its  back  to  him,  gray
except for a small pink seat. “If I had a ass like that,” he said prudishly, “I’d sit on
it. I wouldn’t be exposing it to all these people come to this park. Come on, we
don’t have to look at theseyer birds that come next.” He ran past the cages of birds
and then he was at the end of the zoo. “Now we don’t need the car,” he said, going
on ahead, “we’ll go right down that hill yonder through them trees.” He stopped
and saw that Hazel Weaver instead of being behind him had stopped at the last
cage for birds. “Oh Jesus,” he groaned. He stood and waved his arms wildly and
shouted, “Come on!” but Haze didn’t move from where he was looking into the

cage.

Enoch ran back to him and grabbed him by the arm but Haze pushed him off
absently and kept on looking in the cage. It was empty. Enoch stared. “It’s empty!”
he shouted. “What do you have to look in that ole empty cage for? You come on.”
He stood there, sweating and purple. “It’s empty!” he shouted; and then he saw it
wasn’t empty. Over in one corner on the floor of the cage, there was an eye. The
eye was in the middle of something that looked like a piece of mop and the piece
of mop was sitting on an old rag. He squinted close to the wire and saw that the
piece  of  mop  was  an  owl  with  one  eye  open.  It  was  looking  directly  at  Hazel
Weaver.  “That  ain’t  nothing  but  an  ole   hoot  owl,”  he  moaned.  “You  seen  them
before.”

“I  ain’t  clean,”  Haze  said  to  the  eye.  He  said  it  just  like  he  said  it  to  the
woman in the FROSTY BOTTLE. The eye shut softly and the owl turned its head to the
wall.

He’s done murdered somebody, Enoch thought. “Oh sweet Jesus come on!” he
wailed. “I got to show you this right now.” He pulled him away but a few feet
from the cage Haze stopped again, looking at something in the distance. Enoch’s
eyesight  was  very  poor.  He  squinted  and  made  out  a  figure  far  down  the  road
behind them. There were two smaller figures jumping on either side of it.

Hazel  Weaver  turned  back  to  him  suddenly  and  said,  “Where’s  this  thing?

Let’s see it right now. Come on.”

“Ain’t  that  where  I  been  trying  to  take  you,”  Enoch  murmured.  He  felt  the
perspiration drying on him and stinging and his skin began to get pin-pointed, even
in his scalp. “We got to go on foot,” he said.

“Why?” Haze muttered.
“I don’t know,” Enoch said. He knew something was going to happen to him.
He knew something was going to happen to him. His blood stopped beating. All
the time it had been beating like drum noises and now it had stopped. They started
down the hill. It was a steep hill, full of trees painted white from the ground up
four feet. They looked as if they had on ankle-socks. He gripped Hazel Weaver’s
arm.  “It  gets  damp  as  you  go  down,”  he  said,  looking  around  vaguely.  Hazel
Weaver shook him off. In a second, he gripped his arm again and stopped him. He

pointed down through the trees. “Muvseevum,” he said. The strange word made
him  shiver.  That  was  the  first  time  he  had  ever  said  it  aloud. A  piece  of  gray
building was showing where he pointed. It grew larger as they went down the hill,
then as they came to the end of the wood and stepped out on the gravel driveway,
it seemed to shrink suddenly. It was round and soot-colored. There were columns
at the front of it and in between each column there was an eyeless woman holding
a  pot  on  her  head.  A  concrete  band  was  over  the  columns  and  the  letters
M V S E V M were cut into it. Enoch was afraid to pronounce the word again.

“We got to go up the steps and through the front door,” he whispered. There
were ten steps up to the porch. The door was wide and black. Enoch pushed it in
cautiously and inserted his head in the crack. In a minute he brought it out again
and said, “All right, go in and walk easy. I don’t want to wake up theter ole guard.
He ain’t very friendly with me.” They went into a dark hall. It was heavy with the
odor of linoleum and creosote and another odor behind these two. The third one
was an undersmell and Enoch couldn’t name it as anything he had ever smelled
before.  There  was  nothing  in  the  hall  but  two  urns  and  an  old  man  asleep  in  a
straight chair against the wall. He had on the same kind of uniform as Enoch and
he looked like a dried up spider stuck there. Enoch looked at Hazel Weaver to see
if he was smelling the undersmell. He looked like he was; Enoch’s blood began
beating again, and the sound was nearer this time like the drums had moved up
about a quarter of a mile. He gripped Haze’s arm and tip-toed through the hall to
another black door at the end of it. He cracked it a little and inserted his head in
the crack. Then in a second he drew it out and crooked his finger in a gesture for
Haze  to  follow  him.  They  went  into  another  hall,  like  the  last  one  but  running
crosswise. “It’s in that first door yonder,” Enoch said in a small voice. They went
into a dark room full of glass cases. The glass cases covered the walls and there
were three coffin-like ones in the middle of the floor. The ones on the walls were
full  of  birds  tilted  on  varnished  sticks  and  looking  down  with  dried  piquant
expressions.

“Come  on,”  Enoch  whispered.  The  drum  noises  in  his  blood  were  getting
closer  and  closer.  He  went  past  the  two  cases  in  the  middle  of  the  floor  and
toward  the  third  one.  He  went  to  the  farthest  end  of  it  and  stopped.  He  stood

looking down with his neck thrust forward and his hands clutched together; Hazel
Weaver moved up beside him.

The  two  of  them  stood  there,  Enoch  rigid  and  Hazel  Weaver  bent  slightly
forward. There were three bowls and a row of blunt weapons and a man in the
case. It was the man Enoch was looking at. He was about three feet long. He was
naked  and  a  dried  yellow  color  and  his  eyes  were  squinched  shut  as  if  a  giant
block of steel were falling down on top of him.

“See theter notice,” Enoch said in a church whisper, pointing to a typewritten
card at the man’s foot, “it says he was once as tall as us. Some A-rabs did it to
him in six months.” He turned his head cautiously to see Hazel Weaver.

All he could tell was that Hazel Weaver’s eyes were on the shrunken man. He
was bent forward so that his face was reflected in the glass top of the case. The
reflection was pale and the eyes were like two clean bullet holes. Enoch waited,
rigid. He heard footsteps in the hall. Oh Jesus Jesus, he prayed, let him hurry up
and do whatever he’s going to do! The footsteps came in the door. He saw the
woman with the two little boys. She had one by each hand, and she was grinning.
Hazel Weaver had not raised his eyes once from the shrunken man. The woman
came toward them. She stopped on the other side of the case and looked down into
it,  and  the  reflection  of  her  face  appeared  grinning  on  the  glass,  over  Hazel
Weaver’s. She snickered and put two fingers in front of her teeth. The little boys’
faces were like pans set on either side to catch the grins that overflowed from her.
Haze’s neck jerked back and he made a noise. It was a noise like Enoch hadn’t
ever heard before. It might have come from the man inside the case. In a second
Enoch  knew  it  had.  “Wait!”  he  screamed,  and  tore  out  the  room  after  Hazel
Weaver.

He overtook him halfway up the hill. He caught him by the arm and swung him
around and then he stood there, suddenly weak and light as a balloon, and stared.
Hazel  Weaver  grabbed  him  by  the  shoulders  and  shook  him.  “What  is  that
address?” he shouted. “Give me that address!”

Even if Enoch had known the address, he couldn’t have thought of it then. He
could not even stand up. As soon as Hazel Weaver let him go, he fell backwards
and landed against one of the white-socked trees. He rolled over and lay stretched

out on the ground, with an exalted look on his face. He thought he was floating. A
long way off he saw the blue figure spring and pick up a rock, and he saw the wild
face turn, and the rock hurtle toward him; he smiled and shut his eyes. When he
opened them again, Hazel Weaver was gone. He put his fingers to his forehead
and  then  held  them  in  front  of  his  eyes.  They  were  red-streaked.  He  turned  his
head and saw a drop of blood on the ground and as he looked at it, he thought it
widened like a little spring. He sat straight up, frozen-skinned, and put his finger
in  it,  and  very  faintly  he  could  hear  his  blood  beating,  his  secret  blood,  in  the
center of the city.

A Stroke of Good Fortune

RUBY came in the front door of the apartment building and lowered the paper sack
with the four cans of number three beans in it onto the hall table. She was too tired
to take her arms from around it or to straighten up and she hung there collapsed
from the hips, her head balanced like a big florid vegetable at the top of the sack.
She  gazed  with  stony  unrecognition  at  the  face  that  confronted  her  in  the  dark
yellow-spotted mirror over the table. Against her right cheek was a gritty collard
leaf that had been stuck there half the way home. She gave it a vicious swipe with
her arm and straightened up, muttering, “Collards, collards,” in a voice of sultry
subdued wrath. Standing up straight, she was a short woman, shaped nearly like a
funeral  urn.  She  had  mulberry-colored  hair  stacked  in  sausage  rolls  around  her
head but some of these had come loose with the heat and the long walk from the
grocery store and pointed frantically in various directions. “Collard greens!” she
said, spitting the word from her mouth this time as if it were a poisonous seed.

She  and  Bill  Hill  hadn’t  eaten  collard  greens  for  five  years  and  she  wasn’t
going to start cooking them now. She had bought these on account of Rufus but she
wasn’t going to buy them but once. You would have thought that after two years in
the armed forces Rufus would have come back ready to eat like somebody from
somewhere; but no. When she asked him what he would like to have special, he
had  not  had  the  gumption  to  think  of  one  civilized  dish—he  had  said  collard
greens. She had expected Rufus to have turned out into somebody with some get in
him. Well, he had about as much get as a floor mop.

Rufus  was  her  baby  brother  who  had  just  come  back  from  the  European
Theater.  He  had  come  to  live  with  her  because  Pitman  where  they  were  raised
was not there any more. All the people who had lived in Pitman had had the good
sense to leave it, either by dying or by moving to the city. She had married Bill B.
Hill, a Florida man who sold Miracle Products, and had come to live in the city. If
Pitman had still been there, Rufus would have been in Pitman. If one chicken had
been left to walk across the road in Pitman, Rufus would have been there too to

keep him company. She didn’t like to admit it about her own kin, least about her
own brother, but there he was—good for absolutely nothing. “I seen it after five
minutes  of  him,”  she  had  told  Bill  Hill  and  Bill  Hill,  with  no  expression
whatsoever, had said, “It taken me three.” It was mortifying to let that kind of a
husband see you had that kind of a brother.

She supposed there was no help for it. Rufus was like the other children. She
was the only one in her family who had been different, who had had any get. She
took a stub of pencil from her pocketbook and wrote on the side of the sack: Bill
you bring this upstairs. Then she braced herself at the bottom of the steps for the
climb to the fourth floor.

The  steps  were  thin  black  rent  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  covered  with  a
mole-colored carpet that looked as if it grew from the floor. They stuck straight up
like steeple steps, it seemed to her. They reared up. The minute she stood at the
bottom of them, they reared up and got steeper for her benefit. As she gazed up
them, her mouth widened and turned down in a look of complete disgust. She was
in no condition to go up anything. She was sick. Madam Zoleeda had told her but
not before she knew it herself.

Madam  Zoleeda  was  the  palmist  on  Highway  87.  She  had  said,  “A  long
illness,” but she had added, whispering, with a very I-al-ready-know-but-I-won’t-
tell  look,  “It  will  bring  you  a  stroke  of  good  fortune!”  and  then  had  sat  back
grinning, a stout woman with green eyes that moved in their sockets as if they had
been  oiled.  Ruby  didn’t  need  to  be  told.  She  had  already  figured  out  the  good
fortune.  Moving.  For  two  months  she  had  had  a  distinct  feeling  that  they  were
going  to  move.  Bill  Hill  couldn’t  hold  off  much  longer.  He  couldn’t  kill  her.
Where she wanted to be was in a subdivision—she started up the steps, leaning
forward  and  holding  onto  the  banisters—where  you  had  your  drugstores  and
grocery and a picture show right in your own neighborhood. As it was now, living
downtown, she had to walk eight blocks to the main business streets and farther
than that to get to a supermarket. She hadn’t made any complaints for five years
much but now with her health at stake as young as she was what did he think she
was going to do, kill herself? She had her eye on a place in Meadowcrest Heights,
a duplex bungalow with yellow awnings. She stopped on the fifth step to blow. As

young  as  she  was—thirty-four—you  wouldn’t  think  five  steps  would  stew  her.
You better take it easy, baby, she told herself, you’re too young to bust your gears.
Thirty-four wasn’t old, wasn’t any age at all. She remembered her mother at
thirty-four—she had looked like a puckered-up old yellow apple, sour, she had
always  looked  sour,  she  had  always  looked  like  she  wasn’t  satisfied  with
anything.  She  compared  herself  at  thirty-four  with  her  mother  at  that  age.  Her
mother’s  hair  had  been  gray—hers  wouldn’t  be  gray  now  even  if  she  hadn’t
touched it up. All those children were what did her mother in—eight of them: two
born  dead,  one  died  the  first  year,  one  crushed  under  a  mowing  machine.  Her
mother had got deader with every one of them. And all of for what? Because she
hadn’t known any better. Pure ignorance. The purest of downright ignorance!

And  there  her  two  sisters  were,  both  married  four  years  with  four  children
apiece. She didn’t see how they stood it, always going to the doctor to be jabbed
at with instruments. She remembered when her mother had had Rufus. She was the
only one of the children who couldn’t stand it and she walked all the way in to
Melsy, in the hot sun ten miles, to the picture show to get clear of the screaming,
and had sat through two westerns and a horror picture and a serial and then had
walked all the way back and found it was just beginning, and she had had to listen
all  night. All  that  misery  for  Rufus! And  him  turned  out  now  to  have  no  more
charge than a dish rag. She saw him waiting out nowhere before he was born, just
waiting,  waiting  to  make  his  mother,  only  thirty-four,  into  an  old  woman.  She
gripped the banister rail fiercely and heaved herself up another step, shaking her
head. Lord, she was disappointed in him! After she had told all her friends her
brother was back from the European Theater, here he comes—sounding like he’d
never been out of a hog lot.

He looked old too. He looked older than she did and he was fourteen years
younger. She was extremely young looking for her age. Not that thirty-four is any
age and anyway she was married. She had to smile, thinking about that, because
she  had  done  so  much  better  than  her  sisters—they  had  married  from  around.
“This breathlessness,” she muttered, stopping again. She decided she would have
to sit down.

There were twenty-eight steps in each flight—twenty-eight.

She sat down and jumped quickly, feeling something under her. She caught her
breath and then pulled the thing out: it was Hartley Gilfeet’s pistol. Nine inches of
treacherous tin! He was a six-year-old boy who lived on the fifth floor. If he had
been hers, she’d have worn him out so hard so many times he wouldn’t know how
to leave his mess on a public stair. She could have fallen down those stairs as
easy as not and ruined herself! But his stupid mother wasn’t going to do anything
to him even if she told her. All she did was scream at him and tell people how
smart he was. “Little Mister Good Fortune!” she called him. “All his poor daddy
left me!” His daddy had said on his death bed, “There’s nothing but him I ever
given  you,”  and  she  had  said,  “Rodman,  you  given  me  a  fortune!”  and  so  she
called him Little Mister Good Fortune. “I’d wear the seat of his good fortune out!”
Ruby muttered.

The steps were going up and down like a seesaw with her in the middle of it.
She did not want to get nauseated. Not that again. Now no. No. She was not. She
sat tightly to the steps with her eyes shut until the dizziness stopped a little and the
nausea subsided. No, I’m not going to no doctor, she said. No. No. She was not.
They  would  have  to  carry  her  there  knocked  out  before  she  would  go.  She  had
done all right doctoring herself all these years—no bad sick spells, no teeth out,
no children, all that by herself. She would have had five children right now if she
hadn’t been careful.

She  had  wondered  more  than  once  if  this  breathlessness  could  be  heart
trouble. Once in a while, going up the steps, there’d be a pain in her chest along
with it. That was what she wanted it to be—heart trouble. They couldn’t very well
remove your heart. They’d have to knock her in the head before they’d get her near
a hospital, they’d have to—suppose she would die if they didn’t?

She wouldn’t.
Suppose she would?
She made herself stop this gory thinking. She was only thirty-four. There was
nothing  permanent  wrong  with  her.  She  was  fat  and  her  color  was  good.  She
thought  of  herself  again  in  comparison  with  her  mother  at  thirty-four  and  she
pinched  her  arm  and  smiled.  Seeing  that  her  mother  or  father  neither  had  been
much to look at, she had done very well. They had been the dried-up type, dried

up and Pitman dried into them, them and Pitman shrunk down into something all
dried and puckered up. And she had come out of that! A somebody as alive as her!
She got up, gripping the banister rail but smiling to herself. She was warm and fat
and beautiful and not too fat because Bill Hill liked her that way. She had gained
some weight but he hadn’t noticed except that he was maybe more happy lately
and didn’t know why. She felt the wholeness of herself, a whole thing climbing the
stairs. She was up the first flight now and she looked back, pleased. As soon as
Bill  Hill  fell  down  these  steps  once,  maybe  they  would  move.  But  they  would
move before that! Madam Zoleeda had known. She laughed aloud and moved on
down  the  hall.  Mr.  Jerger’s  door  grated  and  startled  her.  Oh  Lord,  she  thought,
him. He was a second-floor resident who was peculiar.

He peered at her coming down the hall. “Good morning!” he said, bowing the
upper  part  of  his  body  out  the  door.  “Good  morning  to  you!”  He  looked  like  a
goat. He had little raisin eyes and a string beard and his jacket was a green that
was almost black or a black that was almost green.

“Morning,” she said. “Hower you?”
“Well!” he  screamed.  “Well  indeed  on  this  glorious  day!”  He  was  seventy-
eight years old and his face looked as if it had mildew on it. In the mornings he
studied  and  in  the  afternoons  he  walked  up  and  down  the  sidewalks,  stopping
children  and  asking  them  questions.  Whenever  he  heard  anyone  in  the  hall,  he
opened his door and looked out.

“Yeah, it’s a nice day,” she said languidly.
“Do you know what great birthday this is?” he asked.
“Uh-uh,” Ruby said. He always had a question like that. A history question that
nobody knew; he would ask it and then make a speech on it. He used to teach in a
high school.

“Guess,” he urged her.
“Abraham Lincoln,” she muttered.
“Hah! You are not trying,” he said. “Try.”
“George Washington,” she said, starting up the stairs.
“Shame on you!” he cried. “And your husband from there! Florida! Florida!
Florida’s birthday,” he shouted. “Come in here.” He disappeared into his room,

beckoning a long finger at her.

She came down the two steps and said, “I gotta be going,” and stuck her head
inside  the  door.  The  room  was  the  size  of  a  large  closet  and  the  walls  were
completely covered with picture postcards of local buildings; this gave an illusion
of space. A single transparent bulb hung down on Mr. Jerger and a small table.

“Now examine this,” he said. He was bending over a book, running his finger
under the lines: “‘On Easter Sunday, April 3, 1516, he arrived on the tip of this
continent.’ Do you know who this he was?” he demanded.

“Yeah, Christopher Columbus.” Ruby said.
“Ponce de Leon!” he screamed. “Ponce de Leon! You should know something

about Florida,” he said. “Your husband is from Florida.”

“Yeah, he was born in Miami,” Ruby said. “He’s not from Tennessee.”
“Florida is not a noble state,” Mr. Jerger said, “but it is an important one.”
“It’s important alrighto,” Ruby said.
“Do you know who Ponce de Leon was?”
“He was the founder of Florida,” Ruby said brightly.
“He was a Spaniard,” Mr. Jerger said. “Do you know what he was looking

for?”

“Florida,” Ruby said.
“Ponce  de  Leon  was  looking  for  the  fountain  of  youth,”  Mr.  Jerger  said,

closing his eyes.

“Oh,” Ruby muttered.
“A certain spring,” Mr. Jerger went on, “whose water gave perpetual youth to
those who drank it. In other words,” he said, “he was trying to be young always.”

“Did he find it?” Ruby asked.
Mr. Jerger paused with his eyes still closed. After a minute he said, “Do you
think he found it? Do you think he found it? Do you think nobody else would have
got to it if he had found it? Do you think there would be one person living on this
earth who hadn’t drunk it?”

“I hadn’t thought,” Ruby said.
“Nobody thinks any more,” Mr. Jerger complained.
“I got to be going.”

“Yes, it’s been found,” Mr. Jerger said.
“Where at?” Ruby asked.
“I have drunk of it.”
“Where’d you have to go to?” she asked. She leaned a little closer and got a

whiff of him that was like putting her nose under a buzzard’s wing.

“Into my heart,” he said, placing his hand over it.
“Oh.” Ruby moved back. “I gotta be going. I think my brother’s home.” She got

over the door sill.

“Ask your husband if he knows what great birthday this is,” Mr. Jerger said,

looking at her coyly.

“Yeah,  I  will.”  She  turned  and  waited  until  she  heard  his  door  click.  She
looked  back  to  see  that  it  was  shut  and  then  she  blew  out  her  breath  and  stood
facing the dark remaining steep of steps. “God Almighty,” she commented. They
got darker and steeper as you went up.

By the time she had climbed five steps her breath was gone. She continued up
a few more, blowing. Then she stopped. There was a pain in her stomach. It was a
pain like a piece of something pushing something else. She had felt it before, a
few days ago. It was the one that frightened her most. She had thought the word
cancer once and dropped it instantly because no horror like that was coming to
her because it couldn’t. The word came back to her immediately with the pain but
she  slashed  it  in  two  with  Madam  Zoleeda.  It  will  end  in  good  fortune.  She
slashed  it  twice  through  and  then  again  until  there  were  only  pieces  of  it  that
couldn’t be recognized. She was going to stop on the next floor—God, if she ever
got up there—and talk to Laverne Watts. Laverne Watts was a third-floor resident,
the secretary to a chiropodist, and an especial friend of hers.

She  got  up  there,  gasping  and  feeling  as  if  her  knees  were  full  of  fizz,  and
knocked on Laverne’s door with the butt of Hartley Gilfeet’s gun. She leaned on
the door frame to rest and suddenly the floor around her dropped on both sides.
The walls turned black and she felt herself reeling, without breath, in the middle
of the air, terrified at the drop that was coming. She saw the door open a great
distance away and Laverne, about four inches high, standing in it.

Laverne, a tall straw-haired girl, let out a great guffaw and slapped her side as

if she had just opened the door on the most comical sight she had yet seen. “That
gun!” she yelled. “That gun! That look!” She staggered back to the sofa and fell on
it, her legs rising higher than her hips and falling down again helplessly with a
thud.

The floor came up to where Ruby could see it and remained, dipping a little.
With  a  terrible  stare  of  concentration,  she  stepped  down  to  get  on  it.  She
scrutinized  a  chair  across  the  room  and  then  headed  for  it,  putting  her  feet
carefully one before the other.

“You should be in a wild-west show!” Laverne Watts said. “You’re a howl!”
Ruby  reached  the  chair  and  then  edged  herself  onto  it.  “Shut  up,”  she  said

hoarsely.

Laverne sat forward, pointing at her, and then fell back on the sofa, shaking

again.

“Quit that!” Ruby yelled. “Quit that! I’m sick.”
Laverne got up and took two or three long strides across the room. She leaned
down in front of Ruby and looked into her face with one eye shut as if she were
squinting through a keyhole. “You are sort of purple,” she said.

“I’m damn sick,” Ruby glowered.
Laverne stood looking at her and after a second she folded her arms and very
pointedly stuck her stomach out and began to sway back and forth. “Well, what’d
you come in here with that gun for? Where’d you get it?” she asked.

“Sat on it,” Ruby muttered.
Laverne  stood  there,  swaying  with  her  stomach  stuck  out,  and  a  very  wise
expression  growing  on  her  face.  Ruby  sat  sprawled  in  the  chair,  looking  at  her
feet. The room was getting still. She sat up and glared at her ankles. They were
swollen!  I’m  not  going  to  no  doctor,  she  started,  I’m  not  going  to  one.  I’m  not
going. “Not going,” she began to mumble, “to no doctor, not…”

“How  long  you  think  you  can  hold  off?”  Laverne  murmured  and  began  to

giggle.

“Are my ankles swollen?” Ruby asked.
“They look like they’ve always looked to me,” Laverne said, throwing herself
down on the sofa again. “Kind of fat.” She lifted her own ankles up on the end

pillow and turned them slightly. “How do you like these shoes?” she asked. They
were a grasshopper green with very high thin heels.

“I think they’re swollen,” Ruby said. “When I was coming up that last flight of

stairs I had the awfulest feeling, all over me like…”

“You ought to go on to the doctor.”
“I don’t need to go to no doctor,” Ruby muttered. “I can take care of myself. I

haven’t done bad at it all this time.”

“Is Rufus at home?”
“I don’t know. I kept myself away from doctors all my life. I kept—why?”
“Why what?”
“Why, is Rufus at home?”
“Rufus is cute,” Laverne said. “I thought I’d ask him how he liked my shoes.”
Ruby  sat  up  with  a  fierce  look,  very  pink  and  purple.  “Why  Rufus?”  she
growled.  “He  ain’t  but  a  baby.”  Laverne  was  thirty  years  old.  “He  don’t  care
about women’s shoes.”

Laverne sat up and took off one of the shoes and peered inside it. “Nine B,”

she said. “I bet he’d like what’s in it.”

“That Rufus ain’t but an enfant!” Ruby said. “He don’t have time to be looking

at your feet. He ain’t got that kind of time.”

“Oh, he’s got plenty of time,” Laverne said.
“Yeah,” Ruby muttered and saw him again, waiting, with plenty of time, out

nowhere before he was born, just waiting to make his mother that much deader.

“I believe your ankles are swollen,” Laverne said.
“Yeah,”  Ruby  said,  twisting  them.  “Yeah.  They  feel  tight  sort  of.  I  had  the
awfulest feeling when I got up those steps, like sort of out of breath all over, sort
of tight all over, sort of—awful.”

“You ought to go on to the doctor.”
“No.”
“You ever been to one?”
“They carried me once when I was ten,” Ruby said, “but I got away. Three of

them holding me didn’t do any good.”

“What was it that time?”

“What you looking at me that way for?” Ruby muttered.
“What way?”
“That way,” Ruby said, “—swagging out that stomach of yours that way.”
“I just asked you what it was that time?”
“It was a boil. A nigger woman up the road told me what to do and I did it and
it went away.” She sat slumped on the edge of the chair, staring in front of her as if
she were remembering an easier time.

Laverne began to do a kind of comic dance up and down the room. She took
two or three slow steps in one direction with her knees bent and then she came
back and kicked her leg slowly and painfully in the other. She began to sing in a
loud guttural voice, rolling her eyes, “Put them all together, they spell MOTHER!
MOTHER!” and stretching out her arms as if she were on the stage.

Ruby’s  mouth  opened  wordlessly  and  her  fierce  expression  vanished.  For  a
half-second  she  was  motionless;  then  she  sprang  from  the  chair.  “Not  me!”  she
shouted. “Not me!”

Laverne stopped and only watched her with the wise look.
“Not me!” Ruby shouted. “Oh no not me! Bill Hill takes care of that. Bill Hill
takes care of that! Bill Hill’s been taking care of that for five years!  That  ain’t
going to happen to me!”

“Well old Bill Hill just slipped up about four or five months ago, my friend,”

Laverne said. “Just slipped up…”

“I don’t reckon you know anything about it, you ain’t even married, you ain’t

even…”

“I  bet  it’s  not  one,  I  bet  it’s  two,”  Laverne  said.  “You  better  go  on  to  the

doctor and find out how many it is.”

“It is not!” Ruby shrilled. She thought she was so smart! She didn’t know a
sick woman when she saw one, all she could do was look at her feet and shoe em
to Rufus, shoe em to Rufus and he was an enfant and she was thirty-four years old.
“Rufus is an enfant!” she wailed.

“That will make two!” Laverne said.
“You shut up talking like that!” Ruby shouted. “You shut up this minute. I ain’t

going to have any baby!”

“Ha ha,” Laverne said.
“I don’t know how you think you know so much,” Ruby said, “single as you
are.  If  I  was  so  single  I  wouldn’t  go  around  telling  married  people  what  their
business is.”

“Not just your ankles,” Laverne said, “you’re swollen all over.”
“I ain’t going to stay here and be insulted,” Ruby said and walked carefully to
the door, keeping herself erect and not looking down at her stomach the way she
wanted to.

“Well I hope all of you feel better tomorrow,” Laverne said.
“I think my heart will be better tomorrow,” Ruby said. “But I hope we will be
moving soon. I can’t climb these steps with this heart trouble and,” she added with
a dignified glare, “Rufus don’t care nothing about your big feet.”

“You better put that gun up,” Laverne said, “before you shoot somebody.”
Ruby slammed the door shut and looked down at herself quickly. She was big
there but she had always had a kind of big stomach. She did not stick out  there
different from the way she did any place else. It was natural when you took on
some weight to take it on in the middle and Bill Hill didn’t mind her being fat, he
was just more happy and didn’t know why. She saw Bill Hill’s long happy face,
grinning at her from the eyes downward in a way he had as if his look got happier
as it neared his teeth. He would never slip up. She rubbed her hand across  her
skirt and felt the tightness of it but hadn’t she felt that before? She had. It was the
skirt—she had on the tight one that she didn’t wear often, she had … she didn’t
have on the tight skirt. She had on the loose one. But it wasn’t very loose. But that
didn’t make any difference, she was just fat.

She put her fingers on her stomach and pushed down and took them off quickly.
She began walking toward the stairs, slowly, as if the floor were going to move
under her. She began the steps. The pain came back at once. It came back with the
first  step.  “No,”  she  whimpered,  “no.”  It  was  just  a  little  feeling,  just  a  little
feeling like a piece of her inside rolling over but it made her breath tighten in her
throat. Nothing in her was supposed to roll over. “Just one step,” she whispered,
“Just one step and it did it.” It couldn’t be cancer. Madam Zoleeda said it would
end in good fortune. She began crying and saying, “Just one step and it did it,” and

going on up them absently as if she thought she were standing still. On the sixth
one,  she  sat  down  suddenly,  her  hand  slipping  weakly  down  the  banister  spoke
onto the floor.

“Noooo,”  she  said  and  leaned  her  round  red  face  between  the  two  nearest
poles.  She  looked  down  into  the  stairwell  and  gave  a  long  hollow  wail  that
widened and echoed as it went down. The stair cavern was dark green and mole-
colored and the wail sounded at the very bottom like a voice answering her. She
gasped and shut her eyes. No. No. It couldn’t be any baby. She was not going to
have something waiting in her to make her deader, she was not. Bill Hill couldn’t
have slipped up. He said it was guaranteed and it had worked all this time and it
could not be that, it could not. She shuddered and held her hand tightly over her
mouth. She felt her face drawn puckered: two born dead one died the first year
and one run under like a dried yellow apple no she was only thirty-four years old,
she was old. Madam Zoleeda said it would end in no drying up. Madam Zoleeda
said oh but it will end in a stroke of good fortune! Moving. She had said it would
end in a stroke of good moving.

She felt herself getting calmer. She felt herself, after a minute, getting almost
calm and thought she got upset too easy; heck, it was gas. Madam Zoleeda hadn’t
been wrong about anything yet, she knew more than …

She  jumped:  there  was  a  bang  at  the  bottom  of  the  stairwell  and  a  rumble
rattling up the steps, shaking them even up where she was. She looked through the
banister poles and saw Hartley Gilfeet, with two pistols leveled, galloping up the
stairs and heard a voice pierce down from the floor over her, “You Hartley, shut
up that racket! You’re shaking the house!” But he came on, thundering louder as he
rounded the bend on the first floor and streaked up the hall. She saw Mr. Jerger’s
door fly open and him spring with clawed fingers and grasp a flying piece of shirt
that whirled and shot off again with a high-pitched, “Leggo, you old goat teacher!”
and  came  on  nearer  until  the  stairs  rumbled  directly  under  her  and  a  charging
chipmunk  face  crashed  into  her  and  rocketed  through  her  head,  smaller  and
smaller into a whirl of dark.

She sat on the step, clutching the banister spoke while the breath came back
into her a thimbleful at a time and the stairs stopped seesawing. She opened her

eyes and gazed down into the dark hold, down to the very bottom where she had
started up so long ago. “Good Fortune,” she said in a hollow voice that echoed
along all the levels of the cavern, “Baby.”

“Good Fortune, Baby,” the three echoes leered.
Then she recognized the feeling again, a little roll. It was as if it were not in
her stomach. It was as if it were out nowhere in nothing, out nowhere, resting and
waiting, with plenty of time.

Enoch and the Gorilla

ENOCH  EMERY  had  borrowed  his  landlady’s  umbrella  and  he  discovered  as  he
stood in the entrance of the drugstore, trying to open it, that it was at least as old
as she was. When he finally got it hoisted, he pushed his dark glasses back on his
eyes and re-entered the downpour.

The  umbrella  was  one  his  landlady  had  stopped  using  fifteen  years  before
(which was the only reason she had lent it to him) and as soon as the rain touched
the top of it, it came down with a shriek and stabbed him in the back of the neck.
He ran a few feet with it over his head and then backed into another store entrance
and removed it. Then to get it up again, he had to place the tip of it on the ground
and  ram  it  open  with  his  foot.  He  ran  out  again,  holding  his  hand  up  near  the
spokes  to  keep  them  open  and  this  allowed  the  handle,  which  was  carved  to
represent the head of a fox terrier, to jab him every few seconds in the stomach.
He proceeded for another quarter of a block this way before the back half of the
silk stood up off the spokes and allowed the storm to sweep down his collar. Then
he ducked under the marquee of a movie house. It was Saturday and there were a
lot of children standing more or less in a line in front of the ticket box.

Enoch was not very fond of children, but children always seemed to like to
look at him. The line turned and twenty or thirty eyes began to observe him with a
steady interest. The umbrella had assumed an ugly position, half up and half down,
and the half that was up was about to come down and spill more water under his
collar. When this happened the children laughed and jumped up and down. Enoch
glared at them and turned his back and lowered his dark glasses. He found himself
facing a life-size four-color picture of a gorilla. Over the gorilla’s head, written in
red  letters  was  “GONGA!  Giant  Jungle  Monarch  and  a  Great  Star!  HERE  IN
PERSON!!!” At the level of the gorilla’s knee, there was more that said, “Gonga
will appear in person in front of this theater at 12 A.M. TODAY! A free pass to the
first ten brave enough to step up and shake his hand!”

Enoch was usually thinking of something else at the moment that Fate began

drawing  back  her  leg  to  kick  him.  When  he  was  four  years  old,  his  father  had
brought him home a tin box from the penitentiary. It was orange and had a picture
of some peanut brittle on the outside of it and green letters that said, “A NUTTY
SURPRISE!” When Enoch had opened it, a coiled piece of steel had sprung out at
him and broken off the ends of his two front teeth. His life was full of so many
happenings like that that it would seem he should have been more sensitive to his
times of danger. He stood there and read the poster twice through carefully. To his
mind, an opportunity to insult a successful ape came from the hand of Providence.
He turned around and asked the nearest child what time it was. The child said
it was twelve-ten and that Gonga was already ten minutes late. Another child said
that maybe the rain had delayed him. Another said, no not the rain, his director
was taking a plane from Hollywood. Enoch gritted his teeth. The first child said
that if he wanted to shake the star’s hand, he would have to get in line like the rest
of them and wait his turn. Enoch got in line. A child asked him how old he was.
Another observed that he had funny-looking teeth. He ignored all this as best he
could and began to straighten out the umbrella.

In a few minutes a black truck turned around the corner and came slowly up
the street in the heavy rain. Enoch pushed the umbrella under his arm and began to
squint through his dark glasses. As the truck approached, a phonograph inside it
began to play “Tarara Boom Di Aye,” but the music was almost drowned out by
the  rain.  There  was  a  large  illustration  of  a  blonde  on  the  outside  of  the  truck,
advertising some picture other than the gorilla’s.

The children held their line carefully as the truck stopped in front of the movie
house. The back door of it was constructed like a paddy wagon, with a grate, but
the ape was not at it. Two men in raincoats got out of the cab part, cursing, and ran
around to the back and opened the door. One of them stuck his head in and said,
“Okay, make it snappy, willya?” The other jerked his thumb at the children and
said, “Get back willya, willya get back?”

A  voice  on  the  record  inside  the  truck  said,  “Here’s  Gonga,  folks,  Roaring
Gonga and a Great Star! Give Gonga a big hand, folks!” The voice was barely a
mumble in the rain.

The  man  who  was  waiting  by  the  door  of  the  truck  stuck  his  head  in  again.

“Okay willya get out?” he said.

There was a faint thump somewhere inside the van. After a second a dark furry

arm emerged just enough for the rain to touch it and then drew back inside.

“Goddamn,” the man who was under the marquee said; he took off his raincoat
and threw it to the man by the door, who threw it into the wagon. After two or
three minutes more, the gorilla appeared at the door, with the raincoat buttoned up
to his chin and the collar turned up. There was an iron chain hanging from around
his neck; the man grabbed it and pulled him down and the two of them bounded
under  the  marquee  together. A  motherly-looking  woman  was  in  the  glass  ticket
box, getting the passes ready for the first ten children brave enough to step up and
shake hands.

The  gorilla  ignored  the  children  entirely  and  followed  the  man  over  to  the
other side of the entrance where there was a small platform raised about a foot off
the ground. He stepped up on it and turned facing the children and began to growl.
His growls were not so much loud as poisonous; they appeared to issue from a
black heart. Enoch was terrified and if he had not been surrounded by the children,
he would have run away.

“Who’ll step up first?” the man said. “Come on come on, who’ll step up first?

A free pass to the first kid stepping up.”

There was no movement from the group of children. The man glared at them.
“What’s the matter with you kids?” he barked. “You yellow? He won’t hurt you as
long as I got him by this chain.” He tightened his grip on the chain and jangled it at
them to show he was holding it securely.

After  a  minute  a  little  girl  separated  herself  from  the  group.  She  had  long
wood-shaving curls and a fierce triangular face. She moved up to within four feet
of the star.

“Okay okay,” the man said, rattling the chain, “make it snappy.”
The ape reached out and gave her hand a quick shake. By this time there was
another little girl ready and then two boys. The line re-formed and began to move
up.

The gorilla kept his hand extended and turned his head away with a bored look
at the rain. Enoch had got over his fear and was trying frantically to think of an

obscene remark that would be suitable to insult him with. Usually he didn’t have
any trouble with this kind of composition but nothing came to him now. His brain,
both parts, was completely empty. He couldn’t think even of the insulting phrases
he used every day.

There  were  only  two  children  in  front  of  him  by  now.  The  first  one  shook
hands and stepped aside. Enoch’s heart was beating violently. The child in front
of him finished and stepped aside and left him facing the ape, who took his hand
with an automatic motion.

It was the first hand that had been extended to Enoch since he had come to the

city. It was warm and soft.

For a second he only stood there, clasping it. Then he began to stammer. “My
name  is  Enoch  Emery,”  he  mumbled.  “I  attended  the  Rodemill  Boys’  Bible
Academy. I work at the city zoo. I seen two of your pictures. I’m only eighteen
years old but I already work for the city. My daddy made me come…” and his
voice cracked.

The star leaned slightly forward and a change came in his eyes: an ugly pair of
human ones moved closer and squinted at Enoch from behind the celluloid pair.
“You go to hell,” a surly voice inside the ape-suit said, low but distinctly, and the
hand was jerked away.

Enoch’s humiliation was so sharp and painful that he turned around three times
before he realized which direction he wanted to go in. Then he ran off into the rain
as fast as he could.

*   *   *

In  spite  of  himself,  Enoch  couldn’t  get  over  the  expectation  that  something  was
going to happen to him. The virtue of hope, in Enoch, was made up of two parts
suspicion and one part lust. It operated on him all the rest of the day. He had only
a vague idea what he wanted, but he was not a boy without ambition: he wanted to
become something. He wanted to better his condition. He wanted, some day, to
see a line of people waiting to shake his hand.

All afternoon he fidgeted and fooled in his room, biting his nails and shredding
what was left of the silk off the landlady’s umbrella. Finally he denuded it entirely

and broke off the spokes. What was left was a black stick with a sharp steel point
at one end and a dog’s head at the other. It might have been an instrument for some
specialized  kind  of  torture  that  had  gone  out  of  fashion.  Enoch  walked  up  and
down his room with it under his arm and realized that it would distinguish him on
the sidewalk.

About seven o’clock in the evening he put on his coat and took the stick and
headed  for  a  little  restaurant  two  blocks  away.  He  had  the  sense  that  he  was
setting off to get some honor, but he was very nervous, as if he were afraid he
might have to snatch it instead of receive it.

He never set out for anything without eating first. The restaurant was called the
Paris  Diner;  it  was  a  tunnel  about  six  feet  wide,  located  between  a  shoeshine
parlor and a dry-cleaning establishment. Enoch slid in and climbed up on the far
stool  at  the  counter  and  said  he  would  have  a  bowl  of  split-pea  soup  and  a
chocolate malted milkshake.

The waitress was a tall woman with a big yellow dental plate and the same
color hair done up in a black hairnet. One hand never left her hip; she filled orders
with the other one. Although Enoch came in every night, she had never learned to
like him.

Instead of filling his order, she began to fry bacon; there was only one other
customer in the place and he had finished his meal and was reading a newspaper;
there  was  no  one  to  eat  the  bacon  but  her.  Enoch  reached  over  the  counter  and
prodded her hip with the stick. “Listenhere,” he said, “I got to go. I’m in a hurry.”
“Go then,” she said. Her jaw began to work and she stared into the skillet with

a fixed attention.

“Lemme just have a piece of theter cake yonder,” he said, pointing to a half of
pink and yellow cake on a round glass stand. “I think I got something to do. I got to
be going. Set it up there next to him,” he said, indicating the customer reading the
newspaper.  He  slid  over  the  stools  and  began  reading  the  outside  sheet  of  the
man’s paper.

The man lowered the paper and looked at him. Enoch smiled. The man raised
the paper again. “Could I borrow some part of your paper that you ain’t studying?”
Enoch  asked.  The  man  lowered  it  again  and  stared  at  him;  he  had  muddy

unflinching eyes. He leafed deliberately through the paper and shook out the sheet
with  the  comic  strips  and  handed  it  to  Enoch.  It  was  Enoch’s  favorite  part.  He
read it every evening like an office. While he ate the cake that the waitress had
torpedoed down the counter at him, he read and felt himself surge with kindness
and courage and strength.

When  he  finished  one  side,  he  turned  the  sheet  over  and  began  to  scan  the
advertisements  for  movies  that  filled  the  other  side.  His  eye  went  over  three
columns  without  stopping;  then  it  came  to  a  box  that  advertised  Gonga,  Giant
Jungle Monarch, and listed the theaters he would visit on his tour and the hours he
would  be  at  each  one.  In  thirty  minutes  he  would  arrive  at  the  Victory  on  57th
Street and that would be his last appearance in the city.

If  anyone  had  watched  Enoch  read  this,  he  would  have  seen  a  certain
transformation  in  his  countenance.  It  still  shone  with  the  inspiration  he  had
absorbed from the comic strips, but something else had come over it: a look of
awakening.

The  waitress  happened  to  turn  around  to  see  if  he  hadn’t  gone.  “What’s  the

matter with you?” she said. “Did you swallow a seed?”

“I know what I want,” Enoch murmured.
“I know what I want too,” she said with a dark look.
Enoch felt for his stick and laid his change on the counter. “I got to be going.”
“Don’t let me keep you,” she said.
“You may not see me again,” he said, “—the way I am.”
“Any way I don’t see you will be all right with me,” she said.
Enoch  left.  It  was  a  pleasant  damp  evening.  The  puddles  on  the  sidewalk
shone and the store windows were steamy and bright with junk. He disappeared
down a side street and made his way rapidly along the darker passages of the city,
pausing only once or twice at the end of an alley to dart a glance in each direction
before  he  ran  on.  The  Victory  was  a  small  theater,  suited  to  the  needs  of  the
family, in one of the closer subdivisions; he passed through a succession of lighted
areas  and  then  on  through  more  alleys  and  back  streets  until  he  came  to  the
business section that surrounded it. Then he slowed up. He saw it about a block
away, glittering in its darker setting. He didn’t cross the street to the side it was on

but kept on the far side, moving forward with his squint fixed on the glary spot. He
stopped  when  he  was  directly  across  from  it  and  hid  himself  in  a  narrow  stair
cavity that divided a building.

The  truck  that  carried  Gonga  was  parked  across  the  street  and  the  star  was
standing  under  the  marquee,  shaking  hands  with  an  elderly  woman.  She  moved
aside and a gentleman in a polo shirt stepped up and shook hands vigorously, like
a sportsman. He was followed by a boy of about three who wore a tall Western
hat  that  nearly  covered  his  face;  he  had  to  be  pushed  ahead  by  the  line.  Enoch
watched for some time, his face working with envy. The small boy was followed
by a lady in shorts, she by an old man who tried to draw extra attention to himself
by  dancing  up  instead  of  walking  in  a  dignified  way.  Enoch  suddenly  darted
across the street and slipped noiselessly into the open back door of the truck.

The handshaking went on until the feature picture was ready to begin. Then the
star got back in the van and the people filed into the theater. The driver and the
man who was master of ceremonies climbed in the cab part and the truck rumbled
off. It crossed the city rapidly and continued on the highway, going very fast.

There  came  from  the  van  certain  thumping  noises,  not  those  of  the  normal
gorilla, but they were drowned out by the drone of the motor and the steady sound
of wheels against the road. The night was pale and quiet, with nothing to stir it but
an occasional complaint from a hoot owl and the distant muted jarring of a freight
train. The truck sped on until it slowed for a crossing, and as the van rattled over
the  tracks,  a  figure  slipped  from  the  door  and  almost  fell,  and  then  limped
hurriedly off toward the woods.

Once in the darkness of a pine thicket, he laid down a pointed stick  he  had
been clutching and something bulky and loose that he had been carrying under his
arm, and began to undress. He folded each garment neatly after he had taken it off
and then stacked it on top of the last thing he had removed. When all his clothes
were in the pile, he took up the stick and began making a hole in the ground with
it.

The darkness of the pine grove was broken by paler moonlit spots that moved
over him now and again and showed him to be Enoch. His natural appearance was
marred by a gash that ran from the corner of his lip to his collarbone and by a

lump under his eye that gave him a dulled insensitive look. Nothing could have
been more deceptive for he was burning with the intensest kind of happiness.

He dug rapidly until he had made a trench about a foot long and a foot deep.
Then he placed the stack of clothes in it and stood aside to rest a second. Burying
his clothes was not a symbol to him of burying his former self; he only knew he
wouldn’t  need  them  any  more.  As  soon  as  he  got  his  breath,  he  pushed  the
displaced  dirt  over  the  hole  and  stamped  it  down  with  his  foot.  He  discovered
while he did this that he still had his shoes on, and when he finished, he removed
them  and  threw  them  from  him.  Then  he  picked  up  the  loose  bulky  object  and
shook it vigorously.

In the uncertain light, one of his lean white legs could be seen to disappear and
then the other, one arm and then the other: a black heavier shaggier figure replaced
his. For an instant, it had two heads, one light and one dark, but after a second, it
pulled the dark back head over the other and corrected this. It busied itself with
certain hidden fastenings and what appeared to be minor adjustments of its hide.

For a time after this, it stood very still and didn’t do anything. Then it began to
growl and beat its chest; it jumped up and down and flung its arms and thrust its
head forward. The growls were thin and uncertain at first but they grew louder
after a second. They became low and poisonous, louder again, low and poisonous
again; they stopped altogether. The figure extended its hand, clutched nothing, and
shook its arm vigorously; it withdrew the arm, extended it again, clutched nothing,
and shook. It repeated this four or five times. Then it picked up the pointed stick
and placed it at a cocky angle under its arm and left the woods for the highway.
No gorilla anywhere, Africa or California or New York, was happier than he.

A man and woman sitting close together on a rock just off the highway were
looking across an open stretch of valley at a view of the city in the distance and
they didn’t see the shaggy figure approaching. The smokestacks and square tops of
buildings made a black uneven wall against the lighter sky and here and there a
steeple cut a sharp wedge out of a cloud. The young man turned his neck just in
time to see the gorilla standing a few feet away, hideous and black, with its hand
extended. He eased his arm from around the woman and disappeared silently into
the woods. She, as soon as she turned her eyes, fled screaming down the highway.

The gorilla stood as though surprised and presently its arm fell to its side. It sat
down  on  the  rock  where  they  had  been  sitting  and  stared  over  the  valley  at  the
uneven skyline of the city.

A Good Man Is Hard to Find

THE GRANDMOTHER didn’t want to go to Florida. She wanted to visit some of her
connections  in  east  Tennessee  and  she  was  seizing  at  every  chance  to  change
Bailey’s mind. Bailey was the son she lived with, her only boy. He was sitting on
the  edge  of  his  chair  at  the  table,  bent  over  the  orange  sports  section  of  the
Journal. “Now look here, Bailey,” she said, “see here, read this,” and she stood
with one hand on her thin hip and the other rattling the newspaper at his bald head.
“Here this fellow that calls himself The Misfit is aloose from the Federal Pen and
headed toward Florida and you read here what it says he did to these people. Just
you read it. I wouldn’t take my children in any direction with a criminal like that
aloose in it. I couldn’t answer to my conscience if I did.”

Bailey didn’t look up from his reading so she wheeled around then and faced
the  children’s  mother,  a  young  woman  in  slacks,  whose  face  was  as  broad  and
innocent as a cabbage and was tied around  with  a  green  head-kerchief  that  had
two points on the top like a rabbit’s ears. She was sitting on the sofa, feeding the
baby his apricots out of a jar. “The children have been to Florida before,” the old
lady said. “You all ought to take them somewhere else for a change so they would
see  different  parts  of  the  world  and  be  broad.  They  never  have  been  to  east
Tennessee.”

The children’s mother didn’t seem to hear her but the eight-year-old boy, John
Wesley, a stocky child with glasses, said, “If you don’t want to go to Florida, why
dontcha stay at home?” He and the little girl, June Star, were reading the funny
papers on the floor.

“She  wouldn’t  stay  at  home  to  be  queen  for  a  day,”  June  Star  said  without

raising her yellow head.

“Yes  and  what  would  you  do  if  this  fellow,  The  Misfit,  caught  you?”  the

grandmother asked.

“I’d smack his face,” John Wesley said.
“She wouldn’t stay at home for a million bucks,” June Star said. “Afraid she’d

miss something. She has to go everywhere we go.”

“All right, Miss,” the grandmother said. “Just remember that the next time you

want me to curl your hair.”

June Star said her hair was naturally curly.
The next morning the grandmother was the first one in the car, ready to go. She
had her big black valise that looked like the head of a hippopotamus in one corner,
and underneath it she was hiding a basket with Pitty Sing, the cat, in it. She didn’t
intend for the cat to be left alone in the house for three days because he would
miss  her  too  much  and  she  was  afraid  he  might  brush  against  one  of  the  gas
burners and accidentally asphyxiate himself. Her son, Bailey, didn’t like to arrive
at a motel with a cat.

She sat in the middle of the back seat with John Wesley and June Star on either
side of her. Bailey and the children’s mother and the baby sat in front and they left
Atlanta at eight forty-five with the mileage on the car at 55890. The grandmother
wrote  this  down  because  she  thought  it  would  be  interesting  to  say  how  many
miles they had been when they got back. It took them twenty minutes to reach the
outskirts of the city.

The  old  lady  settled  herself  comfortably,  removing  her  white  cotton  gloves
and putting them up with her purse on the shelf in front of the back window. The
children’s  mother  still  had  on  slacks  and  still  had  her  head  tied  up  in  a  green
kerchief, but the grandmother had on a navy blue straw sailor hat with a bunch of
white violets on the brim and a navy blue dress with a small white dot in the print.
Her collars and cuffs were white organdy trimmed with lace and at her neckline
she had pinned a purple spray of cloth violets containing a sachet. In case of an
accident, anyone seeing her dead on the highway would know at once that she was
a lady.

She said she thought it was going to be a good day for driving, neither too hot
nor too cold, and she cautioned Bailey that the speed limit was fifty-five miles an
hour and that the patrolmen hid themselves behind billboards and small clumps of
trees and sped out after you before you had a chance to slow down. She pointed
out interesting details of the scenery: Stone Mountain; the blue granite that in some
places came up to both sides of the highway; the brilliant red clay banks slightly

streaked with purple; and the various crops that made rows of green lace-work on
the ground. The trees were full of silver-white sunlight and the meanest of them
sparkled. The children were reading comic magazines and their mother had gone
back to sleep.

“Let’s  go  through  Georgia  fast  so  we  won’t  have  to  look  at  it  much,”  John

Wesley said.

“If I were a little boy,” said the grandmother, “I wouldn’t talk about my native

state that way. Tennessee has the mountains and Georgia has the hills.”

“Tennessee  is  just  a  hillbilly  dumping  ground,”  John  Wesley  said,  “and

Georgia is a lousy state too.”

“You said it,” June Star said.
“In my time,” said the grandmother, folding her thin veined fingers, “children
were more respectful of their native states and their parents and everything else.
People did right then. Oh look at the cute little pickaninny!” she said and pointed
to a Negro child standing in the door of a shack. “Wouldn’t that make a picture,
now?” she asked and they all turned and looked at the little Negro out of the back
window. He waved.

“He didn’t have any britches on,” June Star said.
“He probably didn’t have any,” the grandmother explained. “Little niggers in
the country don’t have things like we do. If I could paint, I’d paint that picture,”
she said.

The children exchanged comic books.
The  grandmother  offered  to  hold  the  baby  and  the  children’s  mother  passed
him over the front seat to her. She set him on her knee and bounced him and told
him about the things they were passing. She rolled her eyes and screwed up her
mouth and stuck her leathery thin face into his smooth bland one. Occasionally he
gave her a faraway smile. They passed a large cotton field with five or six graves
fenced  in  the  middle  of  it,  like  a  small  island.  “Look  at  the  graveyard!”  the
grandmother said, pointing it out. “That was the old family burying ground. That
belonged to the plantation.”

“Where’s the plantation?” John Wesley asked.
“Gone With the Wind,” said the grandmother. “Ha. Ha.”

When the children finished all the comic books they had brought, they opened
the lunch and ate it. The grandmother ate a peanut butter sandwich and an olive
and  would  not  let  the  children  throw  the  box  and  the  paper  napkins  out  the
window.  When  there  was  nothing  else  to  do  they  played  a  game  by  choosing  a
cloud and making the other two guess what shape it suggested. John Wesley took
one the shape of a cow and June Star guessed a cow and John Wesley said, no, an
automobile,  and  June  Star  said  he  didn’t  play  fair,  and  they  began  to  slap  each
other over the grandmother.

The grandmother said she would tell them a  story  if  they  would  keep  quiet.
When  she  told  a  story,  she  rolled  her  eyes  and  waved  her  head  and  was  very
dramatic. She said once when she was a maiden lady she had been courted by a
Mr. Edgar Atkins Tea-garden from Jasper, Georgia. She said he was a very good-
looking man and a gentleman and that he brought her a watermelon every Saturday
afternoon  with  his  initials  cut  in  it,  E. A.  T.  Well,  one  Saturday,  she  said,  Mr.
Teagarden brought the watermelon and there was nobody at home and he left it on
the  front  porch  and  returned  in  his  buggy  to  Jasper,  but  she  never  got  the
watermelon, she said, because a nigger boy ate it when he saw the initials, E. A.
T.! This story tickled John Wesley’s  funny bone and he giggled and giggled but
June Star didn’t think it was any good. She said she wouldn’t marry a man that just
brought  her  a  watermelon  on  Saturday.  The  grandmother  said  she  would  have
done well to marry Mr. Teagarden because he was a gentleman and had bought
Coca-Cola stock when it first came out and that he had died only a few years ago,
a very wealthy man.

They stopped at The Tower for barbecued sandwiches. The Tower was a part
stucco  and  part  wood  filling  station  and  dance  hall  set  in  a  clearing  outside  of
Timothy. A fat man named Red Sammy Butts ran it and there were signs stuck here
and  there  on  the  building  and  for  miles  up  and  down  the  highway  saying,  TRY
RED  SAMMY’S  FAMOUS  BARBECUE.  NONE  LIKE  FAMOUS  RED
SAMMY’S!  RED  SAM!  THE  FAT  BOY  WITH  THE  HAPPY  LAUGH!  A
VETERAN! RED SAMMY’S YOUR MAN!

Red Sammy was lying on the bare ground outside The Tower with his head
under a truck while a gray monkey about a foot high, chained to a small chinaberry

tree, chattered nearby. The monkey sprang back into the tree and got on the highest
limb as soon as he saw the children jump out of the car and run toward him.

Inside, The Tower was a long dark room with a counter at one end and tables
at the other and dancing space in the middle. They all sat down at a board table
next to the nickelodeon and Red Sam’s wife, a tall burnt-brown woman with hair
and eyes lighter than her skin, came and took their order. The children’s mother
put  a  dime  in  the  machine  and  played  “The  Tennessee  Waltz,”  and  the
grandmother said that tune always made her want to dance. She asked Bailey if he
would like to dance but he only glared at her. He didn’t have a naturally sunny
disposition  like  she  did  and  trips  made  him  nervous.  The  grandmother’s  brown
eyes were very bright. She swayed her head from side to side and pretended she
was dancing in her chair. June Star said play something she could tap to so the
children’s  mother  put  in  another  dime  and  played  a  fast  number  and  June  Star
stepped out onto the dance floor and did her tap routine.

“Ain’t she cute?” Red Sam’s wife said, leaning over the counter. “Would you

like to come be my little girl?”

“No I certainly wouldn’t,” June Star said. “I wouldn’t live in a broken-down

place like this for a million bucks!” and she ran back to the table.

“Ain’t she cute?” the woman repeated, stretching her mouth politely.
“Aren’t you ashamed?” hissed the grandmother.
Red Sam came in and told his wife to quit lounging on the counter and hurry up
with these people’s order. His khaki trousers reached just to his hip bones and his
stomach hung over them like a sack of meal swaying under his shirt. He came over
and sat down at a table nearby and let out a combination sigh and yodel. “You
can’t win,” he said. “You can’t win,” and he wiped his sweating red face off with
a gray handkerchief. “These days you don’t know who to trust,” he said. “Ain’t
that the truth?”

“People are certainly not nice like they used to be,” said the grandmother.
“Two fellers come in here last week,” Red Sammy said, “driving a Chrysler.
It was a old beat-up car but it was a good one and these boys looked all right to
me. Said they worked at the mill and you know I let them fellers charge the gas
they bought? Now why did I do that?”

“Because you’re a good man!” the grandmother said at once.
“Yes’m, I suppose so,” Red Sam said as if he were struck with this answer.
His wife brought the orders, carrying the five plates all at once without a tray,
two in each hand and one balanced on her arm. “It isn’t a soul in this green world
of God’s that you can trust,” she said. “And I don’t count nobody out of that, not
nobody,” she repeated, looking at Red Sammy.

“Did  you  read  about  that  criminal,  The  Misfit,  that’s  escaped?”  asked  the

grandmother.

“I wouldn’t be a bit surprised if he didn’t attact this place right here,” said the
woman. “If he hears about it being here, I wouldn’t be none surprised to see him.
If he hears it’s two cent in the cash register, I wouldn’t be a tall surprised if he…”
“That’ll do,” Red Sam said. “Go bring these people their Co’-Colas,” and the

woman went off to get the rest of the order.

“A good man is hard to find,” Red Sammy said. “Everything is getting terrible.
I remember the day you could go off and leave your screen door unlatched. Not no
more.”

He and the grandmother discussed better times. The old lady said that in her
opinion Europe was entirely to blame for the way things were now. She said the
way Europe acted you would think we were made of money and Red Sam said it
was no use talking about it, she was exactly right. The children ran outside into the
white sunlight and looked at the monkey in the lacy china-berry tree. He was busy
catching fleas on himself and biting each one carefully between his teeth as if it
were a delicacy.

They drove off again into the hot afternoon. The grandmother took cat naps and
woke  up  every  few  minutes  with  her  own  snoring.  Outside  of  Toombsboro  she
woke up and recalled an old plantation that she had visited in this neighborhood
once when she was a young lady. She said the house had six white columns across
the  front  and  that  there  was  an  avenue  of  oaks  leading  up  to  it  and  two  little
wooden trellis arbors on either side in front where you sat down with your suitor
after a stroll in the garden. She recalled exactly which road to turn off to get to it.
She  knew  that  Bailey  would  not  be  willing  to  lose  any  time  looking  at  an  old
house, but the more she talked about it, the more she wanted to see it once again

and find out if the little twin arbors were still standing. “There was a secret panel
in  this  house,”  she  said  craftily,  not  telling  the  truth  but  wishing  that  she  were,
“and the story went that all the family silver was hidden in it when Sherman came
through but it was never found…”

“Hey!” John Wesley said. “Let’s go see it! We’ll find it! We’ll poke all the
woodwork and find it! Who lives there? Where do you turn off at? Hey Pop, can’t
we turn off there?”

“We never have seen a house with a secret panel!” June Star shrieked. “Let’s
go to the house with the secret panel! Hey Pop, can’t we go see the house with the
secret panel!”

“It’s not far from here, I know,” the grandmother said. “It wouldn’t take over

twenty minutes.”

Bailey was looking straight ahead. His jaw was as rigid as a horseshoe. “No,”

he said.

The children began to yell and scream that they wanted to see the house with
the secret panel. John Wesley kicked the back of the front seat and June Star hung
over  her  mother’s  shoulder  and  whined  desperately  into  her  ear  that  they  never
had any fun even on their vacation, that they could never do what THEY wanted to
do. The baby began to scream and John Wesley kicked the back of the seat so hard
that his father could feel the blows in his kidney.

“All right!” he shouted and drew the car to a stop at the side of the road. “Will
you all shut up? Will you all just shut up for one second? If you don’t shut up, we
won’t go anywhere.”

“It would be very educational for them,” the grandmother murmured.
“All right,” Bailey said, “but get this: this is the only time we’re going to stop

for anything like this. This is the one and only time.”

“The  dirt  road  that  you  have  to  turn  down  is  about  a  mile  back,”  the

grandmother directed. “I marked it when we passed.”

“A dirt road,” Bailey groaned.
After  they  had  turned  around  and  were  headed  toward  the  dirt  road,  the
grandmother  recalled  other  points  about  the  house,  the  beautiful  glass  over  the
front doorway and the candle-lamp in the hall. John Wesley said that the secret

panel was probably in the fireplace.

“You  can’t  go  inside  this  house,”  Bailey  said.  “You  don’t  know  who  lives

there.”

“While you all talk to the people in front, I’ll run around behind and get in a

window,” John Wesley suggested.

“We’ll all stay in the car,” his mother said.
They turned onto the dirt road and the car raced roughly along in a swirl  of
pink dust. The grandmother recalled the times when there were no paved roads
and  thirty  miles  was  a  day’s  journey.  The  dirt  road  was  hilly  and  there  were
sudden washes in it and sharp curves on dangerous embankments. All at once they
would be on a hill, looking down over the blue tops of trees for miles around, then
the  next  minute,  they  would  be  in  a  red  depression  with  the  dust-coated  trees
looking down on them.

“This place had better turn up in a minute,” Bailey said, “or I’m going to turn

around.”

The road looked as if no one had traveled on it in months.
“It’s not much farther,” the grandmother said and just as she said it, a horrible
thought came to her. The thought was so embarrassing that she turned red in the
face  and  her  eyes  dilated  and  her  feet  jumped  up,  upsetting  her  valise  in  the
corner. The instant the valise moved, the newspaper top she had over the basket
under it rose with a snarl and Pitty Sing, the cat, sprang onto Bailey’s shoulder.

The  children  were  thrown  to  the  floor  and  their  mother,  clutching  the  baby,
was thrown out the door onto the ground; the old lady was thrown into the front
seat. The car turned over once and landed right-side-up in a gulch off the side of
the road. Bailey remained in the driver’s seat with the cat—gray-striped with a
broad white face and an orange nose—clinging to his neck like a caterpillar.

As  soon  as  the  children  saw  they  could  move  their  arms  and  legs,  they
scrambled out of the car, shouting, “We’ve had an ACCIDENT!” The grandmother
was curled up under the dashboard, hoping she was injured so that Bailey’s wrath
would not come down on her all at once. The horrible thought she had had before
the accident was that the house she had remembered so vividly was not in Georgia
but in Tennessee.

Bailey  removed  the  cat  from  his  neck  with  both  hands  and  flung  it  out  the
window  against  the  side  of  a  pine  tree.  Then  he  got  out  of  the  car  and  started
looking for the children’s mother. She was sitting against the side of the red gutted
ditch,  holding  the  screaming  baby,  but  she  only  had  a  cut  down  her  face  and  a
broken shoulder. “We’ve had an ACCIDENT!” the children screamed in a frenzy
of delight.

“But nobody’s killed,” June Star said with disappointment as the grandmother
limped out of the car, her hat still pinned to her head but the broken front brim
standing up at a jaunty angle and the violet spray hanging off the side. They all sat
down in the ditch, except the children, to recover from the shock. They were all
shaking.

“Maybe a car will come along,” said the children’s mother hoarsely.
“I believe I have injured an organ,” said the grandmother, pressing her side,
but no one answered her. Bailey’s teeth were clattering. He had on a yellow sport
shirt with bright blue parrots designed in it and his face was as yellow as the shirt.
The  grandmother  decided  that  she  would  not  mention  that  the  house  was  in
Tennessee.

The road was about ten feet above and they could see only the tops of the trees
on  the  other  side  of  it.  Behind  the  ditch  they  were  sitting  in  there  were  more
woods,  tall  and  dark  and  deep.  In  a  few  minutes  they  saw  a  car  some  distance
away on top of a hill, coming slowly as if the occupants were watching them. The
grandmother stood up and waved both arms dramatically to attract their attention.
The car continued to come on slowly, disappeared around a bend and appeared
again,  moving  even  slower,  on  top  of  the  hill  they  had  gone  over.  It  was  a  big
black battered hearse-like automobile. There were three men in it.

It came to a stop just over them and for some minutes, the driver looked down
with  a  steady  expressionless  gaze  to  where  they  were  sitting,  and  didn’t  speak.
Then he turned his head and muttered something to the other two and they got out.
One was a fat boy in black trousers and a red sweat shirt with a silver stallion
embossed on the front of it. He moved around on the right side of them and stood
staring, his mouth partly open in a kind of loose grin. The other had on khaki pants
and a blue striped coat and a gray hat pulled down very low, hiding most of his

face. He came around slowly on the left side. Neither spoke.

The driver got out of the car and stood by the side of it, looking down at them.
He was an older man than the other two. His hair was just beginning to gray and
he wore silver-rimmed spectacles that gave him a scholarly look. He had a long
creased face and didn’t have on any shirt or undershirt. He had on blue jeans that
were too tight for him and was holding a black hat and a gun. The two boys also
had guns.

“We’ve had an ACCIDENT!” the children screamed.
The  grandmother  had  the  peculiar  feeling  that  the  bespectacled  man  was
someone she knew. His face was as familiar to her as if she had known him all her
life but she could not recall who he was. He moved away from the car and began
to come down the embankment, placing his feet carefully so that he wouldn’t slip.
He had on tan and white shoes and no socks, and his ankles were red and thin.
“Good afternoon,” he said. “I see you all had you a little spill.”

“We turned over twice!” said the grandmother.
“Oncet,” he corrected. “We seen it happen. Try their car and see will it run,

Hiram,” he said quietly to the boy with the gray hat.

“What you got that gun for?” John Wesley asked. “Whatcha gonna do with that

gun?”

“Lady,” the man said to the children’s mother, “would you mind calling them
children to sit down by you? Children make me nervous. I want all you all to sit
down right together there where you’re at.”

“What are you telling US what to do for?” June Star asked.
Behind them the line of woods gaped like a dark open mouth. “Come here,”

said their mother.

“Look  here  now,”  Bailey  began  suddenly,  “we’re  in  a  predicament!  We’re

in…”

The  grandmother  shrieked.  She  scrambled  to  her  feet  and  stood  staring.

“You’re The Misfit!” she said. “I recognized you at once!”

“Yes’m,”  the  man  said,  smiling  slightly  as  if  he  were  pleased  in  spite  of
himself to be known, “but it would have been better for all of you, lady, if you
hadn’t of reckernized me.”

Bailey turned his head sharply and said something to his mother that shocked

even the children. The old lady began to cry and The Misfit reddened.

“Lady,” he said, “don’t you get upset. Sometimes a man says things he don’t

mean. I don’t reckon he meant to talk to you thataway.”

“You wouldn’t shoot a lady, would you?” the grandmother said and removed a

clean handkerchief from her cuff and began to slap at her eyes with it.

The Misfit pointed the toe of his shoe into the ground and made a little hole

and then covered it up again. “I would hate to have to,” he said.

“Listen,” the grandmother almost screamed, “I know you’re a good man. You
don’t look a bit like you have common blood. I know you must come from nice
people!”

“Yes mam,” he said, “finest people in the world.” When he smiled he showed
a row of strong white teeth. “God never made a finer woman than my mother and
my daddy’s heart was pure gold,” he said. The boy with the red sweat shirt had
come  around  behind  them  and  was  standing  with  his  gun  at  his  hip.  The  Misfit
squatted down on the ground. “Watch them children, Bobby Lee,” he said. “You
know they make me nervous.” He looked at the six of them huddled together in
front of him and he seemed to be embarrassed as if he couldn’t think of anything to
say. “Ain’t a cloud in the sky,” he remarked, looking up at it. “Don’t see no sun
but don’t see no cloud neither.”

“Yes,  it’s  a  beautiful  day,”  said  the  grandmother.  “Listen,”   she  said,  “you
shouldn’t call yourself The Misfit because I know you’re a good man at heart. I
can just look at you and tell.”

“Hush!” Bailey yelled. “Hush! Everybody shut up and let me handle this!” He
was  squatting  in  the  position  of  a  runner  about  to  sprint  forward  but  he  didn’t
move.

“I pre-chate that, lady,” The Misfit said and drew a little circle in the ground

with the butt of his gun.

“It’ll take a half a hour to fix this here car,” Hiram called, looking over the

raised hood of it.

“Well, first you and Bobby Lee get him and that little boy to step over yonder
with you,” The Misfit said, pointing to Bailey and John Wesley. “The boys want

to ast you something,” he said to Bailey. “Would you mind stepping back in them
woods there with them?”

“Listen,”  Bailey  began,  “we’re  in  a  terrible  predicament!  Nobody  realizes
what  this  is,”  and  his  voice  cracked.  His  eyes  were  as  blue  and  intense  as  the
parrots in his shirt and he remained perfectly still.

The grandmother reached up to adjust her hat brim as if she were going to the
woods  with  him  but  it  came  off  in  her  hand.  She  stood  staring  at  it  and  after  a
second she let it fall on the ground. Hiram pulled Bailey up by the arm as if he
were  assisting  an  old  man.  John  Wesley  caught  hold  of  his  father’s  hand  and
Bobby Lee followed. They went off toward the woods and just as they reached the
dark edge, Bailey turned and supporting himself against a gray naked pine trunk,
he shouted, “I’ll be back in a minute, Mamma, wait on me!”

“Come back this instant!” his mother shrilled but they all disappeared into the

woods.

“Bailey Boy!” the grandmother called in a tragic voice but she found she was
looking at The Misfit squatting on the ground in front of her. “I just know you’re a
good man,” she said desperately. “You’re not a bit common!”

“Nome,  I  ain’t  a  good  man,”  The  Misfit  said  after  a  second  as  if  he  had
considered her statement carefully, “but I ain’t the worst in the world neither. My
daddy  said  I  was  a  different  breed  of  dog  from  my  brothers  and  sisters.  ‘You
know,’  Daddy  said,  ‘it’s  some  that  can  live  their  whole  life  out  without  asking
about it and it’s others has to know why it is, and this boy is one of the latters.
He’s going to be into everything!’” He put on his black hat and looked up suddenly
and then away deep into the woods as if he were embarrassed again. “I’m sorry I
don’t have on a shirt before you ladies,” he said, hunching his shoulders slightly.
“We buried our clothes that we had on when we escaped and we’re just making
do  until  we  can  get  better.  We  borrowed  these  from  some  folks  we  met,”  he
explained.

“That’s perfectly all right,” the grandmother said. “Maybe Bailey has an extra

shirt in his suitcase.”

“I’ll look and see terrectly,” The Misfit said.
“Where are they taking him?” the children’s mother screamed.

“Daddy was a card himself,” The Misfit said. “You couldn’t put anything over
on him. He never got in trouble with the Authorities though. Just had the knack of
handling them.”

“You could be honest too if you’d only try,” said the grandmother. “Think how
wonderful it would be to settle down and live a comfortable life and not have to
think about somebody chasing you all the time.”

The Misfit kept scratching in the ground with the butt of his gun as if he were

thinking about it. “Yes’m, somebody is always after you,” he murmured.

The grandmother noticed how thin his shoulder blades were just behind his hat
because  she  was  standing  up  looking  down  on  him.  “Do  you  ever  pray?”  she
asked.

He shook his head. All she saw was the black hat wiggle between his shoulder

blades. “Nome,” he said.

There was a pistol shot from the woods, followed closely by another. Then
silence. The old lady’s head jerked around. She could hear the wind move through
the tree tops like a long satisfied insuck of breath. “Bailey Boy!” she called.

“I was a gospel singer for a while,” The Misfit said. “I been most everything.
Been  in  the  arm  service,  both  land  and  sea,  at  home  and  abroad,  been  twict
married, been an undertaker, been with the railroads, plowed Mother Earth, been
in a tornado, seen a man burnt alive oncet,” and looked up at the children’s mother
and the little girl who were sitting close together, their faces white and their eyes
glassy; “I even seen a woman flogged,” he said.

“Pray, pray,” the grandmother began, “pray, pray…”
“I  never  was  a  bad  boy  that  I  remember  of,”  The  Misfit  said  in  an  almost
dreamy  voice,  “but  somewheres  along  the  line  I  done  something  wrong  and  got
sent  to  the  penitentiary.  I  was  buried  alive,”  and  he  looked  up  and  held  her
attention to him by a steady stare.

“That’s when you should have started to pray,” she said. “What did you do to

get sent to the penitentiary that first time?”

“Turn  to  the  right,  it  was  a  wall,”  The  Misfit  said,  looking  up  again  at  the
cloudless sky. “Turn to the left, it was a wall. Look up it was a ceiling, look down
it  was  a  floor.  I  forget  what  I  done,  lady.  I  set  there  and  set  there,  trying  to

remember what it was I done and I ain’t recalled it to this day. Oncet in a while, I
would think it was coming to me, but it never come.”

“Maybe they put you in by mistake,” the old lady said vaguely.
“Nome,” he said. “It wasn’t no mistake. They had the papers on me.”
“You must have stolen something,” she said.
The Misfit sneered slightly. “Nobody had nothing I wanted,” he said. “It was a
head-doctor  at  the  penitentiary  said  what  I  had  done  was  kill  my  daddy  but  I
known that for a lie. My daddy died in nineteen ought nineteen of the epidemic flu
and  I  never  had  a  thing  to  do  with  it.  He  was  buried  in  the  Mount  Hopewell
Baptist churchyard and you can go there and see for yourself.”

“If you would pray,” the old lady said, “Jesus would help you.”
“That’s right,” The Misfit said.
“Well then, why don’t you pray?” she asked trembling with delight suddenly.
“I don’t want no hep,” he said. “I’m doing all right by myself.”
Bobby Lee and Hiram  came  ambling  back  from  the  woods.  Bobby  Lee  was

dragging a yellow shirt with bright blue parrots in it.

“Thow me that shirt, Bobby Lee,” The Misfit said. The shirt came flying at him
and landed on his shoulder and he put it on. The grandmother couldn’t name what
the shirt reminded her of. “No, lady,” The Misfit said while he was buttoning it
up,  “I  found  out  the  crime  don’t  matter.  You  can  do   one  thing  or  you  can  do
another, kill a man or take a tire off his car, because sooner or later you’re going
to forget what it was you done and just be punished for it.”

The children’s mother had begun to make heaving noises as if she couldn’t get
her breath. “Lady,” he asked, “would you and that little girl like to step off yonder
with Bobby Lee and Hiram and join your husband?”

“Yes, thank you,” the mother said faintly. Her left arm dangled helplessly and
she was holding the baby, who had gone to sleep, in the other. “Hep that lady up,
Hiram,” The Misfit said as she struggled to climb out of the ditch, “and Bobby
Lee, you hold onto that little girl’s hand.”

“I don’t want to hold hands with him,” June Star said. “He reminds me of a

pig.”

The fat boy blushed and laughed and caught her by the arm and pulled her off

into the woods after Hiram and her mother.

Alone  with  The  Misfit,  the  grandmother  found  that  she  had  lost  her  voice.
There was not a cloud in the sky nor any sun. There was nothing around her but
woods. She wanted to tell him that he must pray. She opened and closed her mouth
several times before anything came out. Finally she found herself saying, “Jesus,
Jesus,” meaning, Jesus will help you, but the way she was saying it, it sounded as
if she might be cursing.

“Yes’m,” The Misfit said as if he agreed. “Jesus thown everything off balance.
It was the same case with Him as with me except He hadn’t committed any crime
and they could prove I had committed one because they had the papers on me. Of
course,” he said, “they never shown me my papers. That’s why I sign myself now.
I  said  long  ago,  you  get  you  a  signature  and  sign  everything  you  do  and  keep  a
copy of it. Then you’ll know what you done and you can hold up the crime to the
punishment and see do they match and in the end you’ll have something to prove
you ain’t been treated right. I call myself The Misfit,” he said, “because I can’t
make what all I done wrong fit what all I gone through in punishment.”

There  was  a  piercing  scream  from  the  woods,  followed  closely  by  a  pistol
report. “Does it seem right to you, lady, that one is punished a heap and another
ain’t punished at all?”

“Jesus!”  the  old  lady  cried.  “You’ve  got  good  blood!  I  know  you  wouldn’t
shoot a lady! I know you come from nice people! Pray! Jesus, you ought not to
shoot a lady. I’ll give you all the money I’ve got!”

“Lady,” The Misfit said, looking beyond her far into the woods, “there never

was a body that give the undertaker a tip.”

There were two more pistol reports and the grandmother raised her head like a
parched old turkey hen crying for water and called, “Bailey Boy, Bailey Boy!” as
if her heart would break.

“Jesus was the only One that ever raised the dead.” The Misfit continued, “and
He shouldn’t have done it. He thrown everything off balance. If He did what He
said, then it’s nothing for you to do but throw away everything and follow Him,
and if He didn’t, then it’s nothing for you to do but enjoy the few minutes you got
left  the  best  way  you  can—by  killing  somebody  or  burning  down  his  house  or

doing some other meanness to him. No pleasure but meanness,” he said and his
voice had become almost a snarl.

“Maybe He didn’t raise the dead,” the old lady mumbled, not knowing what
she was saying and feeling so dizzy that she sank down in the ditch with her legs
twisted under her.

“I wasn’t there so I can’t say He didn’t,” The Misfit said. “I wisht I had of
been there,” he said, hitting the ground with his fist. “It ain’t right I wasn’t there
because if I had of been there I would of known. Listen lady,” he said in a high
voice, “if I had of been there I would of known and I wouldn’t be like I am now.”
His  voice  seemed  about  to  crack  and  the  grandmother’s  head  cleared  for  an
instant. She saw the man’s face twisted close to her own as if he were going to cry
and  she  murmured,  “Why  you’re  one  of  my  babies.  You’re  one  of  my  own
children!”  She  reached  out  and  touched  him  on  the  shoulder.  The  Misfit  sprang
back as if a snake had bitten him and shot her three times through the chest. Then
he  put  his  gun  down  on  the  ground  and  took  off  his  glasses  and  began  to  clean
them.

Hiram  and  Bobby  Lee  returned  from  the  woods  and  stood  over  the  ditch,
looking down at the grandmother who half sat and half lay in a puddle of blood
with  her  legs  crossed  under  her  like  a  child’s  and  her  face  smiling  up  at  the
cloudless sky.

Without  his  glasses,  The  Misfit’s  eyes  were  red-rimmed  and  pale  and
defenseless-looking. “Take her off and throw her where you thrown the others,”
he said, picking up the cat that was rubbing itself against his leg.

“She was a talker, wasn’t she?” Bobby Lee said, sliding down the ditch with a

yodel.

“She  would  of  been  a  good  woman,”  The  Misfit  said,  “if  it  had  been

somebody there to shoot her every minute of her life.”

“Some fun!” Bobby Lee said.
“Shut up, Bobby Lee,” The Misfit said. “It’s no real pleasure in life.”

A Late Encounter with the Enemy

GENERAL  SASH  was  a  hundred  and  four  years  old.  He  lived  with  his
granddaughter, Sally Poker Sash, who was sixty-two years old and who prayed
every night on her knees that he would live until her graduation from college. The
General didn’t give two slaps for her graduation but he never doubted he would
live for it. Living had got to be such a habit with him that he couldn’t conceive of
any  other  condition. A  graduation  exercise  was  not  exactly  his  idea  of  a  good
time, even if, as she said, he would be expected to sit on the stage in his uniform.
She said there would be a long procession of teachers and students in their robes
but that there wouldn’t be anything to equal him in his uniform. He knew this well
enough without her telling him, and as for the damn procession, it could march to
hell  and  back  and  not  cause  him  a  quiver.  He  liked  parades  with  floats  full  of
Miss Americas and Miss Daytona Beaches and Miss Queen Cotton Products. He
didn’t have any use for processions and a procession full of schoolteachers was
about as deadly as the River Styx to his way of thinking. However, he was willing
to sit on the stage in his uniform so that they could see him.

Sally Poker was not as sure as he was that he would live until her graduation.
There had not been any perceptible change in him for the last five years, but she
had the sense that she might be cheated out of her triumph because she so often
was. She had been going to summer school every year for the past twenty because
when she started teaching, there were no such things as degrees. In those times,
she  said,  everything  was  normal  but  nothing  had  been  normal  since  she  was
sixteen, and for the past twenty summers, when she should have been resting, she
had had to take a trunk in the burning heat to the state teacher’s college; and though
when  she  returned  in  the  fall,  she  always  taught  in  the  exact  way  she  had  been
taught not to teach, this was a mild revenge that didn’t satisfy her sense of justice.
She wanted the General at her graduation because she wanted to show what she
stood for, or, as she said, “what all was behind her,” and was not behind them.
This them  was  not  anybody  in  particular.  It  was  just  all  the  upstarts  who  had

turned the world on its head and unsettled the ways of decent living.

She meant to stand on that platform in August with the General sitting in his
wheel chair on the stage behind her and she meant to hold her head very high as if
she were saying, “See him! See him! My kin, all you upstarts! Glorious upright old
man standing for the old traditions! Dignity! Honor! Courage! See him!” One night
in her sleep she screamed, “See him! See him!” and turned her head and found him
sitting  in  his  wheel  chair  behind  her  with  a  terrible  expression  on  his  face  and
with all his clothes off except the general’s hat and she had waked up and had not
dared to go back to sleep again that night.

For  his  part,  the  General  would  not  have  consented  even  to  attend  her
graduation if she had not promised to see to it that he sit on the stage. He liked to
sit on any stage. He considered that he was still a very handsome man. When he
had been  able  to  stand  up,  he  had  measured  five  feet  four  inches  of  pure  game
cock. He had white hair that reached to his shoulders behind and he would not
wear teeth because he thought his profile was more striking without them. When
he  put  on  his  full-dress  general’s  uniform,  he  knew  well  enough  that  there  was
nothing to match him anywhere.

This was not the same uniform he had worn in the War between the States. He
had not actually been a general in that war. He had probably been a foot soldier;
he didn’t remember what he had been; in fact, he didn’t remember that war at all.
It  was  like  his  feet,  which  hung  down  now  shriveled  at  the  very  end  of  him,
without feeling, covered with a blue-gray afghan that Sally Poker had crocheted
when  she  was  a  little  girl.  He  didn’t  remember  the  Spanish-American  War  in
which he had lost a son; he didn’t even remember the son. He didn’t have any use
for history because he never expected to meet it again. To his mind, history was
connected with processions and life with parades and he liked parades. People
were always asking him if he remembered this or that—a dreary black procession
of  questions  about  the  past.  There  was  only  one  event  in  the  past  that  had  any
significance  for  him  and  that  he  cared  to  talk  about:  that  was  twelve  years  ago
when he had received the general’s uniform and had been in the premiere.

“I was in that preemy they had in Atlanta,” he would tell visitors sitting on his
front porch. “Surrounded by beautiful guls. It wasn’t a thing local about it. It was

nothing local about it. Listen here. It was a nashnul event and they had me in it—
up onto the stage. There was no bob-tails at it. Every person at it had paid ten
dollars to get in and had to wear his tuxseeder. I was in this uniform. A beautiful
gul presented me with it that afternoon in a hotel room.”

“It was in a suite in the hotel and I was in it too, Papa,” Sally Poker would
say, winking at the visitors. “You weren’t alone with any young lady in a hotel
room.”

“Was, I’d a known what to do,” the old General would say with a sharp look
and the visitors would scream with laughter. “This was a Hollywood, California,
gul,” he’d continue. “She was from Hollywood, California, and didn’t have any
part in the pitcher. Out there they have so many beautiful guls that they don’t need
that  they  call  them  a  extra  and  they  don’t  use  them  for  nothing  but  presenting
people with things and having their pitchers taken. They took my pitcher with her.
No, it was two of them. One on either side and me in the middle with my arms
around each of them’s waist and their waist ain’t any bigger than a half a dollar.”
Sally  Poker  would  interrupt  again.  “It  was  Mr.  Govisky  that  gave  you  the
uniform,  Papa,  and  he  gave  me  the  most  exquisite  corsage.  Really,  I  wish  you
could have seen it. It was made with gladiola petals taken off and painted gold
and put back together to look like a rose. It was exquisite. I wish you could have
seen it, it was…”

“It was as big as her head,” the General would snarl. “I was tellin it. They
gimme this uniform and they gimme this soward and they say, ‘Now General, we
don’t want you to start a war on us. All we want you to do is march right up on
that stage when you’re innerduced tonight and answer a few questions. Think you
can do that?’ ‘Think I can do it!’ I say. ‘Listen here. I was doing things before you
were born,’ and they hollered.”

“He was the hit of the show,” Sally Poker would say, but she didn’t much like
to remember the premiere on account of what had happened to her feet at it. She
had bought a new dress for the occasion—a long black crepe dinner dress with a
rhinestone  buckle  and  a  bolero—and  a  pair  of  silver  slippers  to  wear  with  it,
because she was supposed to go up on the stage with him to keep him from falling.
Everything was arranged for them. A real limousine came at ten minutes to eight

and took them to the theater. It drew up under the marquee at exactly the right time,
after the big stars and the director and the author and the governor and the mayor
and  some  less  important  stars.  The  police  kept  traffic  from  jamming  and  there
were ropes to keep the people off who couldn’t go. All the people who couldn’t
go watched them step out of the limousine into the lights. Then they walked down
the red and gold foyer and an usherette in a Confederate cap and little short skirt
conducted them to their special seats. The audience was already there and a group
of UDC members began to clap when they saw the General in his uniform and that
started everybody to clap. A few more celebrities came after them and then the
doors closed and the lights went down.

A  young  man  with  blond  wavy  hair  who  said  he  represented  the  motion-
picture  industry  came  out  and  began  to  introduce  everybody  and  each  one  who
was introduced walked up on the stage and said how really happy he was to be
here  for  this  great  event.  The  General  and  his  granddaughter  were  introduced
sixteenth on the program. He was introduced as General Tennessee Flintrock Sash
of the Confederacy, though Sally Poker had told Mr. Govisky that his name was
George Poker Sash and that he had only been a major. She helped him up from his
seat  but  her  heart  was  beating  so  fast  she  didn’t  know  whether  she’d  make  it
herself.

The old man walked up the aisle slowly with his fierce white head high and
his  hat  held  over  his  heart.  The  orchestra  began  to  play  the  Confederate  Battle
Hymn  very  softly  and  the  UDC  members  rose  as  a  group  and  did  not  sit  down
again until the General was on the stage. When he reached the center of the stage
with Sally Poker just behind him guiding his elbow, the orchestra burst out in a
loud rendition of the Battle Hymn and the old man, with real stage presence, gave
a  vigorous  trembling  salute  and  stood  at  attention  until  the  last  blast  had  died
away.  Two  of  the  usherettes  in  Confederate  caps  and  short  skirts  held  a
Confederate and a Union flag crossed behind them.

The General stood in the exact  center  of  the  spotlight  and  it  caught  a  weird
moon-shaped  slice  of  Sally  Poker—the  corsage,  the  rhinestone  buckle  and  one
hand  clenched  around  a  white  glove  and  handkerchief.  The  young  man  with  the
blond wavy hair inserted himself into the circle of light and said he was really

happy to have here tonight for this great event, one, he said, who had fought and
bled in the battles they would soon see daringly reacted on the screen, and “Tell
me, General,” he asked, “how old are you?”

“Niiiiiinnttty-two!” the General screamed.
The young man looked as if this were just about the most impressive thing that
had  been  said  all  evening.  “Ladies  and  gentlemen,”  he  said,  “let’s  give  the
General the biggest hand we’ve got!” and there was applause immediately and the
young man indicated to Sally Poker with a motion of his thumb that she could take
the old man back to his seat now so that the next person could be introduced; but
the  General  had  not  finished.  He  stood  immovable  in  the  exact  center  of  the
spotlight, his neck thrust forward, his mouth slightly open, and his voracious gray
eyes drinking in the glare and the applause. He elbowed his granddaughter roughly
away. “How I keep so young,” he screeched, “I kiss all the pretty guls!”

This was met with a great din of spontaneous applause and it was at just that
instant  that  Sally  Poker  looked  down  at  her  feet  and  discovered  that  in  the
excitement of getting ready she had forgotten to change her shoes: two brown Girl
Scout oxfords protruded from the bottom of her dress. She gave the General a yank
and almost ran with him off the stage. He was very angry that he had not got to say
how glad he was to be here for this event and on the way back to his seat, he kept
saying  as  loud  as  he  could,  “I’m  glad  to  be  here  at  this  preemy  with  all  these
beautiful  guls!”  but  there  was  another  celebrity  going  up  the  other  aisle  and
nobody paid any attention to him. He slept through the picture, muttering fiercely
every now and then in his sleep.

Since  then,  his  life  had  not  been  very  interesting.  His  feet  were  completely
dead  now,  his  knees  worked  like  old  hinges,  his  kidneys  functioned  when  they
would, but his heart persisted doggedly to beat. The past and the future were the
same thing to him, one forgotten and the other not remembered; he had no more
notion  of  dying  than  a  cat.  Every  year  on  Confederate  Memorial  Day,  he  was
bundled up and lent to the Capitol City Museum where he was displayed from one
to four in a musty room full of old photographs, old uniforms, old artillery, and
historic  documents.  All  these  were  carefully  preserved  in  glass  cases  so  that
children would not put their hands on them. He wore his general’s uniform from

the premiere and sat, with a fixed scowl, inside a small roped area. There  was
nothing about him to indicate that he was alive except an occasional movement in
his milky gray eyes, but once when a bold child touched his sword, his arm shot
forward and slapped the hand off in an instant. In the spring when the old homes
were opened for pilgrimages, he was invited to wear his uniform and sit in some
conspicuous spot and lend atmosphere to the scene. Some of these times he only
snarled at the visitors but sometimes he told about the premiere and the beautiful
girls.

If  he  had  died  before  Sally  Poker’s  graduation,  she  thought  she  would  have
died herself. At the beginning of the summer term, even before she knew if she
would pass, she told the Dean that her grandfather, General Tennessee Flintrock
Sash of the Confederacy, would attend her graduation and that he was a hundred
and  four  years  old  and  that  his  mind  was  still  clear  as  a  bell.  Distinguished
visitors were always welcome and could sit on the stage and be introduced. She
made arrangements with her nephew, John Wesley Poker Sash, a Boy Scout, to
come wheel the General’s chair. She thought how sweet it would be to see the old
man in his courageous gray and the young boy in his clean khaki—the old and the
new, she thought appropriately—they would be behind her on the stage when she
received her degree.

Everything went almost exactly as she had planned. In the summer while she
was away at school, the General stayed with other relatives and they brought him
and John Wesley, the Boy Scout, down to the graduation. A reporter came to the
hotel where they stayed and took the General’s picture with Sally Poker on one
side of him and John Wesley on the other. The General, who had had his picture
taken  with  beautiful  girls,  didn’t  think  much  of  this.  He  had  forgotten  precisely
what kind of event this was he was going to attend but he remembered that he was
to wear his uniform and carry the sword.

On the morning of the graduation, Sally Poker had to line up in the academic
procession with the B.S.’s in Elementary Education and she couldn’t see to getting
him  on  the  stage  herself—but  John  Wesley,  a  fat  blond  boy  of  ten  with  an
executive  expression,  guaranteed  to  take  care  of  everything.  She  came  in  her
academic gown to the hotel and dressed the old man in his uniform. He was as

frail  as  a  dried  spider.  “Aren’t  you  just  thrilled,  Papa?”  she  asked.  “I’m  just
thrilled to death!”

“Put  the  soward  acrost  my  lap,  damm  you,”  the  old  man  said,  “where  it’ll

shine.”

She put it there and then stood back looking at him. “You look just grand,” she

said.

“God damm it,” the old man said in a slow monotonous certain tone as if he
were saying it to the beating of his heart. “God damm every goddam thing to hell.”

“Now, now,” she said and left happily to join the procession.
The graduates  were  lined  up  behind  the  Science  building  and  she  found  her
place just as the line started to move. She had not slept much the night before and
when she had, she had dreamed of the exercises, murmuring, “See him, see him?”
in her sleep but waking up every time just before she turned her head to look at
him  behind  her.  The  graduates  had  to  walk  three  blocks  in  the  hot  sun  in  their
black  wool  robes  and  as  she  plodded  stolidly  along  she  thought  that  if  anyone
considered this academic procession something impressive to behold, they need
only  wait  until  they  saw  that  old  General  in  his  courageous  gray  and  that  clean
young  Boy  Scout  stoutly  wheeling  his  chair  across  the  stage  with  the  sunlight
catching the sword. She imagined that John Wesley had the old man ready now
behind the stage.

The black procession wound its way up the two blocks and started on the main
walk leading to the auditorium. The visitors stood on the grass, picking out their
graduates.  Men  were  pushing  back  their  hats  and  wiping  their  foreheads  and
women  were  lifting  their  dresses  slightly  from  the  shoulders  to  keep  them  from
sticking  to  their  backs.  The  graduates  in  their  heavy  robes  looked  as  if  the  last
beads of ignorance were being sweated out of them. The sun blazed off the fenders
of automobiles and beat from the columns of the buildings and pulled the eye from
one spot of glare to another. It pulled Sally Poker’s toward the big red Coca-Cola
machine  that  had  been  set  up  by  the  side  of  the  auditorium.  Here  she  saw  the
General parked, scowling and hatless in his chair in the blazing sun while John
Wesley, his blouse loose behind, his hip and cheek pressed to the red machine,
was  drinking  a  Coca-Cola.  She  broke  from  the  line  and  galloped  to  them  and

snatched the bottle away. She shook the boy and thrust in his blouse and put the hat
on the old man’s head. “Now get him in there!” she said, pointing one rigid finger
to the side door of the building.

For his part the General felt as if there were a little hole beginning to widen in
the top of his head. The boy wheeled him rapidly down a walk and up a ramp and
into a building and bumped him over the stage entrance and into position where he
had been told and the General glared in front of him at heads that all seemed to
flow  together  and  eyes  that  moved  from  one  face  to  another.  Several  figures  in
black robes came and picked up his hand and shook it. A black procession was
flowing up each aisle and forming to stately music in a pool in front of him. The
music seemed to be entering his head through the little hole and he thought for a
second that the procession would try to enter it too.

He  didn’t  know  what  procession  this  was  but  there  was  something  familiar
about it. It must be familiar to him since it had come to meet him, but he didn’t like
a black procession. Any procession that came to meet him, he thought irritably,
ought to have floats with beautiful guls on them like the floats before the preemy. It
must be something connected with history like they were always having. He had
no use for any of it. What happened then wasn’t anything to a man living now and
he was living now.

When all the procession had flowed into the black pool, a black figure began
orating  in  front  of  it.  The  figure  was  telling  something  about  history  and  the
General  made  up  his  mind  he  wouldn’t  listen,  but  the  words  kept  seeping  in
through the little hole in his head. He heard his own name mentioned and his chair
was shuttled forward roughly and the Boy Scout took a big bow. They called his
name and the fat brat bowed. Goddam you, the old man tried to say, get out of my
way, I can stand up!—but he was jerked back again before he could get up and
take the bow. He supposed the noise they made was for him. If he was over, he
didn’t intend to listen to any more of it. If it hadn’t been for the little hole in the
top of his head, none of the words would have got to him. He thought of putting his
finger up there into the hole to block them but the hole was a little wider than his
finger and it felt as if it were getting deeper.

Another black robe had taken the place of the first one and was talking now

and he heard his name mentioned again but they were not talking about him, they
were still talking about history. “If we forget our past,” the speaker was saying,
“we won’t remember our future and it will be as well for we won’t have one.”
The General heard some of these words gradually. He had forgotten history and he
didn’t intend to remember it again. He had forgotten the name and face of his wife
and the names and faces of his children or even if he had a wife and children, and
he  had  forgotten  the  names  of  places  and  the  places  themselves  and  what  had
happened at them.

He was considerably irked  by  the  hole  in  his  head.  He  had  not  expected  to
have a hole in his head at this event. It was the slow black music that had put it
there and though most of the music had stopped outside, there was still a little of it
in the hole, going deeper and moving around in his thoughts, letting the words he
heard into the dark places of his brain. He heard the words, Chickamauga, Shiloh,
Johnston, Lee, and he knew he was inspiring all these words that meant nothing to
him. He wondered if he had been a general at Chickamauga or at Lee. Then he
tried to see himself and the horse mounted in the middle of a float full of beautiful
girls,  being  driven  slowly  through  downtown  Atlanta.  Instead,  the  old  words
began to stir in his head as if they were trying to wrench themselves out of place
and come to life.

The speaker was through with that war and had gone on to the next one and
now  he  was  approaching  another  and  all  his  words,  like  the  black  procession,
were  vaguely  familiar  and  irritating.  There  was  a  long  finger  of  music  in  the
General’s head, probing various spots that were words, letting in a little light on
the words and helping them to live. The words began to come toward him and he
said, Dammit! I ain’t going to have it! and he started edging backwards to get out
of the way. Then he saw the figure in the black robe sit down and there was a
noise and the black pool in front of him began to rumble and to flow toward him
from either side to the black slow music, and he said, Stop dammit! I can’t do but
one thing at a time! He couldn’t protect himself from the words and attend to the
procession too and the words were coming at him fast. He felt that he was running
backwards and the words were coming at him like musket fire, just escaping him
but  getting  nearer  and  nearer.  He  turned  around  and  began  to  run  as  fast  as  he

could  but  he  found  himself  running  toward  the  words.  He  was  running  into  a
regular volley of them and meeting them with quick curses. As the music swelled
toward him, the entire past opened up on him out of nowhere and he felt his body
riddled in a hundred places with sharp stabs of pain and he fell down, returning a
curse  for  every  hit.  He  saw  his  wife’s  narrow  face  looking  at  him  critically
through her round gold-rimmed glasses; he saw one of his squinting bald-headed
sons; and his mother ran toward him with an anxious look; then a succession of
places—Chickamauga, Shiloh, Marthasville—rushed at him as if the past were the
only  future  now  and  he  had  to  endure  it.  Then  suddenly  he  saw  that  the  black
procession was almost on him. He recognized it, for it had been dogging all his
days. He made such a desperate effort to see over it and find out what comes after
the past that his hand clenched the sword until the blade touched bone.

The graduates were crossing the stage in a long file to receive their scrolls and
shake the president’s hand. As Sally Poker, who was near the end, crossed, she
glanced at the General and saw him sitting fixed and fierce, his eyes wide open,
and she turned her head forward again and held it a perceptible degree higher and
received her scroll. Once it was all over and she was out of the auditorium in the
sun again, she located her kin and they waited together on a bench in the shade for
John Wesley to wheel the old man out. That crafty scout had bumped him out the
back  way  and  rolled  him  at  high  speed  down  a  flagstone  path  and  was  waiting
now, with the corpse, in the long line at the Coca-Cola machine.

The Life You Save May Be Your Own

THE  old  woman  and  her  daughter  were  sitting  on  their  porch  when  Mr.  Shiftlet
came up their road for the first time. The old woman slid to the edge of her chair
and leaned forward, shading her eyes from the piercing sunset with her hand. The
daughter could not see far in front of her and continued to play with her fingers.
Although the old woman lived in this desolate spot with only her daughter and she
had never seen Mr. Shiftlet before, she could tell, even from a distance, that he
was a tramp and no one to be afraid of. His left coat sleeve was folded up to show
there was only half an arm in it and his gaunt figure listed slightly to the side as if
the breeze were pushing him. He had on a black town suit and a brown felt hat that
was turned up in the front and down in the back and he carried a tin tool box by a
handle.  He  came  on,  at  an  amble,  up  her  road,  his  face  turned  toward  the  sun
which appeared to be balancing itself on the peak of a small mountain.

The old woman didn’t change her position until he was almost into her yard;
then she rose with one hand fisted on her hip. The daughter, a large girl in a short
blue organdy dress, saw him all at once and jumped up and began to stamp and
point and make excited speechless sounds.

Mr.  Shiftlet  stopped  just  inside  the  yard  and  set  his  box  on  the  ground  and
tipped his hat at her as if she were not in the least afflicted; then he turned toward
the old woman and swung the hat all the way off. He had long black slick hair that
hung flat from a part in the middle to beyond the tips of his ears on either side. His
face descended in forehead for more than half its length and ended suddenly with
his features just balanced over a jutting steel-trap jaw. He seemed to be a young
man  but  he  had  a  look  of  composed  dissatisfaction  as  if  he  understood  life
thoroughly.

“Good evening,” the old woman said. She was about the size of a cedar fence

post and she had a man’s gray hat pulled down low over her head.

The  tramp  stood  looking  at  her  and  didn’t  answer.  He  turned  his  back  and
faced the sunset. He swung both his whole and his short arm up slowly so that they

indicated  an  expanse  of  sky  and  his  figure  formed  a  crooked  cross.  The  old
woman  watched  him  with  her  arms  folded  across  her  chest  as  if  she  were  the
owner of the sun, and the daughter watched, her head thrust forward and her fat
helpless hands hanging at the wrists. She had long pink-gold hair and eyes as blue
as a peacock’s neck.

He held the pose for almost fifty seconds and then he picked up his box and
came on to the porch and dropped down on the bottom step. “Lady,” he said in a
firm nasal voice, “I’d give a fortune to live where I could see me a sun do that
every evening.”

“Does it every evening,” the old woman said and sat back down. The daughter
sat down too and watched him with a cautious sly look as if he were a bird that
had come up very close. He leaned to one side, rooting in his pants pocket, and in
a second he brought out a package of chewing gum and offered her a piece. She
took  it  and  unpeeled  it  and  began  to  chew  without  taking  her  eyes  off  him.  He
offered the old woman a piece but she only raised her upper lip to indicate she
had no teeth.

Mr. Shiftlet’s pale sharp glance had already passed over everything in the yard
—the  pump  near  the  corner  of  the  house  and  the  big  fig  tree  that  three  or  four
chickens were preparing to roost in—and had moved to a shed where he saw the
square rusted back of an automobile. “You ladies drive?” he asked.

“That car ain’t run in fifteen year,” the old woman said. “The day my husband

died, it quit running.”

“Nothing is like it used to be, lady,” he said. “The world is almost rotten.”
“That’s right,” the old woman said. “You from around here?”
“Name Tom T. Shiftlet,” he murmured, looking at the tires.
“I’m pleased to meet you,” the old woman said. “Name Lucynell Crater and

daughter Lucynell Crater. What you doing around here, Mr. Shiftlet?”

He judged the car to be about a 1928 or ’29 Ford. “Lady,” he said, and turned
and gave her his full attention, “lemme tell you something. There’s one of these
doctors in Atlanta that’s taken a knife and cut the human heart—the human heart,”
he repeated, leaning forward, “out of a man’s chest and held it in his hand,” and he
held his hand out, palm up, as if it were slightly weighted with the human heart,

“and studied it like it was a day-old chicken, and lady,” he said, allowing a long
significant  pause  in  which  his  head  slid  forward  and  his  clay-colored  eyes
brightened, “he don’t know no more about it than you or me.”

“That’s right,” the old woman said.
“Why,  if  he  was  to  take  that  knife  and  cut  into  every  corner  of  it,  he  still

wouldn’t know no more than you or me. What you want to bet?”

“Nothing,” the old woman said wisely. “Where you come from, Mr. Shiftlet?”
He  didn’t  answer.  He  reached  into  his  pocket  and  brought  out  a  sack  of
tobacco and a package of cigarette papers and rolled himself a cigarette, expertly
with one hand, and attached it in a hanging position to his upper lip. Then he took
a box of wooden matches from his pocket and struck one on his shoe. He held the
burning  match  as  if  he  were  studying  the  mystery  of  flame  while  it  traveled
dangerously toward his skin. The daughter began to make loud noises and to point
to  his  hand  and  shake  her  finger  at  him,  but  when  the  flame  was  just  before
touching him, he leaned down with his hand cupped over it as if he were going to
set fire to his nose and lit the cigarette.

He flipped away the dead match and blew a stream of gray into the evening. A
sly look came over his face. “Lady,” he said, “nowadays, people’ll do anything
anyways. I can tell you my name is Tom T. Shiftlet and I come from Tarwater,
Tennessee, but you never have seen me before: how you know I ain’t lying? How
you  know  my  name  ain’t  Aaron  Sparks,  lady,  and  I  come  from  Singleberry,
Georgia,  or  how  you  know  it’s  not  George  Speeds  and  I  come  from  Lucy,
Alabama,  or  how  you  know  I  ain’t  Thompson  Bright  from  Toolafalls,
Mississippi?”

“I don’t know nothing about you,” the old woman muttered, irked.
“Lady,” he said, “people don’t care how they lie. Maybe the best I can tell you
is,  I’m  a  man;  but  listen  lady,”  he  said  and  paused  and  made  his  tone  more
ominous still, “what is a man?”

The  old  woman  began  to  gum  a  seed.  “What  you  carry  in  that  tin  box,  Mr.

Shiftlet?” she asked.

“Tools,” he said, put back. “I’m a carpenter.”
“Well, if you come out here to work, I’ll be able to feed you and give you a

place to sleep but I can’t pay. I’ll tell you that before you begin,” she said.

There  was  no  answer  at  once  and  no  particular  expression  on  his  face.  He
leaned back against the two-by-four that helped support the porch roof. “Lady,” he
said slowly, “there’s some men that some things mean more to them than money.”
The old woman rocked without comment and the daughter watched the trigger that
moved up and down in his neck. He told the old woman then that all most people
were interested in was money, but he asked what a man was made for. He asked
her if a man was made for money, or what. He asked her what she thought she was
made for but she didn’t answer, she only sat rocking and wondered if a one-armed
man could put a new roof on her garden house. He asked a lot of questions that she
didn’t  answer.  He  told  her  that  he  was  twenty-eight  years  old  and  had  lived  a
varied life. He had been a gospel singer, a foreman on the railroad, an assistant in
an  undertaking  parlor,  and  he  come  over  the  radio  for  three  months  with  Uncle
Roy  and  his  Red  Creek  Wranglers.  He  said  he  had  fought  and  bled  in  the Arm
Service of his country and visited every foreign land and that everywhere he had
seen people that didn’t care if they did a thing one way or another. He said he
hadn’t been raised thataway.

A fat yellow moon appeared in the branches of the fig tree as if it were going
to roost there with the chickens. He said that a man had to escape to the country to
see  the  world  whole  and  that  he  wished  he  lived  in  a  desolate  place  like  this
where he could see the sun go down every evening like God made it to do.

“Are you married or are you single?” the old woman asked.
There  was  a  long  silence.  “Lady,”  he  asked  finally,  “where  would  you  find
you an innocent woman today? I wouldn’t have any of this trash I could just pick
up.”

The daughter was leaning very far down, hanging her head almost between her
knees watching him through a triangular door she had made in her overturned hair;
and she suddenly fell in a heap on the floor and began to whimper. Mr. Shiftlet
straightened her out and helped her get back in the chair.

“Is she your baby girl?” he asked.
“My only,” the old woman said “and she’s  the  sweetest  girl  in  the  world.  I
would give her up for nothing on earth. She’s smart too. She can sweep the floor,

cook,  wash,  feed  the  chickens,  and  hoe.  I  wouldn’t  give  her  up  for  a  casket  of
jewels.”

“No,” he said kindly, “don’t ever let any man take her away from you.”
“Any man come after her,” the old woman said, “’ll have to stay around the

place.”

Mr.  Shiftlet’s  eye  in  the  darkness  was  focused  on  a  part  of  the  automobile
bumper that glittered in the distance. “Lady,” he said, jerking his short arm up as if
he could point with it to her house and yard and pump, “there ain’t a broken thing
on this plantation that I couldn’t fix for you, one-arm jackleg or not. I’m a man,” he
said with a sullen dignity, “even if I ain’t a whole one. I got,” he said, tapping his
knuckles on the floor to emphasize the immensity of what he was going to say, “a
moral  intelligence!”  and  his  face  pierced  out  of  the  darkness  into  a  shaft  of
doorlight and he stared at her as if he were astonished himself at this impossible
truth.

The old woman was not impressed with the phrase. “I told you you could hang
around  and  work  for  food,”  she  said,  “if  you  don’t  mind  sleeping  in  that  car
yonder.”

“Why listen, lady,” he said with a grin of delight, “the monks of old slept in

their coffins!”

“They wasn’t as advanced as we are,” the old woman said.

*   *   *

The  next  morning  he  began  on  the  roof  of  the  garden  house  while  Lucynell,  the
daughter, sat on a rock and watched him work. He had not been around a week
before the change he had made in the place was apparent. He had patched the front
and back steps, built a new hog pen, restored a fence, and taught Lucynell, who
was  completely  deaf  and  had  never  said  a  word  in  her  life,  to  say  the  word
“bird.”  The  big  rosy-faced  girl  followed  him  everywhere,  saying  “Burrttddt
ddbirrrttdt,”  and  clapping  her  hands.  The  old  woman  watched  from  a  distance,
secretly pleased. She was ravenous for a son-in-law.

Mr. Shiftlet slept on the hard narrow back seat of the car with his feet out the
side window. He had his razor and a can of water on a crate that served him as a

bedside table and he put up a piece of mirror against the back glass and kept his
coat neatly on a hanger that he hung over one of the windows.

In  the  evenings  he  sat  on  the  steps  and  talked  while  the  old  woman  and
Lucynell rocked violently in their chairs on either side of him. The old woman’s
three mountains were black against the dark blue sky and were visited off and on
by  various  planets  and  by  the  moon  after  it  had  left  the  chickens.  Mr.  Shiftlet
pointed out that the reason he had improved this plantation was because he had
taken a personal interest in it. He said he was even going to make the automobile
run.

He had raised the hood and studied the mechanism and he said he could tell
that the car had been built in the days when cars were really built. You take now,
he said, one man puts in one bolt and another man puts in another bolt and another
man puts in another bolt so that it’s a man for a bolt. That’s why you have to pay
so much for a car: you’re paying all those men. Now if you didn’t have to pay but
one man, you could get you a cheaper car and one that had had a personal interest
taken in it, and it would be a better car. The old woman agreed with him that this
was so.

Mr.  Shiftlet  said  that  the  trouble  with  the  world  was  that  nobody  cared,  or
stopped  and  took  any  trouble.  He  said  he  never  would  have  been  able  to  teach
Lucynell to say a word if he hadn’t cared and stopped long enough.

“Teach her to say something else,” the old woman said.
“What you want her to say next?” Mr. Shiftlet asked.
The old woman’s smile was broad and toothless and suggestive. “Teach her to

say ‘sugarpie,’” she said.

Mr. Shiftlet already knew what was on her mind.
The next day he began to tinker with the automobile and that evening he told

her that if she would buy a fan belt, he would be able to make the car run.

The  old  woman  said  she  would  give  him  the  money.  “You  see  that  girl
yonder?” she asked, pointing to Lucynell who was sitting on the floor a foot away,
watching him, her eyes blue even in the dark. “If it was ever a man wanted to take
her away, I would say, ‘No man on earth is going to take that sweet girl of mine
away from me!’ but if he was to say, ‘Lady, I don’t want to take her away, I want

her right here,’ I would say, ‘Mister, I don’t blame you none. I wouldn’t pass up a
chance to live in a permanent place and get the sweetest girl in the world myself.
You ain’t no fool,’ I would say.”

“How old is she?” Mr. Shiftlet asked casually.
“Fifteen, sixteen,” the old woman said. The girl was nearly thirty but because

of her innocence it was impossible to guess.

“It would be a good idea to paint it too,” Mr. Shiftlet remarked. “You don’t

want it to rust out.”

“We’ll see about that later,” the old woman said.
The next day he walked into town and returned with the parts he needed and a
can of gasoline. Late in the afternoon, terrible noises issued from the shed and the
old woman rushed out of the house, thinking Lucynell was somewhere having a fit.
Lucynell  was  sitting  on  a  chicken  crate,  stamping  her  feet  and  screaming,
“Burrddttt! bddurrddtttt!” but her fuss was drowned out by the car. With a volley
of blasts it emerged from the shed, moving in a fierce and stately way. Mr. Shiftlet
was  in  the  driver’s  seat,  sitting  very  erect.  He  had  an  expression  of  serious
modesty on his face as if he had just raised the dead.

That night, rocking on the porch, the old woman began her business, at once.
“You want you an innocent woman, don’t you?” she asked sympathetically. “You
don’t want none of this trash.”

“No’m, I don’t,” Mr. Shiftlet said.
“One that can’t talk,” she continued, “can’t sass you back or use foul language.
That’s the kind for you to have. Right there,” and she pointed to Lucynell sitting
cross-legged in her chair, holding both feet in her hands.

“That’s right,” he admitted. “She wouldn’t give me any trouble.”
“Saturday,” the old woman said, “you and her and me can drive into town and

get married.”

Mr. Shiftlet eased his position on the steps.
“I  can’t  get  married  right  now,”  he  said.  “Everything  you  want  to  do  takes

money and I ain’t got any.”

“What you need with money?” she asked.
“It takes money,” he said. “Some people’ll do anything anyhow these days, but

the way I think, I wouldn’t marry no woman that I couldn’t take on a trip like she
was  somebody.  I  mean  take  her  to  a  hotel  and  treat  her.  I  wouldn’t  marry  the
Duchesser Windsor,” he said firmly, “unless I could take her to a hotel and giver
something good to eat.

“I was raised thataway and there ain’t a thing I can do about it. My old mother

taught me how to do.”

“Lucynell don’t even know what a hotel is,” the old woman muttered. “Listen
here,  Mr.  Shiftlet,”  she  said,  sliding  forward  in  her  chair,  “you’d  be  getting  a
permanent  house  and  a  deep  well  and  the  most  innocent  girl  in  the  world. You
don’t need no money. Lemme tell you something: there ain’t any place in the world
for a poor disabled friendless drifting man.”

The ugly words settled in Mr. Shiftlet’s head like a group of buzzards in the
top of a tree. He didn’t answer at once. He rolled himself a cigarette and lit it and
then he said in an even voice, “Lady, a man is divided into two parts, body and
spirit.”

The old woman clamped her gums together.
“A body and a spirit,” he repeated. “The body, lady, is like a house: it don’t
go  anywhere;  but  the  spirit,  lady,  is  like  a  automobile:  always  on  the  move,
always…”

“Listen,  Mr.  Shiftlet,”  she  said,  “my  well  never  goes  dry  and  my  house  is
always warm in the winter and there’s no mortgage on a thing about this place.
You can go to the courthouse and see for yourself. And yonder under that shed is a
fine  automobile.”  She  laid  the  bait  carefully.  “You  can  have  it  painted  by
Saturday. I’ll pay for the paint.”

In the darkness, Mr. Shiftlet’s smile stretched like a weary snake waking up by
a fire. After a second he recalled himself and said, “I’m only saying a man’s spirit
means more to him than anything else. I would have to take my wife off for the
weekend without no regards at all for cost. I got to follow where my spirit says to
go.”

“I’ll  give  you  fifteen  dollars  for  a  weekend  trip,”  the  old  woman  said  in  a

crabbed voice. “That’s the best I can do.”

“That wouldn’t hardly pay for more than the gas and the hotel,” he said. “It

wouldn’t feed her.”

“Seventeen-fifty,” the old woman said. “That’s all I got so it isn’t any use you

trying to milk me. You can take a lunch.”

Mr. Shiftlet was deeply hurt by the word “milk.” He didn’t doubt that she had
more  money  sewed  up  in  her  mattress  but  he  had  already  told  her  he  was  not
interested  in  her  money.  “I’ll  make  that  do,”  he  said  and  rose  and  walked  off
without treating with her further.

On  Saturday  the  three  of  them  drove  into  town  in  the  car  that  the  paint  had
barely  dried  on  and  Mr.  Shiftlet  and  Lucynell  were  married  in  the  Ordinary’s
office while the old woman witnessed. As they came out of the courthouse, Mr.
Shiftlet began twisting his neck in his collar. He looked morose and bitter as if he
had been insulted while someone held him. “That didn’t satisfy me none,” he said.
“That was just something a woman in an office did, nothing but paper work and
blood tests. What do they know about my blood? If they was to take my heart and
cut it out,” he said, “they wouldn’t know a thing about me. It didn’t satisfy me at
all.”

“It satisfied the law,” the old woman said sharply.
“The law,” Mr. Shiftlet said and spit. “It’s the law that don’t satisfy me.”
He had painted the car dark green with a yellow band around it just under the
windows.  The  three  of  them  climbed  in  the  front  seat  and  the  old  woman  said,
“Don’t Lucynell look pretty? Looks like a baby doll.” Lucynell was dressed up in
a white dress that her mother had uprooted from a trunk and there was a Panama
hat on her head with a bunch of red wooden cherries on the brim. Every now and
then her placid expression was changed by a sly isolated little thought like a shoot
of green in the desert. “You got a prize!” the old woman said.

Mr. Shiftlet didn’t even look at her.
They drove back to the house to let the old woman off and pick up the lunch.
When they were ready to leave, she stood staring in the window of the car, with
her fingers clenched around the glass. Tears began  to  seep  sideways  out  of  her
eyes and run along the dirty creases in her face. “I ain’t ever been parted with her
for two days before,” she said.

Mr. Shiftlet started the motor.

“And  I  wouldn’t  let  no  man  have  her  but  you  because  I  seen  you  would  do
right. Good-by, Sugarbaby,” she said, clutching at the sleeve of the white dress.
Lucynell looked straight at her and didn’t seem to see her there at all. Mr. Shiftlet
eased the car forward so that she had to move her hands.

The  early  afternoon  was  clear  and  open  and  surrounded  by  pale  blue  sky.
Although  the  car  would  go  only  thirty  miles  an  hour,  Mr.  Shiftlet  imagined  a
terrific climb and dip and swerve that went entirely to his head so that he forgot
his  morning  bitterness.  He  had  always  wanted  an  automobile  but  he  had  never
been  able  to  afford  one  before.  He  drove  very  fast  because  he  wanted  to  make
Mobile by nightfall.

Occasionally  he  stopped  his  thoughts  long  enough  to  look  at  Lucynell  in  the
seat beside him. She had eaten the lunch as soon as they were out of the yard and
now she was pulling the cherries off the hat one by one and throwing them out the
window. He became depressed in spite of the car. He had driven about a hundred
miles when he decided that she must be hungry again and at the next small town
they came to, he stopped in front of an aluminum-painted eating place called The
Hot Spot and took her in and ordered her a plate of ham and grits. The ride had
made her sleepy and as soon as she got up on the stool, she rested her head on the
counter and shut her eyes. There was no one in The Hot Spot but Mr. Shiftlet and
the boy behind the counter, a pale youth with a greasy rag hung over his shoulder.
Before he could dish up the food, she was snoring gently.

“Give it to her when she wakes up,” Mr. Shiftlet said. “I’ll pay for it now.”
The boy bent over her and stared at the long pink-gold hair and the half-shut
sleeping eyes. Then he looked up and stared at Mr. Shiftlet. “She looks like an
angel of Gawd,” he murmured.

“Hitchhiker,” Mr. Shiftlet explained. “I can’t wait. I got to make Tuscaloosa.”
The boy bent over again and very carefully touched his finger to a strand of the

golden hair and Mr. Shiftlet left.

He  was  more  depressed  than  ever  as  he  drove  on  by  himself.  The  late
afternoon had grown hot and sultry and the country had flattened out. Deep in the
sky a storm was preparing very slowly and without thunder as if it meant to drain
every  drop  of  air  from  the  earth  before  it  broke.  There  were  times  when  Mr.

Shiftlet  preferred  not  to  be  alone.  He  felt  too  that  a  man  with  a  car  had  a
responsibility to others and he kept his eye out for a hitchhiker. Occasionally he
saw a sign that warned: “Drive carefully. The life you save may be your own.”

The narrow road dropped off on either side into dry fields and here and there
a shack or a filling station stood in a clearing. The sun began to set directly in
front of the automobile. It was a reddening ball that through his windshield was
slightly  flat  on  the  bottom  and  top.  He  saw  a  boy  in  overalls  and  a  gray  hat
standing on the edge of the road and he slowed the car down and stopped in front
of  him.  The  boy  didn’t  have  his  hand  raised  to  thumb  the  ride,  he  was  only
standing there, but he had a small cardboard suitcase and his hat was set on his
head in a way to indicate that he had left somewhere for good. “Son,” Mr. Shiftlet
said, “I see you want a ride.”

The boy didn’t say he did or he didn’t but he opened the door of the car and
got in, and Mr. Shiftlet started driving again. The child held the suitcase on his lap
and folded his arms on top of it. He turned his head and looked out the window
away from Mr. Shiftlet. Mr. Shiftlet felt oppressed. “Son,” he said after a minute,
“I got the best old mother in the world so I reckon you only got the second best.”

The boy gave him a quick dark glance and then turned his face back out the

window.

“It’s nothing so sweet,” Mr. Shiftlet continued, “as a boy’s mother. She taught
him his first prayers at her knee, she give him love when no other would, she told
him  what  was  right  and  what  wasn’t,  and  she  seen  that  he  done  the  right  thing.
Son,” he said, “I never rued a day in my life like the one I rued when I left that old
mother of mine.”

The boy shifted in his seat but he didn’t look at Mr. Shiftlet. He unfolded his

arms and put one hand on the door handle.

“My mother was a angel of Gawd,” Mr. Shiftlet said in a very strained voice.
“He took her from heaven and giver to me and I left her.” His eyes were instantly
clouded over with a mist of tears. The car was barely moving.

The boy turned angrily in the seat. “You go to the devil!” he cried. “My old
woman is a flea bag and yours is a stinking pole cat!” and with that he flung the
door open and jumped out with his suitcase into the ditch.

Mr.  Shiftlet  was  so  shocked  that  for  about  a  hundred  feet  he  drove  along
slowly  with  the  door  still  open. A  cloud,  the  exact  color  of  the  boy’s  hat  and
shaped  like  a  turnip,  had  descended  over  the  sun,  and  another,  worse  looking,
crouched  behind  the  car.  Mr.  Shiftlet  felt  that  the  rottenness  of  the  world  was
about  to  engulf  him.  He  raised  his  arm  and  let  it  fall  again  to  his  breast.  “Oh
Lord!” he prayed. “Break forth and wash the slime from this earth!”

The  turnip  continued  slowly  to  descend.  After  a  few  minutes  there  was  a
guffawing peal of thunder from behind and fantastic raindrops, like tin-can tops,
crashed over the rear of Mr. Shiftlet’s car. Very quickly he stepped on the gas and
with  his  stump  sticking  out  the  window  he  raced  the  galloping  shower  into
Mobile.

The River

THE child stood glum and limp in the middle of the dark living room while his
father pulled him into a plaid coat. His right arm was hung in the sleeve but the
father buttoned the coat anyway and pushed him forward toward a pale spotted
hand that stuck through the half-open door.

“He ain’t fixed right,” a loud voice said from the hall.
“Well then for Christ’s sake fix him,” the father  muttered. “It’s six o’clock in
the morning.” He was in his bathrobe and barefooted. When he got the child to the
door and tried to shut it, he found her looming in it, a speckled skeleton in a long
pea-green coat and felt helmet.

“And his and my carfare,” she said. “It’ll be twict we have to ride the car.”
He went in the bedroom again to get the money and when he came back, she
and the boy were both standing in the middle of the room. She was taking stock. “I
couldn’t smell those dead cigarette butts long if I was ever to come sit with you,”
she said, shaking him down in his coat.

“Here’s the change,” the father said. He went to the door and opened it wide

and waited.

After she had counted the money she slipped it somewhere inside her coat and
walked over to a watercolor hanging near the phonograph. “I know what time it
is,”  she  said,  peering  closely  at  the  black  lines  crossing  into  broken  planes  of
violent color. “I ought to. My shift goes on at 10 P.M. and don’t get off till 5 and it
takes me one hour to ride the Vine Street car.”

“Oh,  I  see,”  he  said.  “Well,  we’ll  expect  him  back  tonight,  about  eight  or

nine?”

“Maybe later,” she said. “We’re going to the river to a healing.  This particular
preacher don’t get around this way often. I wouldn’t have paid for that,” she said,
nodding at the painting, “I would have drew it myself.”

“All right, Mrs. Connin, we’ll see you then,” he said drumming on the door.
A toneless voice called from the bedroom, “Bring me an icepack.”

“Too bad his mamma’s sick,” Mrs. Connin said. “What’s her trouble?”
“We don’t know,” he muttered.
“We’ll  ask  the  preacher  to  pray  for  her.  He’s  healed  a  lot  of  folks.  The

Reverend Bevel Summers. Maybe she ought to see him sometime.”

“Maybe  so,”  he  said.  “We’ll  see  you  tonight,”  and  he  disappeared  into  the

bedroom and left them to go.

The little boy stared at her silently, his nose and eyes running. He was four or
five.  He  had  a  long  face  and  bulging  chin  and  half-shut  eyes  set  far  apart.  He
seemed mute and patient, like an old sheep waiting to be let out.

“You’ll  like  this  preacher,”  she  said.  “The  Reverend  Bevel  Summers. You

ought to hear him sing.”

The bedroom door opened suddenly and the father stuck his head out and said,

“Good-by, old man. Have a good time.”

“Good-by,” the little boy said and jumped as if he had been shot.
Mrs. Connin gave the watercolor another look. Then they went out into the hall

and rang for the elevator. “I wouldn’t have drew it,” she said.

Outside  the  gray  morning  was  blocked  off  on  either  side  by  the  unlit  empty
buildings. “It’s going to fair up later,” she said, “but this is the last time we’ll be
able to have any preaching at the river this year. Wipe your nose, Sugar Boy.”

He began rubbing his sleeve across it but she stopped him. “That ain’t nice,”

she said. “Where’s your handkerchief?”

He put his hands in his pockets and pretended to look for it while she waited.
“Some people don’t care how they send one off,” she murmured to her reflection
in  the  coffee  shop  window.  “You  pervide.”  She  took  a  red  and  blue  flowered
handkerchief out of her pocket and stooped down and began to work on his nose.
“Now blow,” she said and he blew. “You can borry it. Put it in your pocket.”

He folded it up and put it in his pocket carefully and they walked on to the
corner and leaned against the side of a closed drugstore to wait for the car. Mrs.
Connin  turned  up  her  coat  collar  so  that  it  met  her  hat  in  the  back.  Her  eyelids
began to droop and she looked as if she might go to sleep against the wall. The
little boy put a slight pressure on her hand.

“What’s  your  name?”  she  asked  in  a  drowsy  voice.  “I  don’t  know  but  only

your last name. I should have found out your first name.”

His name was Harry Ashfield and he had never thought at any time before of

changing it. “Bevel,” he said.

Mrs. Connin raised herself from the wall. “Why ain’t that a coincident!” she

said. “I told you that’s the name of this preacher!”

“Bevel,” he repeated.
She stood looking down at him as if he had become a marvel to her. “I’ll have
to see you meet him today,” she said. “He’s no ordinary preacher. He’s a healer.
He couldn’t do nothing for Mr. Connin though. Mr. Connin didn’t have the faith but
he said he would try anything once. He had this griping in his gut.”

The trolley appeared as a yellow spot at the end of the deserted street.
“He’s gone to the government hospital now,” she said, “and they taken one-
third of his stomach. I tell him he better thank Jesus for what he’s got left but he
says he ain’t thanking nobody. Well I declare,” she murmured, “Bevel!”

They walked out to the tracks to wait. “Will he heal me?” Bevel asked.
“What you got?”
“I’m hungry,” he decided finally.
“Didn’t you have your breakfast?”
“I didn’t have time to be hungry yet then,” he said.
“Well when we get home we’ll both have us something,” she said. “I’m ready

myself.”

They  got  in  the  car  and  sat  down  a  few  seats  behind  the  driver  and  Mrs.
Connin took Bevel on her knees. “Now you be a good boy,” she said, “and let me
get  some  sleep.  Just  don’t  get  off  my  lap.”  She  lay  her  head  back  and  as  he
watched, gradually her eyes closed and her mouth fell open to show a few long
scattered teeth, some gold and some darker than her face; she began to whistle and
blow like a musical skeleton. There was no one in the car but themselves and the
driver and when he saw she was asleep, he took out the flowered handkerchief
and unfolded it and examined it carefully. Then he folded it up again and unzipped
a place in the innerlining of his coat and hid it in there and shortly he went to sleep
himself.

Her house was a half-mile from the end of the car line, set back a little from

the road. It was tar paper brick with a porch across the front of it and a tin top. On
the  porch  there  were  three  little  boys  of  different  sizes  with  identical  speckled
faces and one tall girl who had her hair up in so many aluminum curlers that it
glared like the roof. The three boys followed them inside and closed in on Bevel.
They looked at him silently, not smiling.

“That’s Bevel,” Mrs. Connin said, taking off her coat. “It’s a coincident he’s
named the same as the preacher. These boys are J. C, Spivey, and Sinclair, and
that’s Sarah Mildred on the porch. Take off that coat and hang it on the bed post,
Bevel.”

The three boys watched him while he unbuttoned the coat and took it off. Then
they watched him hang it on the bed post and then they stood, watching the coat.
They turned abruptly and went out the door and had a conference on the porch.

Bevel  stood  looking  around  him  at  the  room.  It  was  part  kitchen  and  part
bedroom. The entire house was two rooms and two porches. Close to his foot the
tail of a light-colored dog moved up and down between two floor boards as he
scratched his back on the underside of the house. Bevel jumped on it but the hound
was experienced and had already withdrawn when his feet hit the spot.

The  walls  were  filled  with  pictures  and  calendars.  There  were  two  round
photographs of an old man and woman with collapsed mouths and another picture
of a man whose eyebrows dashed out of two bushes of hair and clashed in a heap
on the bridge of his nose; the rest of his face stuck out like a bare cliff to fall from.
“That’s Mr. Connin,” Mrs. Connin said, standing back from the stove for a second
to admire the face with him, “but it don’t favor him any more.” Bevel turned from
Mr. Connin to a colored picture over the bed of a man wearing a white sheet. He
had long hair and a gold circle around his head and he was sawing on a board
while some children stood watching him. He was going to ask who that was when
the three boys came in again and motioned for him to follow them. He thought of
crawling under the bed and hanging onto one of the legs but the three boys only
stood there, speckled and silent, waiting, and after a second he followed them at a
little distance out on the porch and around the corner of the house. They started off
through a field of rough yellow weeds to the hog pen, a five-foot boarded square
full of shoats, which they intended to ease him over into. When they reached it,

they turned and waited silently, leaning against the side.

He  was  coming  very  slowly,  deliberately  bumping  his  feet  together  as  if  he
had trouble walking. Once he had been beaten up in the park by some strange boys
when his sitter forgot him, but he hadn’t known anything was going to happen that
time until it was over. He began to smell a strong odor of garbage and to hear the
noises of a wild animal. He stopped a few feet from the pen and waited, pale but
dogged.

The  three  boys  didn’t  move.  Something  seemed  to  have  happened  to  them.
They stared over his head as if they saw something coming behind him but he was
afraid  to  turn  his  own  head  and  look.  Their  speckles  were  pale  and  their  eyes
were still and gray as glass. Only their ears twitched slightly. Nothing happened.
Finally,  the  one  in  the  middle  said,  “She’d  kill  us,”  and  turned,  dejected  and
hacked, and climbed up on the pen and hung over, staring in.

Bevel sat down on the ground, dazed with relief, and grinned up at them.
The one sitting on the pen glanced at him severely. “Hey you,” he said after a
second, “if you can’t climb up and see these pigs you can lift that bottom board off
and look in thataway.” He appeared to offer this as a kindness.

Bevel had never seen a real pig but he had seen a pig in a book and knew they
were  small  fat  pink  animals  with  curly  tails  and  round  grinning  faces  and  bow
ties. He leaned forward and pulled eagerly at the board.

“Pull harder,” the littlest boy said. “It’s nice and rotten. Just lift out thet nail.”
He eased a long reddish nail out of the soft wood.
“Now  you  can  lift  up  the  board  and  put  your  face  to  the…”  a  quiet  voice

began.

He had already done it and another face, gray, wet and sour, was pushing into
his,  knocking  him  down  and  back  as  it  scraped  out  under  the  plank.  Something
snorted  over  him  and  charged  back  again,  rolling  him  over  and  pushing  him  up
from  behind  and  then  sending  him  forward,  screaming  through  the  yellow  field,
while it bounded behind.

The three Connins watched from where they were. The one sitting on the pen
held the loose board back with his gangling foot. Their stern faces didn’t brighten
any but they seemed to become less taut, as if some great need had been partly

satisfied.  “Maw  ain’t  going  to  like  him  lettin’  out  thet  hawg,”  the  smallest  one
said.

Mrs.  Connin  was  on  the  back  porch  and  caught  Bevel  up  as  he  reached  the
steps. The hog ran under the house and subsided, panting, but the child screamed
for  five  minutes.  When  she  had  finally  calmed  him  down,  she  gave  him  his
breakfast  and  let  him  sit  on  her  lap  while  he  ate  it.  The  shoat  climbed  the  two
steps onto the back porch and stood outside the screen door, looking in with his
head lowered sullenly. He was long-legged and humpbacked and part of one of
his ears had been bitten off.

“Git away!” Mrs. Connin shouted. “That one yonder favors Mr. Paradise that
has the gas station,” she said. “You’ll see him today at the healing. He’s got the
cancer over his ear. He always comes to show he ain’t been healed.”

The shoat stood squinting a few seconds longer and then moved off slowly. “I

don’t want to see him,” Bevel said.

*   *   *

They walked to the river, Mrs. Connin in front with him and the three boys strung
out behind and Sarah Mildred, the tall girl, at the end to holler if one of them ran
out  on  the  road.  They  looked  like  the  skeleton  of  an  old  boat  with  two  pointed
ends, sailing slowly on the edge of the highway. The white Sunday sun followed at
a  little  distance,  climbing  fast  through  a  scum  of  gray  cloud  as  if  it  meant  to
overtake them. Bevel walked on the outside edge, holding Mrs. Connin’s hand and
looking down into the orange and purple gulley that dropped off from the concrete.
It occurred to him that he was lucky this time that they had found Mrs. Connin
who would take you away for the day instead of an ordinary sitter who only sat
where you lived or went to the park. You found out more when you left where you
lived. He had found out already this morning that he had been made by a carpenter
named Jesus Christ. Before he had thought it had been a doctor named Sladewall,
a fat man with a yellow mustache who gave him shots and thought his name was
Herbert, but this must have been a joke. They joked a lot where he lived. If he had
thought about it before, he would have thought Jesus Christ was a word like “oh”
or “damn” or “God,” or maybe somebody who had cheated them out of something

sometime. When he had asked Mrs. Connin who the man in the sheet in the picture
over her bed was, she had looked at him a while with her mouth open. Then she
had said, “That’s Jesus,” and she had kept on looking at him.

In a few minutes she had got up and got a book out of the other room. “See
here,” she said, turning over the cover, “this belonged to my great grandmamma. I
wouldn’t part with it for nothing on earth.” She ran her finger under some brown
writing on a spotted page. “Emma Stevens Oakley, 1832,” she said. “Ain’t that
something  to  have? And  every  word  of  it  the  gospel  truth.”  She  turned  the  next
page  and  read  him  the  name:  “The  Life  of  Jesus  Christ  for  Readers  Under
Twelve.” Then she read him the book.

It was a small book, pale brown on the outside with gold edges and a smell
like old putty. It was full of pictures, one of the carpenter driving a crowd of pigs
out of a man. They were real pigs, gray and sour-looking, and Mrs. Connin said
Jesus had driven them all out of this one man. When she finished reading, she let
him sit on the floor and look at the pictures again.

Just before they left for the healing, he had managed to get the book inside his
innerlining without her seeing him. Now it made his coat hang down a little farther
on one side than the other. His mind was dreamy and serene as they walked along
and when they turned off the highway onto a long red clay road winding between
banks of honeysuckle, he began to make wild leaps and pull forward on her hand
as if he wanted to dash off and snatch the sun which was rolling away ahead of
them now.

They walked on the dirt road for a while and then they crossed a field stippled
with  purple  weeds  and  entered  the  shadows  of  a  wood  where  the  ground  was
covered  with  thick  pine  needles.  He  had  never  been  in  woods  before  and  he
walked  carefully,  looking  from  side  to  side  as  if  he  were  entering  a  strange
country. They moved along a bridle path that twisted downhill through crackling
red  leaves,  and  once,  catching  at  a  branch  to  keep  himself  from  slipping,  he
looked into two frozen green-gold eyes enclosed in the darkness of a tree hole. At
the bottom of the hill, the woods opened suddenly onto a pasture dotted here and
there  with  black  and  white  cows  and  sloping  down,  tier  after  tier,  to  a  broad
orange stream where the reflection of the sun was set like a diamond.

There were people standing on the near bank in a group, singing. Long tables
were  set  up  behind  them  and  a  few  cars  and  trucks  were  parked  in  a  road  that
came up by the river. They crossed the pasture, hurrying, because Mrs. Connin,
using her hand for a shed over her eyes, saw the preacher already standing out in
the water. She dropped her basket on one of the tables and pushed the three boys
in front of her into the knot of people so that they wouldn’t linger by the food. She
kept Bevel by the hand and eased her way up to the front.

The  preacher  was  standing  about  ten  feet  out  in  the  stream  where  the  water
came up to his knees. He was a tall youth in khaki trousers that he had rolled up
higher than the water. He had on a blue shirt and a red scarf around his neck but no
hat and his light-colored hair was cut in sideburns that curved into the hollows of
his cheeks. His face was all bone and red light reflected from the river. He looked
as  if  he  might  have  been  nineteen  years  old.  He  was  singing  in  a  high  twangy
voice, above the singing on the bank, and he kept his hands behind him and his
head tilted back.

He ended the hymn on a high note and stood silent, looking down at the water
and shifting his feet in it. Then he looked up at the people on the bank. They stood
close together, waiting; their faces were solemn but expectant and every eye was
on him. He shifted his feet again.

“Maybe I know why you come,” he said in the twangy voice, “maybe I don’t.
“If you ain’t come for Jesus, you ain’t come for me. If you just come to see can
you leave your pain in the river, you ain’t come for Jesus. You can’t leave your
pain  in  the  river,”  he  said.  “I  never  told  nobody  that.”  He  stopped  and  looked
down at his knees.

“I seen you cure a woman oncet!” a sudden high voice shouted from the hump
of people. “Seen that woman git up and walk out straight where she had limped
in!”

The preacher lifted one foot and then the other. He seemed almost but not quite

to smile. “You might as well go home if that’s what you come for,” he said.

Then he lifted his head and arms and shouted, “Listen to what I got to say, you
people! There ain’t but one river and that’s the River of Life, made out of Jesus’
Blood. That’s the river you have to lay your pain in, in the River of Faith, in the

River  of  Life,  in  the  River  of  Love,  in  the  rich  red  river  of  Jesus’  Blood,  you
people!”

His voice grew soft and musical. “All the rivers come from that one River and
go back to it like it was the ocean sea and if you believe, you can lay your pain in
that River and get rid of it because that’s the River that was made to carry sin. It’s
a River full of pain itself, pain itself, moving toward the Kingdom of Christ, to be
washed away, slow, you people, slow as this here old red water river round my
feet.

“Listen,” he sang, “I read in Mark about an unclean man, I read in Luke about a
blind man, I read in John about a dead man! Oh you people hear! The same blood
that makes this River red, made that leper clean, made that blind man stare, made
that dead man leap! You people with trouble,” he cried, “lay it in that River of
Blood, lay it in that River of Pain, and watch it move away toward the Kingdom
of Christ.”

While he preached, Bevel’s eyes followed drowsily the slow circles of two
silent birds revolving high in the air. Across the river there was a low red and
gold grove of sassafras with hills of dark blue trees behind it and an occasional
pine jutting over the skyline. Behind, in the distance, the city rose like a cluster of
warts  on  the  side  of  the  mountain.  The  birds  revolved  downward  and  dropped
lightly  in  the  top  of  the  highest  pine  and  sat  hunch-shouldered  as  if  they  were
supporting the sky.

“If  it’s  this  River  of  Life  you  want  to  lay  your  pain  in,  then  come  up,”  the
preacher said, “and lay your sorrow here. But don’t be thinking this is the last of it
because this old red river don’t end here. This old red suffering stream goes on,
you people, slow to the Kingdom of Christ. This old red river is good to Baptize
in, good to lay your faith in, good to lay your pain in, but it ain’t this muddy water
here  that  saves  you.  I  been  all  up  and  down  this  river  this  week,”  he  said.
“Tuesday I was in Fortune Lake, next day in Ideal, Friday me and my wife drove
to Lulawillow to see a sick man there. Them people didn’t see no healing,” he
said and his face burned redder for a second. “I never said they would.”

While he was talking a fluttering figure had begun to move forward with a kind
of butterfly movement—an old woman with flapping arms whose head wobbled

as if it might fall off any second. She managed to lower herself at the edge of the
bank and let her arms churn in the water. Then she bent farther and pushed her face
down  in  it  and  raised  herself  up  finally,  streaming  wet;  and  still  flapping,  she
turned a time or two in a blind circle until someone reached out and pulled her
back into the group.

“She’s been that way for thirteen years,” a rough voice shouted. “Pass the hat
and give this kid his money. That’s what he’s here for.” The shout, directed out to
the boy in the river, came from a huge old man who sat like a humped stone on the
bumper of a long ancient gray automobile. He had on a gray hat that was turned
down  over  one  ear  and  up  over  the  other  to  expose  a  purple  bulge  on  his  left
temple.  He  sat  bent  forward  with  his  hands  hanging  between  his  knees  and  his
small eyes half closed.

Bevel stared at him once and then moved into the folds of Mrs. Connin’s coat

and hid himself.

The  boy  in  the  river  glanced  at  the  old  man  quickly  and  raised  his  fist.

“Believe Jesus or the devil!” he cried. “Testify to one or the other!”

“I know from my own self-experience,” a woman’s mysterious voice called
from the knot of people, “I know from it that this preacher can heal. My eyes have
been opened! I testify to Jesus!”

The preacher lifted his arms quickly and began to repeat all that he had said
before  about  the  River  and  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  and  the  old  man  sat  on  the
bumper, fixing him with a narrow squint. From time to time Bevel stared at him
again from around Mrs. Connin.

A man in overalls and a brown coat leaned forward and dipped his hand in the
water quickly and shook it and leaned back, and a woman held a baby over the
edge of the bank and splashed its feet with water. One man moved a little distance
away  and  sat  down  on  the  bank  and  took  off  his  shoes  and  waded  out  into  the
stream; he stood there for a few minutes with his face tilted as far back as it would
go, then he waded back and put on his shoes. All this time, the preacher sang and
did not appear to watch what went on.

As soon as he stopped singing, Mrs. Connin lifted Bevel up and said, “Listen
here, preacher, I got a boy from town today that I’m keeping. His mamma’s sick

and he wants you to pray for her. And this is a coincident—his name is Bevel!
Bevel,” she said, turning to look at the people behind her, “same as his. Ain’t that
a coincident, though?”

There were some murmurs and Bevel turned and grinned over her shoulder at

the faces looking at him. “Bevel,” he said in a loud jaunty voice.

“Listen,” Mrs. Connin said, “have you ever been Baptized, Bevel?”
He only grinned.
“I  suspect  he  ain’t  ever  been  Baptized,”  Mrs.  Connin  said,  raising  her

eyebrows at the preacher.

“Swang  him  over  here,”  the  preacher  said  and  took  a  stride  forward  and

caught him.

He  held  him  in  the  crook  of  his  arm  and  looked  at  the  grinning  face.  Bevel
rolled  his  eyes  in  a  comical  way  and  thrust  his  face  forward,  close  to  the
preacher’s. “My name is Bevvvuuuuul,” he said in a loud deep voice and let the
tip of his tongue slide across his mouth.

The preacher didn’t smile. His bony face was rigid and his narrow gray eyes
reflected the almost colorless sky. There was a loud laugh from the old man sitting
on the car bumper and Bevel grasped the back of the preacher’s collar and held it
tightly. The grin had already disappeared from his face. He had the sudden feeling
that  this  was  not  a  joke.  Where  he  lived  everything  was  a  joke.  From  the
preacher’s face, he knew immediately that nothing the preacher said or did was a
joke. “My mother named me that,” he said quickly.

“Have you ever been Baptized?” the preacher asked.
“What’s that?” he murmured.
“If I Baptize you,” the preacher said, “you’ll be able to go to the Kingdom of
Christ. You’ll be washed in the river of suffering, son, and you’ll go by the deep
river of life. Do you want that?”

“Yes,” the child said, and thought, I won’t go back to the apartment then, I’ll

go under the river.

“You  won’t  be  the  same  again,”  the  preacher  said.  “You’ll  count.”  Then  he
turned  his  face  to  the  people  and  began  to  preach  and  Bevel  looked  over  his
shoulder  at  the  pieces  of  the  white  sun  scattered  in  the  river.  Suddenly  the

preacher  said,  “All  right,  I’m  going  to  Baptize  you  now,”  and  without  more
warning, he tightened his hold and swung him upside down and plunged his head
into the water. He held him under while he said the words of Baptism and then he
jerked him up again and looked sternly at the gasping child. Bevel’s eyes were
dark  and  dilated.  “You  count  now,”  the  preacher  said.  “You  didn’t  even  count
before.”

The little boy was too shocked to cry. He spit out the muddy water and rubbed

his wet sleeve into his eyes and over his face.

“Don’t forget his mamma,” Mrs. Connin called. “He wants you to pray for his

mamma. She’s sick.”

“Lord,” the preacher said, “we pray for somebody in affliction who isn’t here

to testify. Is your mother sick in the hospital?” he asked. “Is she in pain?”

The child stared at him. “She hasn’t got up yet,” he said in a high dazed voice.
“She has a hangover.” The air was so quiet he could hear the broken pieces of the
sun knocking the water.

The preacher looked angry and startled. The red drained out of his face and the
sky appeared to darken in his eyes. There was a loud guffaw from the bank and
Mr. Paradise shouted, “Haw! Cure the afflicted woman with the hangover!” and
began to beat his knee with his fist.

*   *   *

“He’s  had  a  long  day,”  Mrs.  Connin  said,  standing  with  him  in  the  door  of  the
apartment  and  looking  sharply  into  the  room  where  the  party  was  going  on.  “I
reckon  it’s  past  his  regular  bedtime.”  One  of  Bevel’s  eyes  was  closed  and  the
other half closed; his nose was running and he kept his mouth open and breathed
through it. The damp plaid coat dragged down on one side.

That  would  be  her,  Mrs.  Connin  decided,  in  the  black  britches—long  black
satin  britches  and  barefoot  sandals  and  red  toenails.  She  was  lying  on  half  the
sofa,  with  her  knees  crossed  in  the  air  and  her  head  propped  on  the  arm.  She
didn’t get up.

“Hello Harry,” she said. “Did you have a big day?” She had a long pale face,

smooth and blank, and straight sweet-potato-colored hair, pulled back.

The father went off to get the money. There were two other couples. One of the
men,  blond  with  little  violet-blue  eyes,  leaned  out  of  his  chair  and  said,  “Well
Harry, old man, have a big day?”

“His name ain’t Harry. It’s Bevel,” Mrs. Connin said.
“His  name  is  Harry,” she  said  from  the  sofa.  “Whoever  heard  of  anybody

named Bevel?”

The little boy had seemed to be going to sleep on his feet, his head drooping
farther and farther forward; he pulled it back suddenly and opened one eye; the
other was stuck.

“He told me this morning his name was Bevel,” Mrs. Connin said in a shocked
voice. “The same as our preacher. We been all day at a preaching and healing at
the river. He said his name was Bevel, the same as the preacher’s. That’s what he
told me.”

“Bevel!” his mother said. “My God! what a name.”
“This  preacher  is  name  Bevel  and  there’s  no  better  preacher  around,”  Mrs.
Connin  said.  “And  furthermore,”  she  added  in  a  defiant  tone,  “he  Baptized  this
child this morning!”

His mother sat straight up. “Well the nerve!” she muttered.
“Furthermore,” Mrs. Connin said, “he’s a healer and he prayed for you to be

healed.”

“Healed!” she almost shouted. “Healed of what for Christ’s sake?”
“Of your affliction,” Mrs. Connin said icily.
The  father  had  returned  with  the  money  and  was  standing  near  Mrs.  Connin
waiting to give it to her. His eyes were lined with red threads. “Go on, go on,” he
said,  “I  want  to  hear  more  about  her  affliction.  The  exact  nature  of  it  has
escaped…”  He  waved  the  bill  and  his  voice  trailed  off.  “Healing  by  prayer  is
mighty inexpensive,” he murmured.

Mrs.  Connin  stood  a  second,  staring  into  the  room,  with  a  skeleton’s
appearance of seeing everything. Then, without taking the money, she turned and
shut the door behind her. The father swung around, smiling vaguely, and shrugged.
The rest of them were looking at Harry. The little boy began to shamble toward
the bedroom.

“Come  here,  Harry,”  his  mother  said.  He  automatically  shifted  his  direction
toward her without opening his eyes any farther. “Tell  me what happened today,”
she said when he reached her. She began to pull off his coat.

“I don’t know,” he muttered.
“Yes  you  do  know,”  she  said,  feeling  the  coat  heavier  on  one  side.  She
unzipped the innerlining and caught the book and a dirty handkerchief as they fell
out. “Where did you get these?”

“I don’t know,” he said and grabbed for them. “They’re mine. She gave them

to me.”

She threw the handkerchief down and held the book too high for him to reach
and  began  to  read  it,  her  face  after  a  second  assuming  an  exaggerated  comical
expression.  The  others  moved  around  and  looked  at  it  over  her  shoulder.  “My
God,” somebody said.

One of the men peered at it sharply from behind a thick pair of glasses. “That’s
valuable,” he said. “That’s a collector’s item,” and he took it away from the rest
of them and retired to another chair.

“Don’t let George go off with that,” his girl said.
“I tell you it’s valuable,” George said. “1832.”
Bevel shifted his direction again toward the room where he slept. He shut the
door behind him and moved slowly in the darkness to the bed and sat down and
took off his shoes and got under the cover. After a minute a shaft of light let in the
tall silhouette of his mother. She tiptoed lightly cross the room and sat down on
the  edge  of  his  bed.  “What  did  that  dolt  of  a  preacher  say  about  me?”  she
whispered. “What lies have you been telling today, honey?”

He shut his eye and heard her voice from a long way away, as if he were under
the river and she on top of it. She shook his shoulder. “Harry,” she said, leaning
down and putting her mouth to his ear, “tell me what he said.” She pulled him into
a sitting position and he felt as if he had been drawn up from under the river. “Tell
me,” she whispered and her bitter breath covered his face.

He  saw  the  pale  oval  close  to  him  in  the  dark.  “He  said  I’m  not  the  same

now,” he muttered. “I count.”

After a second, she lowered him by his shirt front onto the pillow. She hung

over him an instant and brushed her lips against his forehead. Then she got up and
moved away, swaying her hips lightly through the shaft of light.

*   *   *

He didn’t wake up early but the apartment was still dark and close when he did.
For a while he lay there, picking his nose and eyes. Then he sat up in bed and
looked out the window. The sun came in palely, stained gray by the glass. Across
the street at the Empire Hotel, a colored cleaning woman was looking down from
an upper window, resting her face on her folded arms. He got up and put on his
shoes and went to the bathroom and then into the front room. He ate two crackers
spread  with  anchovy  paste,  that  he  found  on  the  coffee  table,  and  drank  some
ginger ale left in a bottle and looked around for his book but it was not there.

The apartment was silent except for the faint humming of the refrigerator. He
went into the kitchen and found some raisin bread heels and spread a half jar of
peanut  butter  between  them  and  climbed  up  on  the  tall  kitchen  stool  and  sat
chewing  the  sandwich  slowly,  wiping  his  nose  every  now  and  then  on  his
shoulder.  When  he  finished  he  found  some  chocolate  milk  and  drank  that.  He
would rather have had the ginger ale he saw but they left the bottle openers where
he couldn’t reach them. He studied what was left in the refrigerator for a while—
some  shriveled  vegetables  that  she  had  forgot  were  there  and  a  lot  of  brown
oranges  that  she  bought  and  didn’t  squeeze;  there  were  three  or  four  kinds  of
cheese and something fishy in a paper bag; the rest was a pork bone. He left the
refrigerator door open and wandered back into the dark living room and sat down
on the sofa.

He decided they would be out cold until one o’clock and that they would all
have to go to a restaurant for lunch. He wasn’t high enough for the table yet and the
waiter would bring a highchair and he was too big for a highchair. He sat in the
middle of the sofa, kicking it with his heels. Then he got up and wandered around
the room, looking into the ashtrays at the butts as if this might be a habit. In his
own room he had picture books and blocks but they were for the most part torn up;
he found the way to get new ones was to tear up the ones he had. There was very
little to do at any time but eat; however, he was not a fat boy.

He  decided  he  would  empty  a  few  of  the  ashtrays  on  the  floor.  If  he  only
emptied a few, she would think they had fallen. He emptied two, rubbing the ashes
carefully into the rug with his finger. Then he lay on the floor for a while, studying
his feet which he held up in the air. His shoes were still damp and he began to
think about the river.

Very  slowly,  his  expression  changed  as  if  he  were  gradually  seeing  appear
what he didn’t know he’d been looking for. Then all of a sudden he knew what he
wanted to do.

He  got  up  and  tiptoed  into  their  bedroom  and  stood  in  the  dim  light  there,
looking for her pocketbook. His glance passed her long pale arm hanging off the
edge of the bed down to the floor, and across the white mound his father made,
and past the crowded bureau, until it rested on the pocketbook hung on the back of
a chair. He took a car-token out of it and half a package of Life Savers. Then he
left  the  apartment  and  caught  the  car  at  the  corner.  He  hadn’t  taken  a  suitcase
because there was nothing from there he wanted to keep.

He got off the car at the end of the line and started down the road he and Mrs.
Connin had taken the day before. He knew there wouldn’t be anybody at her house
because the three boys and the girl went to school and Mrs. Connin had told him
she went out to clean. He passed her yard and walked on the way they had gone to
the river. The paper brick houses were far apart and after a while the dirt place to
walk on ended and he had to walk on the edge of the highway. The sun was pale
yellow and high and hot.

He passed a shack with an orange gas pump in front of it but he didn’t see the
old man looking out at nothing in particular from the doorway. Mr. Paradise was
having an orange drink. He finished it slowly, squinting over the bottle at the small
plaid-coated figure disappearing down the road: Then he set the empty bottle on a
bench and, still squinting, wiped his sleeve over his mouth. He went in the shack
and  picked  out  a  peppermint  stick,  a  foot  long  and  two  inches  thick,  from  the
candy shelf, and stuck it in his hip pocket. Then he got in his car and drove slowly
down the highway after the boy.

By the time Bevel came to the field speckled with purple weeds, he was dusty
and sweating and he crossed it at a trot to get into the woods as fast as he could.

Once inside, he wandered from tree to tree, trying to find the path they had taken
yesterday. Finally he found a line worn in the pine needles and followed it until he
saw the steep trail twisting down through the trees.

Mr.  Paradise  had  left  his  automobile  back  some  way  on  the  road  and  had
walked to the place where he was accustomed to sit almost every day, holding an
unbaited fishline in the water while he stared at the river passing in front of him.
Anyone  looking  at  him  from  a  distance  would  have  seen  an  old  boulder  half
hidden in the bushes.

Bevel didn’t see him at all. He only saw the river, shimmering reddish yellow,
and bounded into it with his shoes and his coat on and took a gulp. He swallowed
some  and  spit  the  rest  out  and  then  he  stood  there  in  water  up  to  his  chest  and
looked around him. The sky was a clear pale blue, all in one piece—except for
the  hole  the  sun  made—and  fringed  around  the  bottom  with  treetops.  His  coat
floated to the surface and surrounded him like a strange gay lily pad and he stood
grinning in the sun. He intended not to fool with preachers any more but to Baptize
himself and to keep on going this time until he found the Kingdom of Christ in the
river. He didn’t mean to waste any more time. He put his head under the water at
once and pushed forward.

In  a  second  he  began  to  gasp  and  sputter  and  his  head  reappeared  on  the
surface; he started under again and the same thing happened. The river wouldn’t
have  him.  He  tried  again  and  came  up,  choking.  This  was  the  way  it  had  been
when the preacher held him under—he had had to fight with something that pushed
him back in the face. He stopped and thought suddenly: it’s another joke, it’s just
another joke! He thought how far he had come for nothing and he began to hit and
splash and kick the filthy river. His feet were already treading on nothing. He gave
one low cry of pain and indignation. Then he heard a shout and turned his head
and saw something like a giant pig bounding after him, shaking a red and white
club and shouting. He plunged under once and this time, the waiting current caught
him  like  a  long  gentle  hand  and  pulled  him  swiftly  forward  and  down.  For  an
instant  he  was  overcome  with  surprise:  then  since  he  was  moving  quickly  and
knew that he was getting somewhere, all his fury and fear left him.

Mr. Paradise’s head appeared from time to time on the surface of the water.

Finally, far downstream, the old man rose like some ancient water monster and
stood empty-handed, staring with his dull eyes as far down the river line as he
could see.

A Circle in the Fire

SOMETIMES the last line of trees was a solid gray-blue wall a little darker than the
sky but this afternoon it was almost black and behind it the sky was a livid glaring
white. “You know that woman that had that baby in that iron lung?” Mrs. Pritchard
said.  She  and  the  child’s  mother  were  underneath  the  window  the  child  was
looking  down  from.  Mrs.  Pritchard  was  leaning  against  the  chimney,  her  arms
folded on a shelf of stomach, one foot crossed and the toe pointed into the ground.
She was a large woman with a small pointed face and steady ferreting eyes. Mrs.
Cope was the opposite, very small and trim, with a large round face and black
eyes that seemed to be enlarging all the time behind her glasses as if  she  were
continually  being  astonished.  She  was  squatting  down  pulling  grass  out  of  the
border  beds  around  the  house.  Both  women  had  on  sunhats  that  had  once  been
identical but now Mrs. Pritchard’s was faded and out of shape while Mrs. Cope’s
was still stiff and bright green.
“I read about her,” she said.
“She was a Pritchard that married a Brookins and so’s kin to me—about my

seventh or eighth cousin by marriage.”

“Well, well,” Mrs. Cope muttered and threw a large clump of nut grass behind
her. She worked at the weeds and nut grass as if they were an evil sent directly by
the devil to destroy the place.

“Beinst  she  was  kin  to  us,  we  gone  to  see  the  body,”  Mrs.  Pritchard  said.

“Seen the little baby too.”

Mrs. Cope didn’t say anything. She was used to these calamitous stories; she
said  they  wore  her  to  a  frazzle.  Mrs.  Pritchard  would  go  thirty  miles  for  the
satisfaction of seeing anybody laid away. Mrs. Cope always changed the subject
to something cheerful but the child had observed that this only put Mrs. Pritchard
in a bad humor.

The child thought the blank sky looked as if it were pushing against the fortress
wall, trying to break through. The trees across the near field were a patchwork of

gray  and  yellow  greens.  Mrs.  Cope  was  always  worrying  about  fires  in  her
woods. When the nights were very windy, she would say to the child, “Oh Lord,
do pray there won’t be any fires, it’s so windy,” and the child would grunt from
behind her book or not answer at all because she heard it so often. In the evenings
in the summer when they sat on the porch, Mrs. Cope would say to the child who
was  reading  fast  to  catch  the  last  light,  “Get  up  and  look  at  the  sunset,  it’s
gorgeous. You ought to get up and look at it,” and the child would scowl and not
answer or glare up once across the lawn and two front pastures to the gray-blue
sentinel line of trees and then begin to read again with no change of expression,
sometimes  muttering  for  meanness,  “It  looks  like  a  fire. You  better  get  up  and
smell around and see if the woods ain’t on fire.”

“She  had  her  arm  around  it  in  the  coffin,”  Mrs.  Pritchard  went  on,  but  her
voice was drowned out by the sound of the tractor that the Negro, Culver, was
driving  up  the  road  from  the  barn.  The  wagon  was  attached  and  another  Negro
was sitting in the back, bouncing, his feet jogging about a foot from the ground.
The one on the tractor drove it past the gate that led into the field on the left.

Mrs.  Cope  turned  her  head  and  saw  that  he  had  not  gone  through  the  gate
because he was too lazy to get off and open it. He was going the long way around
at her expense. “Tell him to stop and come here!” she shouted.

Mrs. Pritchard heaved herself from the chimney and waved her arm in a fierce
circle  but  he  pretended  not  to  hear.  She  stalked  to  the  edge  of  the  lawn  and
screamed, “Get off, I toljer! She wants you!”

He  got  off  and  started  toward  the  chimney,  pushing  his  head  and  shoulders
forward at each step to give the appearance of hurrying. His head was thrust up to
the top in a white cloth hat streaked with different shades of sweat. The brim was
down and hid all but the lower parts of his reddish eyes.

Mrs. Cope was on her knees, pointing the trowel into the ground. “Why aren’t
you  going  through  the  gate  there?”  she  asked  and  waited,  her  eyes  shut  and  her
mouth stretched flat as if she were prepared for any ridiculous answer.

“Got to raise the blade on the mower if we do,” he said and his gaze bore just
to the left of her. Her Negroes were as destructive and impersonal as the nut grass.
Her eyes, as she opened them, looked as if they would keep on enlarging until

they  turned  her  wrongsideout.  “Raise  it,”  she  said  and  pointed  across  the  road
with the trowel.

He moved off.
“It’s nothing to them,” she said. “They don’t have the responsibility. I thank the

Lord all these things don’t come at once. They’d destroy me.”

“Yeah, they would,” Mrs. Pritchard shouted against the sound of the tractor.
He  opened  the  gate  and  raised  the  blade  and  drove  through  and  down  into  the
field; the noise diminished as the wagon disappeared. “I don’t see myself how she
had it in it,” she went on in her normal voice.

Mrs. Cope was bent over, digging fiercely at the nut grass again. “We have a
lot  to  be  thankful  for,”  she  said.  “Every  day  you  should  say  a  prayer  of
thanksgiving. Do you do that?”

“Yes’m,” Mrs. Pritchard said. “See she was in it four months before she even
got thataway. Look like to me if I was in one of them, I would leave off … how
you reckon they…?”

“Every day I say a prayer of thanksgiving,” Mrs. Cope said. “Think of all we
have. Lord,” she said and sighed, “we have everything,” and she looked around at
her rich pastures and hills heavy with timber and shook her head as if it might all
be a burden she was trying to shake off her back.

Mrs.  Pritchard  studied  the  woods.  “All  I  got  is  four  abscess  teeth,”  she

remarked.

“Well, be thankful you don’t have five,” Mrs. Cope snapped and threw back a
clump  of  grass.  “We  might  all  be  destroyed  by  a  hurricane.  I  can  always  find
something to be thankful for.”

Mrs. Pritchard took up a hoe resting against the side of the house and struck
lightly at a weed that had come up between two bricks in the chimney. “I reckon
you can,” she said, her voice a little more nasal than usual with contempt.

“Why, think of all those poor Europeans,” Mrs. Cope went on, “that they put in
boxcars like cattle and rode them to Siberia. Lord,” she said, “we ought to spend
half our time on our knees.”

“I know if I was in an iron lung there would be some things I wouldn’t do,”

Mrs. Pritchard said, scratching her bare ankle with the end of the hoe.

“Even that poor woman had plenty to be thankful for,” Mrs. Cope said.
“She could be thankful she wasn’t dead.”
“Certainly,”  Mrs.  Cope  said,  and  then  she  pointed  the  trowel  up  at  Mrs.
Pritchard  and  said,  “I  have  the  best  kept  place  in  the  county  and  do  you  know
why? Because I work. I’ve had to work to save this place and work to keep it.”
She emphasized each word with the trowel. “I don’t let anything get ahead of me
and I’m not always looking for trouble. I take it as it comes.”
“If it all come at oncet sometime,” Mrs. Pritchard began.
“It doesn’t all come at once,” Mrs. Cope said sharply.
The child could see over to where the dirt road joined the highway. She saw a
pick-up truck stop at the gate and let off three boys who started walking up the
pink dirt road. They walked single file, the middle one bent to the side carrying a
black pig-shaped valise.

“Well, if it ever did,” Mrs. Pritchard said, “it wouldn’t be nothing you could

do but fling up your hands.”

Mrs. Cope didn’t even answer this. Mrs. Pritchard folded her arms and gazed
down the road as if she could easily enough see all these fine hills flattened to
nothing. She saw the three boys who had almost reached the front walk by now.
“Lookit yonder,” she said. “Who you reckon they are?”

Mrs. Cope leaned back and supported herself with one hand behind her and
looked. The three came toward them but as if they were going to walk on through
the side of the house. The one with the suitcase was in front now. Finally about
four feet from her, he stopped and set it down. The three boys looked something
alike except that the middle-sized one wore silver-rimmed spectacles and carried
the suitcase. One of his eyes had a slight cast to it so that his gaze seemed to be
coming  from  two  directions  at  once  as  if  it  had  them  surrounded.  He  had  on  a
sweat shirt with a faded destroyer printed on it but his chest was so hollow that
the destroyer was broken in the middle and seemed on the point of going under.
His hair was stuck to his forehead with sweat. He looked to be about thirteen. All
three boys had white penetrating stares. “I don’t reckon you remember me, Mrs.
Cope,” he said.

“Your face is certainly familiar,” she murmured, scrutinizing him. “Now let’s

see…”

“My daddy used to work here,” he hinted.
“Boyd?” she said. “Your father was Mr. Boyd and you’re J.C.?”
“Nome, I’m Powell, the secont one, only I’ve growed some since then and my

daddy he’s daid now. Done died.”

“Dead. Well I declare,” Mrs. Cope said as if death were always an unusual

thing. “What was Mr. Boyd’s trouble?”

One of Powell’s eyes seemed to be making a circle of the place, examining the
house and the white water tower behind it and the chicken houses and the pastures
that rolled away on either side until they met the first line of woods. The other eye
looked at her. “Died in Florda,” he said and began kicking the valise.

“Well I declare,” she murmured. After a second she said, “And how is your

mother?”

“Mah’d  again.”  He  kept  watching  his  foot  kick  the  suitcase.  The  other  two

boys stared at her impatiently.

“And where do you all live now?” she asked.
“Atlanta,” he said. “You know, out to one of them developments.”
“Well I see,” she said, “I see.” After a second she said it again. Finally she

asked, “And who are these other boys?” and smiled at them.

“Garfield  Smith  him,  and  W.  T.  Harper  him,”  he  said,  nodding  his  head

backward first in the direction of the large boy and then the small one.

“How  do  you  boys  do?”  Mrs.  Cope  said.  “This  is  Mrs.  Pritchard.  Mr.  and

Mrs. Pritchard work here now.”

They ignored Mrs. Pritchard who watched them with steady beady eyes. The

three seemed to hang there, waiting, watching Mrs. Cope.

“Well well,” she said, glancing at the suitcase, “it’s nice of you to stop and

see me. I think that was real sweet of you.”

Powell’s stare seemed to pinch her like a pair of tongs. “Come back to see

how you was doing,” he said hoarsely.

“Listen here,” the smallest boy said, “all the time we been knowing him he’s
been  telling  us  about  this  here  place.  Said  it  was  everything  here.  Said  it  was
horses  here.  Said  he  had  the  best  time  of  his  entire  life  right  here  on  this  here

place. Talks about it all the time.”

“Never shuts his trap about this place,” the big boy grunted, drawing his arm

across his nose as if to muffle his words.

“Always talking about them horses he rid here,” the small one continued, “and

said he would let us ride them too. Said it was one name Gene.”

Mrs. Cope was always afraid someone would get hurt on her place and sue
her for everything she had. “They aren’t shod,” she said quickly. “There was one
named  Gene  but  he’s  dead  now  but  I’m  afraid  you  boys  can’t  ride  the  horses
because you might get hurt. They’re dangerous,” she said, speaking very fast.

The  large  boy  sat  down  on  the  ground  with  a  noise  of  disgust  and  began  to
finger rocks out of his tennis shoe. The small one darted looks here and there and
Powell fixed her with his stare and didn’t say anything.

After a minute the little boy said, “Say, lady, you know what he said one time?

He said when he died he wanted to come here!”

For a second Mrs. Cope looked blank; then she blushed; then a peculiar look
of pain came over her face as she realized that these children were hungry. They
were staring because they were hungry! She almost gasped in their faces and then
she asked them quickly if they would have something to eat. They said they would
but their expressions, composed and unsatisfied, didn’t lighten any. They looked
as if they were used to being hungry and it was no business of hers.

The  child  upstairs  had  grown  red  in  the  face  with  excitement.  She  was
kneeling down by the window so that only her eyes and forehead showed over the
sill. Mrs. Cope told the boys to come around on the other side of the house where
the lawn chairs were and she led the way and Mrs. Pritchard followed. The child
moved from the right bedroom across the hall and over into the left bedroom and
looked down on the other side of the house where there were three white lawn
chairs and red hammock strung between two hazelnut trees. She was a pale fat girl
of twelve with a frowning squint and a large mouth full of silver bands. She knelt
down at the window.

The three boys came around the corner of the house and the large one threw
himself into the hammock and lit a stub of cigarette. The small boy tumbled down
on the grass next to the black suitcase and rested his head on it and Powell sat

down on the edge of one of the chairs and looked as if he were trying to enclose
the  whole  place  in  one  encircling  stare.  The  child  heard  her  mother  and  Mrs.
Pritchard in a muted conference in the kitchen. She got up and went out into  the
hall and leaned over the banisters.

Mrs. Cope’s and Mrs. Pritchard’s legs were facing each other in the back hall.

“Those poor children are hungry,” Mrs. Cope said in a dead voice.

“You seen that suitcase?” Mrs. Pritchard asked. “What if they intend to spend

the night with you?”

Mrs. Cope gave a slight shriek. “I can’t have three boys in here with only me

and Sally Virginia,” she said. “I’m sure they’ll go when I feed them.”

“I only know they got a suitcase,” Mrs. Pritchard said.
The child hurried back to the window. The large boy was stretched out in the
hammock  with  his  wrists  crossed  under  his  head  and  the  cigarette  stub  in  the
center of his mouth. He spit it out in an arc just as Mrs. Cope came around the
corner of the house with a plate of crackers. She stopped instantly as if a snake
had been slung in her path. “Ashfield!” she said. “Please pick that up. I’m afraid
of fires.”

“Gawfield!” the little boy shouted indignantly. “Gawfield!”
The  large  boy  raised  himself  without  a  word  and  lumbered  for  the  butt.  He
picked it up and put it in his pocket and stood with his back to her, examining a
tattooed heart on his forearm. Mrs. Pritchard came up holding three Coca-Colas
by the necks in one hand and gave one to each of them.

“I  remember  everything  about  this  place,”  Powell  said,  looking  down  the

opening of his bottle.

“Where did you all go when you left here?” Mrs. Cope asked and put the plate

of crackers on the arm of his chair.

He  looked  at  it  but  didn’t  take  one.  He  said,  “I  remember  it  was  one  name
Gene  and  it  was  one  name  George.  We  gone  to  Florda  and  my  daddy  he,  you
know, died, and then we gone to my sister’s and then my mother she, you know,
mah’d, and we been there ever since.”

“There are some crackers,” Mrs. Cope said and sat down in the chair across

from him.

“He  don’t  like  it  in  Atlanta,”  the  little  boy  said,  sitting  up  and  reaching
indifferently for a cracker. “He ain’t ever satisfied with where he’s at except this
place here. Lemme tell you what he’ll do, lady. We’ll be playing ball, see, on this
here place in this development we got to play ball on, see, and he’ll quit playing
and say, ‘Goddam, it was a horse down there name Gene and if I had him here I’d
bust this concrete to hell riding him!’”

“I’m  sure  Powell  doesn’t  use  words  like  that,  do  you,  Powell?”  Mrs.  Cope

said.

“No, mam,” Powell said. His head was turned completely to the side as if he

were listening for the horses in the field.

“I don’t like them kind of crackers,” the little boy said and returned his to the

plate and got up.

Mrs. Cope shifted in her chair. “So you boys live in one of those nice new

developments,” she said.

“The only way you can tell your own is by smell,” the small boy volunteered.
“They’re four stories high and there’s ten of them, one behind the other. Let’s go
see them horses,” he said.

Powell  turned  his  pinching  look  on  Mrs.  Cope.  “We  thought  we  would  just
spend the night in your barn,” he said. “My uncle brought us this far on his pick-up
truck and he’s going to stop for us again in the morning.”

There  was  a  moment  in  which  she  didn’t  say  a  thing  and  the  child  in  the

window thought: she’s going to fly out of that chair and hit the tree.

“Well, I’m afraid you can’t do that,” she said, getting up suddenly. “The barn’s

full of hay and I’m afraid of fire from your cigarettes.”

“We won’t smoke,” he said.
“I’m afraid you can’t spend the night in there just the same,” she repeated as if

she were talking politely to a gangster.

“Well, we can camp out in the woods then,” the little boy said. “We brought

our own blankets anyways. That’s what we got in theter suitcase. Come on.”

“In the woods!” she said. “Oh no! The woods are very dry now, I can’t have
people smoking in my woods. You’ll have to camp out in the field, in this field
here next to the house, where there aren’t any trees.”

“Where she can keep her eye on you,” the child said under her breath.
“Her woods,” the large boy muttered and got out of the hammock.
“We’ll  sleep  in  the  field,”  Powell  said  but  not  particularly  as  if  he  were
talking to her. “This afternoon I’m going to show them about this place.” The other
two were already walking away and he got up and bounded after them and the two
women sat with the black suitcase between them.

“Not no thank you, not no nothing,” Mrs. Pritchard remarked.
“They only played with what we gave them to eat,” Mrs. Cope said in a hurt

voice.

Mrs. Pritchard suggested that they might not like soft drinks.
“They certainly looked hungry,” Mrs. Cope said.
About sunset they appeared out of the woods, dirty and sweating, and came to
the  back  porch  and  asked  for  water.  They  did  not  ask  for  food  but  Mrs.  Cope
could tell that they wanted it. “All I have is some cold guinea,” she said. “Would
you boys like some guinea and some sandwiches?”

“I  wouldn’t  eat  nothing  bald-headed  like  a  guinea,”  the  little  boy  said.  “I

would eat a chicken or a turkey but not no guinea.”

“Dog wouldn’t eat one of them,” the large boy said. He had taken off his shirt
and stuck it in the back of his trousers like a tail. Mrs. Cope carefully avoided
looking at him. The little boy had a cut on his arm.

“You boys haven’t been riding the horses when I asked you not to, have you?”
she asked suspiciously and they all said, “No mam!” at once in loud enthusiastic
voices like the Amens are said in country churches.

She went into the house and made them sandwiches and, while she did it, she
held a conversation with them from inside the kitchen, asking what their fathers
did and how many brothers and sisters they had and where they went to school.
They answered in short explosive sentences, pushing each other’s shoulders and
doubling up with laughter as if the questions had meanings she didn’t know about.
“And do you have men teachers or lady teachers at your school?” she asked.

“Some of both and some you can’t tell which,” the big boy hooted.
“And does your mother work, Powell?” she asked quickly.
“She  ast  you  does  your  mother  work!”  the  little  boy  yelled.  “His  mind’s

affected by them horses he only looked at,” he said. “His mother she works at a
factory and leaves him to mind the rest of them only he don’t mind  them  much.
Lemme tell you, lady, one time he locked his little brother in a box and set it on
fire.”

“I’m sure Powell wouldn’t do a thing like that,” she said, coming out with the
plate of sandwiches and setting it down on the step. They emptied the plate at once
and  she  picked  it  up  and  stood  holding  it,  looking  at  the  sun  which  was  going
down in front of them, almost on top of the tree line. It was swollen and flame-
colored and hung in a net of ragged cloud as if it might burn through any second
and fall into the woods. From the upstairs window the child saw her shiver and
catch  both  arms  to  her  sides.  “We  have  so  much  to  be  thankful  for,”  she  said
suddenly in a mournful marveling tone. “Do you boys thank God every night for all
He’s done for you? Do you thank Him for everything?”

This put an instant hush over them. They bit into the sandwiches as if they had

lost all taste for food.

“Do you?” she persisted.
They were as silent as thieves hiding. They chewed without a sound.
“Well, I know I do,” she said at length and turned and went back to the house
and the child watched their shoulders drop. The large one stretched his legs out as
if he were releasing himself from a trap. The sun burned so fast that it seemed to
be trying to set everything in sight on fire. The white water tower was glazed pink
and  the  grass  was  an  unnatural  green  as  if  it  were  turning  to  glass.  The  child
suddenly  stuck  her  head  far  out  the  window  and  said,  “Ugggghhrhh,”  in  a  loud
voice, crossing her eyes and hanging her tongue out as far as possible as if she
were going to vomit.

The  large  boy  looked  up  and  stared  at  her.  “Jesus,”  he  growled,  “another

woman.”

She dropped back from the window and stood with her back against the wall,
squinting fiercely as if she had been slapped in the face and couldn’t see who had
done it. As soon as they left the steps, she came down into the kitchen where Mrs.
Cope was washing the dishes. “If I had that big boy down I’d beat the daylight out
of him,” she said.

“You keep away from those boys,” Mrs. Cope said, turning sharply. “Ladies
don’t beat the daylight out of people. You keep out of their way. They’ll be gone
in the morning.”

But in the morning they were not gone.
When she went out on the porch after breakfast, they were standing around the
back door, kicking the steps. They were smelling the bacon she had had for her
breakfast. “Why boys!” she said. “I thought you were going to meet your uncle.”
They  had  the  same  look  of  hardened  hunger  that  had  pained  her  yesterday  but
today she felt faintly provoked.

The  big  boy  turned  his  back  at  once  and  the  small  one  squatted  down  and

began to scratch in the sand. “We ain’t, though,” Powell said.

The big boy turned his head just enough to take in a small section of her and

said, “We ain’t bothering nothing of yours.”

He  couldn’t  see  the  way  her  eyes  enlarged  but  he  could  take  note  of  the
significant silence. After a minute she said in an altered voice, “Would you boys
care for some breakfast?”

“We got plenty of our own food,” the big boy said. “We don’t want nothing of

yours.”

She kept her eyes on Powell. His thin white face seemed to confront but not
actually to see her. “You boys know that I’m glad to have you,” she said, “but I
expect you to behave. I expect you to act like gentlemen.”

They stood there, each looking in a different direction, as if they were waiting
for her to leave. “After all,” she said in a suddenly high voice, “this is my place.”
The  big  boy  made  some  ambiguous  noise  and  they  turned  and  walked  off
toward  the  barn,  leaving  her  there  with  a  shocked  look  as  if  she  had  had  a
searchlight thrown on her in the middle of the night.

In a little while Mrs. Pritchard came over and stood in the kitchen door with
her cheek  against  the  edge  of  it.  “I  reckon  you  know  they  rode  them  horses  all
yesterday  afternoon,”  she  said.  “Stole  a  bridle  out  the  saddleroom  and  rode
bareback because Hollis seen them. He runnum out the barn at nine o’clock last
night and then he runnum out the milk room this morning and there was milk all
over their mouths like they had been drinking out the cans.”

“I  cannot  have  this,”  Mrs  Cope  said  and  stood  at  the  sink  with  both  fists
knotted  at  her  sides.  “I  cannot  have  this,”  and  her  expression  was  the  same  as
when she tore at the nut grass.

“There ain’t a thing you can do about it,” Mrs. Pritchard said. “What I expect
is you’ll have them for a week or so until school begins. They just figure to have
themselves a vacation in the country and there ain’t nothing you can do but fold
your hands.”

“I  do  not  fold  my  hands,”  Mrs.  Cope  said.  “Tell  Mr.  Pritchard  to  put  the

horses up in the stalls.”

“He’s already did that. You take a boy thirteen year old is equal in meanness
to a man twict his age. It’s no telling what he’ll think up to do. You never know
where he’ll strike next. This morning Hollis seen them behind the bull pen and that
big one ast if it wasn’t some place they could wash at and Hollis said no it wasn’t
and that you didn’t want no boys dropping cigarette butts in your woods and he
said, ‘She don’t own them woods,’ and Hollis said, ‘Shes does too,’ and that there
little one he said, ‘Man, Gawd owns them woods and her too,’ and that there one
with  the  glasses  said,  ‘I  reckon  she  owns  the  sky  over  this  place  too,’  and  that
there littlest one says, ‘Owns the sky and can’t no airplane go over here without
she says so,’ and then the big one says, ‘I never seen a place with so many damn
women on it, how do you stand it here?’ and Hollis said he had done had enough
of their big talk by then and he turned and walked off without giving no reply one
way or the other.”

“I’m going out there and tell those boys they can get a ride away from here on
the  milk  truck,”  Mrs.  Cope  said  and  she  went  out  the  back  door,  leaving  Mrs.
Pritchard and the child together in the kitchen.

“Listen,” the child said. “I could handle them quicker than that.”
“Yeah?”  Mrs.  Pritchard  murmured,  giving  her  a  long  leering  look.  “How’d

you handle them?”

The  child  gripped  both  hands  together  and  made  a  contorted  face  as  if  she

were strangling someone.

“They’d handle you,” Mrs. Pritchard said with satisfaction.
The  child  retired  to  the  upstairs  window  to  get  out  of  her  way  and  looked

down where her mother was walking off from the three boys who were squatting
under the water tower, eating something out of a cracker box. She heard her come
in the kitchen door and say, “They say they’ll go on the milk truck, and no wonder
they aren’t hungry—they have that suitcase half full of food.”

“Likely stole every bit of it too,” Mrs. Pritchard said.
When the milk truck came, the three boys were nowhere in sight, but as soon
as it left without them their three faces appeared, looking out of the opening in the
top of the calf barn. “Can you beat this?” Mrs. Cope said, standing at one of the
upstairs windows with her hands at her hips. “It’s not that I wouldn’t be glad to
have them—it’s their attitude.”

“You never like nobody’s attitude,” the child said. “I’ll go tell them they got

five minutes to leave here in.”

“You are not to go anywhere near those boys, do you hear me?” Mrs. Cope

said.

“Why?” the child asked.
“I’m going out there and give them a piece of my mind,” Mrs. Cope said.
The child took over the position in the window and in a few minutes she saw
the  stiff  green  hat  catching  the  glint  of  the  sun  as  her  mother  crossed  the  road
toward the calf barn. The three faces immediately disappeared from the opening,
and in a second the large boy dashed across the lot, followed an instant later by
the other two. Mrs. Pritchard came out and the two women started for the grove of
trees  the  boys  had  vanished  into.  Presently  the  two  sunhats  disappeared  in  the
woods and the three boys came out at the left side of it and ambled across the field
and  into  another  patch  of  woods.  By  the  time  Mrs.  Cope  and  Mrs.  Pritchard
reached  the  field,  it  was  empty  and  there  was  nothing  for  them  to  do  but  come
home again.

Mrs.  Cope  had  not  been  inside  long  before  Mrs.  Pritchard  came  running
toward  the  house,  shouting  something.  “They’ve  let  out  the  bull!”  she  hollered.
“Let out the bull!” And in a second she was followed by the bull himself, ambling,
black and leisurely, with four geese hissing at his heels. He was not mean until
hurried  and  it  took  Mr.  Pritchard  and  the  two  Negroes  a  half-hour  to  ease  him
back to his pen. While the men were engaged in this, the boys let the oil out of the

three tractors and then disappeared again into the woods.

Two blue veins had come out on either side of Mrs. Cope’s forehead and Mrs.
Pritchard observed them with satisfaction. “Like I toljer,” she said, “there ain’t a
thing you can do about it.”

Mrs.  Cope  ate  her  dinner  hastily,  not  conscious  that  she  had  her  sunhat  on.
Every  time  she  heard  a  noise,  she  jumped  up.  Mrs.  Pritchard  came  over
immediately after dinner and said, “Well, you want to know where they are now?”
and smiled in an omniscient rewarded way.

“I  want  to  know  at  once,”  Mrs.  Cope  said,  coming  to  an  almost  military

attention.

“Down  to  the  road,  throwing  rocks  at  your  mailbox,”  Mrs.  Pritchard  said,

leaning comfortably in the door. “Done already about knocked it off its stand.”

“Get in the car,” Mrs. Cope said.
The child got in too and the three of them drove down the road to the gate. The
boys  were  sitting  on  the  embankment  on  the  other  side  of  the  highway,  aiming
rocks across the road at the mailbox. Mrs. Cope stopped the car almost directly
beneath them and looked up out of her window. The three of them stared at her as
if they had never seen her before, the large boy with a sullen glare, the small one
glint-eyed  and  unsmiling,  and  Powell  with  his  two-sided  glassed  gaze  hanging
vacantly over the crippled destroyer on his shirt.

“Powell,” she said, “I’m sure your mother would be ashamed of you,” and she
stopped and waited for this to make its effect. His face seemed to twist slightly but
he continued to look through her at nothing in particular.

“Now I’ve put up with this as long as I can,” she said. “I’ve tried to be nice to

you boys. Haven’t I been nice to you boys?”

They might have been three statues except that the big one, barely opening his

mouth, said, “We’re not even on your side the road, lady.”

“There ain’t a thing you can do about it,” Mrs. Pritchard hissed loudly. The
child was sitting on the back seat close to the side. She had a  furious  outraged
look on her face but she kept her head drawn back from the window so that they
couldn’t see her.

Mrs. Cope spoke slowly, emphasizing every word. “I think I have been very

nice to you boys. I’ve fed you twice. Now I’m going into town and if you’re still
here  when  I  come  back,  I’ll  call  the  sheriff,”  and  with  this,  she  drove  off.  The
child, turning quickly so that she could see out the back window, observed that
they had not moved; they had not even turned their heads.

“You done angered them now,” Mrs. Pritchard said, “and it ain’t any telling

what they’ll do.”

“They’ll be gone when we get back,” Mrs. Cope said.
Mrs. Pritchard could not stand an anticlimax. She required the taste of blood
from time to time to keep her equilibrium. “I known a man oncet that his wife was
poisoned by a child she had adopted out of pure kindness,” she said. When they
returned from town, the boys were not on the embankment and she said, “I would
rather to see them than not to see them. When you see them you know what they’re
doing.”

“Ridiculous,”  Mrs.  Cope  muttered.  “I’ve  scared  them  and  they’ve  gone  and

now we can forget them.”

“I ain’t forgetting them,” Mrs. Pritchard said. “I wouldn’t be none surprised if

they didn’t have a gun in that there suitcase.”

Mrs. Cope prided herself on the way she handled the type of mind that Mrs.
Pritchard  had.  When  Mrs.  Pritchard  saw  signs  and  omens,  she  exposed  them
calmly for the figments of imagination that they were, but this afternoon her nerves
were taut and she said, “Now I’ve had about enough of this. Those boys are gone
and that’s that.”

“Well, we’ll wait and see,” Mrs. Pritchard said.
Everything  was  quiet  for  the  rest  of  the  afternoon  but  at  supper  time,  Mrs.
Pritchard came over to say that she had heard a high vicious laugh pierce out of
the bushes near the hog pen. It was an evil laugh, full of calculated meanness, and
she had heard it come three times, herself, distinctly.

“I haven’t heard a thing,” Mrs. Cope said.
“I look for them to strike just after dark,” Mrs. Pritchard said.
That night Mrs. Cope and the child sat on the porch until nearly ten o’clock
and  nothing  happened.  The  only  sounds  came  from  tree  frogs  and  from  one
whippoorwill  who  called  faster  and  faster  from  the  same  spot  of  darkness.

“They’ve gone,” Mrs. Cope said, “poor things,” and  she  began  to  tell  the  child
how much they had to be thankful for, for she said they might have had to live in a
development themselves or they might have been Negroes or they might have been
in iron lungs or they might have been Europeans ridden in boxcars like cattle, and
she began a litany of her blessings, in a stricken voice, that the child, straining her
attention for a sudden shriek in the dark, didn’t listen to.

There was no sign of them the next morning either. The fortress line of trees
was a hard granite blue, the wind had risen overnight and the sun had come up a
pale gold. The season was changing. Even a  small  change  in  the  weather  made
Mrs. Cope thankful, but when the seasons changed she seemed almost frightened at
her good fortune in escaping whatever it was that pursued her. As she sometimes
did  when  one  thing  was  finished  and  another  about  to  begin,  she  turned  her
attention to the child who had put on a pair of overalls  over  her  dress  and  had
pulled a man’s old felt hat down as far as it would go on her head and was arming
herself with two pistols in a decorated holster that she had fastened around her
waist.  The  hat  was  very  tight  and  seemed  to  be  squeezing  the  redness  into  her
face. It came down almost to the tops of her glasses. Mrs. Cope watched her with
a  tragic  look.  “Why  do  you  have  to  look  like  an  idiot?”  she  asked.  “Suppose
company were to come? When are you going to grow up? What’s going to become
of you? I look at you and I want to cry! Sometimes you look like you might belong
to Mrs. Pritchard!”

“Leave  me  be,”  the  child  said  in  a  high  irritated  voice.  “Leave  me  be.  Just
leave me be. I ain’t you,” and she went off to the woods as if she were stalking out
an enemy, her head thrust forward and each hand gripped on a gun.

Mrs.  Pritchard  came  over,  sour-humored,  because  she  didn’t  have  anything
calamitous to report. “I got the misery in my face today,” she said, holding on to
what  she  could  salvage.  “Theseyer  teeth.  They  each  one  feel  like  an  individual
boil.”

*   *   *

The  child  crashed  through  the  woods,  making  the  fallen  leaves  sound  ominous
under her feet. The sun had risen a little and was only a white hole like an opening

for the wind to escape through in a sky a little darker than itself, and the tops of the
trees were black against the glare. “I’m going to get you one by one and beat you
black and blue. Line up. LINE UP!” she said and waved one of the pistols at a
cluster of long bare-trunked pines, four times her height, as she passed them. She
kept moving, muttering and growling to herself and occasionally hitting out with
one of the guns at a branch that got in her way. From time to time she stopped to
remove the thorn vine that caught in her shirt and she would say, “Leave me be, I
told you. Leave me be,” and give it a crack with the pistol and then stalk on.

Presently  she  sat  down  on  a  stump  to  cool  off  but  she  planted  both  feet
carefully  and  firmly  on  the  ground.  She  lifted  them  and  put  them  down  several
times, grinding them fiercely into the dirt as if she were crushing something under
her heels. Suddenly she heard a laugh.

She sat up, prickle-skinned. It came again. She heard the sound of splashing
and she stood up, uncertain which way to run. She was not far from where this
patch of woods ended and the back pasture began. She eased toward the pasture,
careful not to make a sound, and coming suddenly to the edge of it, she saw the
three boys, not twenty feet away, washing in the cow trough. Their clothes were
piled against the black valise out of reach of the water that flowed over the side of
the tank. The large boy was standing up and the small one was trying to climb onto
his shoulders. Powell was sitting down looking straight ahead through glasses that
were splashed with water. He was not paying any attention to the other two. The
trees must have looked like green waterfalls through his wet glasses. The child
stood partly hidden behind a pine trunk, the side of her face pressed into the bark.
“I wish I lived here!” the little boy shouted, balancing with his knees clutched

around the big one’s head.

“I’m goddam glad I don’t,” the big boy panted, and jumped up to dislodge him.
Powell sat without moving, without seeming to know that the other two were
behind him, and looked straight ahead like a ghost sprung upright in his coffin. “If
this place was not here any more,” he said, “you would never have to think of it
again.”

“Listen,” the big boy said, sitting down quietly in the water with the little one

still moored to his shoulders, “it don’t belong to nobody.”

“It’s ours,” the little boy said.
The child behind the tree did not move.
Powell jumped out of the trough and began to run. He ran all the way around
the field as if something were after him and as he passed the tank again, the other
two jumped out and raced with him, the sun glinting on their long wet bodies. The
big one ran the fastest and was the leader. They dashed around the field twice and
finally dropped down by their clothes and lay there with their ribs moving up and
down. After a while, the big one said hoarsely, “Do you know what I would do
with this place if I had the chance?”

“No, what?” the little boy said and sat up to give him his full attention.
“I’d build a big parking lot on it, or something,” he muttered.
They began to dress. The sun made two white spots on Powell’s glasses and
blotted  out  his  eyes.  “I  know  what  let’s  do,”  he  said.  He  took  something  small
from his pocket and showed it to them. For almost a minute they sat  looking  at
what he had in his hand. Then without any more discussion, Powell picked up the
suitcase and they got up and moved past the child and entered the woods not ten
feet  from  where  she  was  standing,  slightly  away  from  the  tree  now,  with  the
imprint of the bark embossed red and white on the side of her face.

She watched with a dazed stare as they stopped and collected all the matches
they had between them and began to set the brush on fire. They began to whoop
and holler and beat their hands over their mouths and in a few seconds there was a
narrow line of fire widening between her and them. While she watched, it reached
up from the brush, snatching and biting at the lowest branches of the trees. The
wind carried rags of it higher and the boys disappeared shrieking behind it.

She turned and tried to run across the field but her legs were too heavy and she
stood there, weighted down with some new unplaced misery that she had never
felt before. But finally she began to run.

Mrs.  Cope  and  Mrs.  Pritchard  were  in  the  field  behind  the  barn  when  Mrs.
Cope saw smoke rising from the woods across the pasture. She shrieked and Mrs.
Pritchard pointed up the road to where the child came loping heavily, screaming,
“Mama, Mama, they’re going to build a parking lot here!”

Mrs.  Cope  began  to  scream  for  the  Negroes  while  Mrs.  Pritchard,  charged

now, ran down the road shouting. Mr. Pritchard came out of the open end of the
barn  and  the  two  Negroes  stopped  filling  the  manure  spreader  in  the  lot  and
started toward Mrs. Cope with their shovels. “Hurry, hurry!” she shouted. “Start
throwing dirt on it!” They passed her almost without looking at her and headed off
slowly  across  the  field  toward  the  smoke.  She  ran  after  them  a  little  way,
shrilling, “Hurry, hurry, don’t you see it! Don’t you see it!”

“It’ll be there when we git there,” Culver said and they thrust their shoulders

forward a little and went on at the same pace.

The child came to a stop beside her mother and stared up at her face as if she
had never seen it before. It was the face of the new misery she felt, but on her
mother  it  looked  old  and  it  looked  as  if  it  might  have  belonged  to  anybody,  a
Negro or a European or to Powell himself. The child turned her head quickly, and
past the Negroes’ ambling figures she could see the column of smoke rising and
widening unchecked inside the granite line of trees. She stood taut, listening, and
could just catch in the distance a few wild high shrieks of joy as if the prophets
were dancing in the fiery furnace, in the circle the angel had cleared for them.

The Displaced Person

THE PEACOCK was following Mrs. Shortley up the road to the hill where she meant
to  stand.  Moving  one  behind  the  other,  they  looked  like  a  complete  procession.
Her arms were folded and as she mounted the prominence, she might have been
the giant wife of the countryside, come out at some sign of danger to see what the
trouble was. She stood on two tremendous legs, with the grand self-confidence of
a mountain, and rose, up narrowing bulges of granite, to two icy blue points of
light that pierced forward, surveying everything. She ignored the white afternoon
sun which was creeping behind a ragged wall of cloud as if it pretended to be an
intruder and cast her gaze down the red clay road that turned off from the highway.
The peacock stopped just behind her, his tail—glittering green-gold and blue
in the sunlight—lifted just enough so that it would not touch the ground. It flowed
out on either side like a floating train and his head on the long blue reed-like neck
was drawn back as if his attention were fixed in the distance on something no one
else could see.

Mrs.  Shortley  was  watching  a  black  car  turn  through  the  gate  from  the
highway. Over by the toolshed, about fifteen feet away, the two Negroes, Astor
and Sulk, had stopped work to watch. They were hidden by a mulberry tree but
Mrs. Shortley knew they were there.

Mrs. McIntyre was coming down the steps of her house to meet the car. She
had on her largest smile but Mrs. Shortley, even from her distance, could detect a
nervous slide in it. These people who were coming were only hired help, like the
Shortleys themselves or the Negroes. Yet here was the owner of the place out to
welcome them. Here she was, wearing her best clothes and a string of beads, and
now bounding forward with her mouth stretched.

The car stopped at the walk just as she did and the priest was the first to get
out. He was a long-legged black-suited old man with a white hat on and a collar
that he wore backwards, which, Mrs. Shortley knew, was what priests did who
wanted  to  be  known  as  priests.  It  was  this  priest  who  had  arranged  for  these

people  to  come  here.  He  opened  the  back  door  of  the  car  and  out  jumped  two
children, a boy and a girl, and then, stepping more slowly, a woman in brown,
shaped  like  a  peanut.  Then  the  front  door  opened  and  out  stepped  the  man,  the
Displaced Person. He was short and a little sway-backed and wore gold-rimmed
spectacles.

Mrs.  Shortley’s  vision  narrowed  on  him  and  then  widened  to  include  the
woman and the two children in a group picture. The first thing that struck her as
very  peculiar  was  that  they  looked  like  other  people.  Every  time  she  had  seen
them  in  her  imagination,  the  image  she  had  got  was  of  the  three  bears,  walking
single file, with wooden shoes on like Dutchmen and sailor hats and bright coats
with a lot of buttons. But the woman had on a dress she might have worn herself
and the children were dressed like anybody from around. The man had on khaki
pants and a blue shirt. Suddenly, as Mrs. McIntyre held out her hand to him, he
bobbed down from the waist and kissed it.

Mrs.  Shortley  jerked  her  own  hand  up  toward  her  mouth  and  then  after  a
second brought it down and rubbed it vigorously on her seat. If Mr. Shortley had
tried to kiss her hand, Mrs. McIntyre would have knocked him into the middle of
next week, but then Mr. Shortley wouldn’t have kissed her hand anyway. He didn’t
have time to mess around.

She looked closer, squinting. The boy was in the center of the group, talking.
He  was  supposed  to  speak  the  most  English  because  he  had  learned  some  in
Poland and so he was to listen to his father’s Polish and say it in English and then
listen to Mrs. McIntyre’s English and say that in Polish. The priest had told Mrs.
McIntyre  his  name  was  Rudolph  and  he  was  twelve  and  the  girl’s  name  was
Sledgewig and she was nine. Sledgewig sounded to Mrs. Shortley like something
you would name a bug, or vice versa, as if you named a boy Bollweevil. All of
them’s  last  name  was  something  that  only  they  themselves  and  the  priest  could
pronounce. All she could make out of it was Gobblehook. She and Mrs. McIntyre
had been calling them the Gobblehooks all week while they got ready for them.

There had been a great deal to do to get ready for them because they didn’t
have  anything  of  their  own,  not  a  stick  of  furniture  or  a  sheet  or  a  dish,  and
everything had had to be scraped together out of things that Mrs. McIntyre couldn’t

use any more herself. They had collected a piece of odd furniture here and a piece
there and they had taken some flowered chicken feed sacks and made curtains for
the windows, two red and one green, because they had not had enough of the red
sacks to go around. Mrs. McIntyre said she was not made of money and she could
not  afford  to  buy  curtains.  “They  can’t  talk,”  Mrs.  Shortley  said.  “You  reckon
they’ll  know  what  colors  even  is?”  and  Mrs.  McIntyre  had  said  that  after  what
those people had been through, they should be grateful for anything they could get.
She said to think how lucky they were to escape from over there and come to a
place like this.

Mrs. Shortley recalled a newsreel she had seen once of a small room piled
high with bodies of dead naked people all in a heap, their arms and legs tangled
together, a head thrust in here, a head there, a foot, a knee, a part that should have
been covered up sticking out, a hand raised clutching nothing. Before you could
realize  that  it  was  real  and  take  it  into  your  head,  the  picture  changed  and  a
hollow-sounding  voice  was  saying,  “Time  marches  on!”  This  was  the  kind  of
thing that was happening every day in Europe where they had not advanced as in
this country, and watching from her vantage point, Mrs. Shortley had the sudden
intuition that the Gobblehooks, like rats with typhoid fleas, could have carried all
those murderous ways over the water with them directly to this place. If they had
come from where that kind of thing was done to them, who was to say they were
not the kind that would also do it to others? The width and breadth of this question
nearly shook her. Her stomach trembled as if there had been a slight quake in the
heart of the mountain and automatically she moved down from her elevation and
went forward to be introduced to them, as if she meant to find out at once what
they were capable of.

She  approached,  stomach  foremost,  head  back,  arms  folded,  boots  flopping
gently against her large legs. About fifteen feet from the gesticulating group, she
stopped  and  made  her  presence  felt  by  training  her  gaze  on  the  back  of  Mrs.
McIntyre’s  neck.  Mrs.  McIntyre  was  a  small  woman  of  sixty  with  a  round
wrinkled face and red bangs that came almost down to two high orange-colored
penciled eyebrows. She had a little doll’s mouth and eyes that were a soft blue
when  she  opened  them  wide  but  more  like  steel  or  granite  when  she  narrowed

them  to  inspect  a  milk  can.  She  had  buried  one  husband  and  divorced  two  and
Mrs. Shortley respected her as a person nobody had put anything over on yet—
except,  ha,  ha,  perhaps  the  Shortleys.  She  held  out  her  arm  in  Mrs.  Shortley’s
direction and said to the Rudolph boy, “And this is Mrs. Shortley. Mr. Shortley is
my dairyman. Where’s Mr. Shortley?” she asked as his wife began to approach
again, her arms still folded. “I want him to meet the Guizacs.”

Now  it  was  Guizac.  She  wasn’t  calling  them  Gobblehook  to  their  face.
“Chancey’s at the barn,” Mrs. Shortley said. “He don’t have time to rest himself in
the bushes like them niggers over there.”

Her  look  first  grazed  the  tops  of  the  displaced  people’s  heads  and  then
revolved downwards slowly, the way a buzzard glides and drops in the air until it
alights on the carcass. She stood far enough away so that the man would not be
able to kiss her hand. He looked directly at her with little green eyes and gave her
a broad grin that was toothless on one side. Mrs. Shortley, without smiling, turned
her  attention  to  the  little  girl  who  stood  by  the  mother,  swinging  her  shoulders
from side to side. She had long braided hair in two looped pigtails and there was
no  denying  she  was  a  pretty  child  even  if  she  did  have  a  bug’s  name.  She  was
better looking than either Annie Maude or Sarah Mae, Mrs. Shortley’s two girls
going  on  fifteen  and  seventeen  but Annie  Maude  had  never  got  her  growth  and
Sarah Mae had a cast in her eye. She compared the foreign boy to her son, H.C.,
and  H.C.  came  out  far  ahead.  H.C.  was  twenty  years  old  with  her  build  and
eyeglasses. He was going to Bible school now and when he finished he was going
to  start  him  a  church.  He  had  a  strong  sweet  voice  for  hymns  and  could  sell
anything. Mrs. Shortley looked at the priest and was reminded that these people
did not have an advanced religion. There was no telling what  all  they  believed
since none of the foolishness had been reformed out of it. Again she saw the room
piled high with bodies.

The priest spoke in a foreign way himself, English but as if he had a throatful
of hay. He had a big nose and a bald rectangular face and head. While she was
observing him, his large mouth dropped open and with a stare behind her, he said,
“Arrrrrrr!” and pointed.

Mrs. Shortley spun around. The peacock was standing a few feet behind her,

with his head slightly cocked.

“What a beauti-ful birdrrrd!” the priest murmured.
“Another  mouth  to  feed,”  Mrs.  McIntyre  said,  glancing  in  the  peafowl’s

direction.

“And when does he raise his splendid tail?” asked the priest.
“Just when it suits him,” she said. “There used to be twenty or thirty of those
things on the place but I’ve let them die off. I don’t like to hear them scream in the
middle of the night.”

“So beauti-ful,” the priest said. “A tail full of suns,” and he crept forward on
tiptoe  and  looked  down  on  the  bird’s  back  where  the  polished  gold  and  green
design began. The peacock stood still as if he had just come down from some sun-
drenched height to be a vision for them all. The priest’s homely red face hung over
him, glowing with pleasure.

Mrs.  Shortley’s  mouth  had  drawn  acidly  to  one  side.  “Nothing  but  a

peachicken,” she muttered.

Mrs. McIntyre raised her orange eyebrows and exchanged a look with her to
indicate that the old man was in his second childhood. “Well, we must show the
Guizacs their new home,” she said impatiently and she herded them into the car
again. The peacock stepped off toward the mulberry tree where the two Negroes
were hiding and the priest turned his absorbed face away and got in the car and
drove the displaced people down to the shack they were to occupy.

Mrs. Shortley waited until the car was out of sight and then she made her way
circuitously to the mulberry tree and stood about ten feet behind the two Negroes,
one an old man holding a bucket half full of calf feed and the other a yellowish
boy with a short woodchuck-like head pushed into a rounded felt hat. “Well,” she
said slowly, “yawl have looked long enough. What you think about them?”

The  old  man, Astor,  raised  himself.  “We  been  watching,”  he  said  as  if  this

would be news to her. “Who they now?”

“They come from over the water,” Mrs. Shortley said with a wave of her arm.

“They’re what is called Displaced Persons.”

“Displaced Persons,” he said. “Well now. I declare. What do that mean?”
“It means they ain’t where they were born at and there’s nowhere for them to

go—like if you was run out of here and wouldn’t nobody have you.”

“It seem like they here, though,” the old man said in a reflective voice. “If they

here, they somewhere.”

“Sho is,” the other agreed. “They here.”
The illogic of Negro-thinking always irked Mrs. Shortley. “They ain’t where
they  belong  to  be  at,”  she  said.  “They  belong  to  be  back  over  yonder  where
everything is still like they been used to. Over here it’s more advanced than where
they come from. But yawl better look out now,” she said and nodded her head.
“There’s  about  ten  million  billion  more  just  like  them  and  I  know  what  Mrs.
McIntyre said.”

“Say what?” the young one asked.
“Places are not easy to get nowadays, for white or black, but I reckon I heard

what she stated to me,” she said in a sing-song voice.

“You liable to hear most anything,” the old man remarked, leaning forward as

if he were about to walk off but holding himself suspended.

“I heard her say, ‘This is going to put the Fear of the Lord into those shiftless

niggers!’” Mrs. Shortley said in a ringing voice.

The old man started off. “She say something like that every now and then,” he

said. “Ha. Ha. Yes indeed.”

“You better get on in that barn and help Mr. Shortley,” she said to the other

one. “What you reckon she pays you for?”

“He the one sont me out,” the Negro muttered. “He the one gimme something

else to do.”

“Well you better get to doing it then,” she said and stood there until he moved
off. Then she stood a while longer, reflecting, her unseeing eyes directly in front
of the peacock’s tail. He had jumped into the tree and his tail hung in front of her,
full of fierce planets with eyes that were each ringed in green and set against a sun
that was gold in one second’s light and salmon-colored in the next. She might have
been looking at a map of the universe but she didn’t notice it any more than she did
the spots of sky that cracked the dull green of the tree. She was having an inner
vision instead. She was seeing the ten million billion of them pushing their way
into  new  places  over  here  and  herself,  a  giant  angel  with  wings  as  wide  as  a

house, telling the Negroes that they would have to find another place. She turned
herself  in  the  direction  of  the  barn,  musing  on  this,  her  expression  lofty  and
satisfied.

She approached the barn from an oblique angle that allowed her a look in the
door  before  she  could  be  seen  herself.  Mr.  Chancey  Shortley  was  adjusting  the
last milking machine on a large black and white spotted cow near the entrance,
squatting  at  her  heels.  There  was  about  a  half-inch  of  cigarette  adhering  to  the
center of his lower lip. Mrs. Shortley observed it minutely for half a second. “If
she seen or heard of you smoking in this barn, she would blow a fuse,” she said.

Mr.  Shortley  raised  a  sharply  rutted  face  containing  a  washout  under  each
cheek and two long crevices eaten down both sides of his blistered mouth. “You
gonter be the one to tell her?” he asked.

“She’s got a nose of her own,” Mrs. Shortley said.
Mr. Shortley, without appearing to give the feat any consideration, lifted the
cigarette stub with the sharp end of his tongue, drew it into his mouth, closed his
lips tightly, rose, stepped out, gave his wife a good round appreciative stare, and
spit the smoldering butt into the grass.

“Aw Chancey,” she said, “haw haw,” and she dug a little hole for it with her
toe and covered it up. This trick of Mr. Shortley’s was actually his way of making
love to her. When he had done his courting, he had not brought a guitar to strum or
anything pretty for her to keep, but had sat on her porch steps, not saying a word,
imitating a paralyzed man propped up to enjoy a cigarette. When the cigarette got
the proper size, he would turn his eyes to her and open his mouth and draw in the
butt  and  then  sit  there  as  if  he  had  swallowed  it,  looking  at  her  with  the  most
loving look anybody could imagine. It nearly drove her wild and every time he did
it, she wanted to pull his hat down over his eyes and hug him to death.

“Well,” she said, going into the barn after him, “the Gobblehooks have come
and she wants you to meet them, says, ‘Where’s Mr. Shortley?’ and I says, ‘He
don’t have time…’”

“Tote up them weights,” Mr. Shortley said, squatting to the cow again.
“You reckon he can drive a tractor when he don’t know English?” she asked.
“I don’t think she’s going to get her money’s worth out of them. That boy can talk

but he looks delicate. The one can work can’t talk and the one can talk can’t work.
She ain’t any better off than if she had more niggers.”

“I rather have a nigger if it was me,” Mr. Shortley said.
“She  says  it’s  ten  million  more  like  them,  Displaced  Persons,  she  says  that

there priest can get her all she wants.”

“She better quit messin with that there priest,” Mr. Shortley said.
“He don’t look smart,” Mrs. Shortley said, “—kind of foolish.”
“I  ain’t  going  to  have  the  Pope  of  Rome  tell  me  how  to  run  no  dairy,”  Mr.

Shortley said.

“They  ain’t  Eye-talians,  they’re  Poles,”  she  said.  “From  Poland  where  all

them bodies were stacked up at. You remember all them bodies?”

“I give them three weeks here,” Mr. Shortley said.

*   *   *

Three weeks later Mrs. McIntyre and Mrs. Shortley drove to the cane bottom to
see Mr. Guizac start to operate the silage cutter, a new machine that Mrs. McIntyre
had just bought because she said, for the first time, she had somebody who could
operate it. Mr. Guizac could drive a tractor, use the rotary hay-baler, the silage
cutter, the combine, the letz mill, or any other machine she had on the place. He
was an expert mechanic, a carpenter, and a mason. He was thrifty and energetic.
Mrs.  McIntyre  said  she  figured  he  would  save  her  twenty  dollars  a  month  on
repair bills alone. She said getting him was the best day’s work she had ever done
in her life. He could work milking machines and he was scrupulously clean. He
did not smoke.

She  parked  her  car  on  the  edge  of  the  cane  field  and  they  got  out.  Sulk,  the
young Negro, was attaching the wagon to the cutter and Mr. Guizac was attaching
the cutter to the tractor. He finished first and pushed the colored boy out of the
way and attached the wagon to the cutter himself, gesticulating with a bright angry
face  when  he  wanted  the  hammer  or  the  screwdriver.  Nothing  was  done  quick
enough to suit him. The Negroes made him nervous.

The week before, he had come upon Sulk at the dinner hour, sneaking with a
croker sack into the pen where the young turkeys were. He had watched him take a

frying-size turkey from the lot and thrust it in the sack and put the sack under his
coat. Then he had followed him around the barn, jumped on him, dragged him to
Mrs. McIntyre’s back door and had acted out the entire scene for her, while the
Negro muttered and grumbled and said God might strike him dead if he had been
stealing any turkey, he had only been taking it to put some black shoe polish on its
head because it had the sorehead. God might strike him dead if that was not the
truth before Jesus. Mrs. McIntyre told him to go put the turkey back and then she
was a long time explaining to the Pole that all Negroes would steal. She finally
had to call Rudolph and tell him in English and have him tell his father in Polish,
and Mr. Guizac had gone off with a startled disappointed face.

Mrs. Shortley stood by hoping there would be trouble with the silage machine
but  there  was  none. All  of  Mr.  Guizac’s  motions  were  quick  and  accurate.  He
jumped on the tractor like a monkey and maneuvered the big orange cutter into the
cane; in a second the silage was spurting in a green jet out of the pipe into the
wagon.  He  went  jolting  down  the  row  until  his  disappeared  from  sight  and  the
noise became remote.

Mrs. McIntyre sighed with pleasure. “At last,” she said, “I’ve got somebody I
can depend on. For years I’ve been fooling with sorry people. Sorry people. Poor
white trash and niggers,” she muttered. “They’ve drained me dry. Before you all
came  I  had  Ringfields  and  Collins  and  Jarrells  and  Perkins  and  Pinkins  and
Herrins and God knows what all else and not a one of them left without taking
something off this place that didn’t belong to them. Not a one!”

Mrs.  Shortley  could  listen  to  this  with  composure  because  she  knew  that  if
Mrs.  McIntyre  had  considered  her  trash,  they  couldn’t  have  talked  about  trashy
people together. Neither of them approved of trash. Mrs. McIntyre continued with
the monologue that Mrs. Shortley had heard oftentimes before. “I’ve been running
this place for thirty years,” she said, looking with a deep frown out over the field,
“and  always  just  barely  making  it.  People  think  you’re  made  of  money.  I  have
taxes to pay. I have the insurance to keep up. I have the repair bills. I have the feed
bills.” It all gathered up and she stood with her chest lifted and her small hands
gripped around her elbows. “Ever since the Judge died,” she said, “I’ve barely
been making ends meet and they all take something when they leave. The niggers

don’t leave—they stay and steal. A nigger thinks anybody is rich he can steal from
and that white trash thinks anybody is rich who can afford to hire people as sorry
as they are. And all I’ve got is the dirt under my feet!”

You hire and fire, Mrs. Shortley thought, but she didn’t always say what she
thought. She stood by and let Mrs. McIntyre say it all out to the end but this time it
didn’t end as usual. “But at last I’m saved!” Mrs. McIntyre said. “One fellow’s
misery  is  the  other  fellow’s  gain.  That  man  there,”  and  she  pointed  where  the
Displaced Person had disappeared, “—he has to work! He wants to work!” She
turned to Mrs. Shortley with her bright wrinkled face. “That man is my salvation!”
she said.

Mrs. Shortley looked straight ahead as if her vision penetrated the cane and the
hill and pierced through to the other side. “I would suspicion salvation got from
the devil,” she said in a slow detached way.

“Now  what  do  you  mean  by  that?”  Mrs.  McIntyre  asked,  looking  at  her

sharply.

Mrs. Shortley wagged her head but would not say anything else. The fact was
she had nothing else to say for this intuition had only at that instant come to her.
She  had  never  given  much  thought  to  the  devil  for  she  felt  that  religion  was
essentially for those people who didn’t have the brains to avoid evil without it.
For  people  like  herself,  for  people  of  gumption,  it  was  a  social  occasion
providing the opportunity to sing; but if she had ever given it much thought, she
would have considered the devil the head of it and God the hanger-on. With the
coming of these displaced people, she was obliged to give new thought to a good
many things.

“I  know  what  Sledgewig  told  Annie  Maude,”  she  said,  and  when  Mrs.
McIntyre carefully did not ask her what but reached down and broke off a sprig of
sassafras to chew, she continued in a way to indicate she was not telling all, “that
they wouldn’t be able to live long, the four of them, on seventy dollars a month.”

“He’s worth raising,” Mrs. McIntyre said. “He saves me money.”
This was as much as to say that Chancey had never saved her money. Chancey
got up at four in the morning to milk her cows, in winter wind and summer heat,
and he had been doing it for the last two years. They had been with her the longest

she had ever had anybody. The gratitude they got was these hints that she hadn’t
been saved any money.

“Is Mr. Shortley feeling better today?” Mrs. McIntyre asked.
Mrs.  Shortley  thought  it  was  about  time  she  was  asking  that  question.  Mr.
Shortley had been in bed two days with an attack. Mr. Guizac had taken his place
in  the  dairy  in  addition  to  doing  his  own  work.  “No  he  ain’t,”  she  said.  “That
doctor said he was suffering from over-exhaustion.”

“If Mr. Shortley is over-exhausted,” Mrs. McIntyre said, “then he must have a
second job on the side,” and she looked at Mrs. Shortley with almost closed eyes
as if she were examining the bottom of a milk can.

Mrs.  Shortley  did  not  say  a  word  but  her  dark  suspicion  grew  like  a  black
thunder cloud. The fact was that Mr. Shortley did have a second job on the side
and  that,  in  a  free  country,  this  was  none  of  Mrs.  McIntyre’s  business.  Mr.
Shortley  made  whisky.  He  had  a  small  still  back  in  the  farthest  reaches  of  the
place, on Mrs. McIntyre’s land to be sure, but on land that she only owned and did
not cultivate, on idle land that was not doing anybody any good. Mr. Shortley was
not afraid of work. He got up at four in the morning and milked her cows and in
the middle of the day when he was supposed to be resting, he was off attending to
his still. Not every man would work like that. The Negroes knew about his still
but he knew about theirs so there had never been any disagreeableness between
them.  But  with  foreigners  on  the  place,  with  people  who  were  all  eyes  and  no
understanding, who had come from a place continually fighting, where the religion
had  not  been  reformed—with  this  kind  of  people,  you  had  to  be  on  the  lookout
every  minute.  She  thought  there  ought  to  be  a  law  against  them.  There  was  no
reason they couldn’t stay over there and take the places of some of the people who
had been killed in their wars and butcherings.

“What’s furthermore,” she said suddenly, “Sledgewig said as soon as her papa
saved the money, he was going to buy him a used car. Once they get them a used
car, they’ll leave you.”

“I can’t pay him enough for him to save money,” Mrs. McIntyre said. “I’m not
worrying about that. Of course,” she said then, “if Mr. Shortley got incapacitated,
I would have to use Mr. Guizac in the dairy all the time and I would have to pay

him more. He doesn’t smoke,” she said, and it was the fifth time within the week
that she had pointed this out.

“It  is  no  man,”  Mrs.  Shortley  said  emphatically,  “that  works  as  hard  as
Chancey, or is as easy with a cow, or is more of a Christian,” and she folded her
arms  and  her  gaze  pierced  the  distance.  The  noise  of  the  tractor  and  cutter
increased and Mr. Guizac appeared coming around the other side of the cane row.
“Which can not be said about everybody,” she muttered. She wondered whether, if
the Pole found Chancey’s still, he would know what it was. The trouble with these
people  was,  you  couldn’t  tell  what  they  knew.  Every  time  Mr.  Guizac  smiled,
Europe  stretched  out  in  Mrs.  Shortley’s  imagination,  mysterious  and  evil,  the
devil’s experiment station.

The tractor, the cutter, the wagon passed, rattling and rumbling and grinding
before them. “Think how long that would have taken with men and mules to do it,”
Mrs. McIntyre shouted. “We’ll get this whole bottom cut within two days at this
rate.”

“Maybe,” Mrs. Shortley muttered, “if don’t no terrible accident occur.” She
thought how the tractor had made mules worthless. Nowadays you couldn’t give
away a mule. The next thing to go, she reminded herself, will be niggers.

In the afternoon she explained what was going to happen to them to Astor and
Sulk who were in the cow lot, filling the manure spreader. She sat down next to
the block of salt under a small shed, her stomach in her lap, her arms on top of it.
“All you colored people better look out,” she said. “You know how much you can
get for a mule.”

“Nothing, no indeed,” the old man said, “not one thing.”
“Before it was a tractor,” she said, “it could be a mule. And before it was a
Displaced  Person,  it  could  be  a  nigger.  The  time  is  going  to  come,”  she
prophesied, “when it won’t be no more occasion to speak of a nigger.”

The old man laughed politely. “Yes indeed,” he said. “Ha ha.”
The young one didn’t say anything. He only looked sullen but when she had

gone in the house, he said, “Big Belly act like she know everything.”

“Never mind,” the old man said, “your place too low for anybody to dispute

with you for it.”

She didn’t tell her fears about the still to Mr. Shortley until he was back on the
job  in  the  dairy.  Then  one  night  after  they  were  in  bed,  she  said,  “That  man
prowls.”

Mr.  Shortley  folded  his  hands  on  his  bony  chest  and  pretended  he  was  a

corpse.

“Prowls,” she continued and gave him a sharp kick in the side with her knee.
“Who’s to say what they know and don’t know? Who’s to say if he found it he
wouldn’t  go  right  to  her  and  tell?  How  you  know  they  don’t  make  liquor  in
Europe? They drive tractors. They got them all kinds of machinery. Answer me.”

“Don’t worry me now,” Mr. Shortley said. “I’m a dead man.”
“It’s them little eyes of his that’s foreign,” she muttered. “And that way he’s
got of shrugging.” She drew her shoulders up and shrugged several times. “How
come he’s got anything to shrug about?” she asked.

“If  everybody  was  as  dead  as  I  am,  nobody  would  have  no  trouble,”  Mr.

Shortley said.

“That  priest,”  she  muttered  and  was  silent  for  a  minute.  Then  she  said,  “In
Europe  they  probably  got  some  different  way  to  make  liquor  but  I  reckon  they
know all the ways. They’re full of crooked ways. They never have advanced or
reformed. They got the same religion as a thousand years ago. It could only be the
devil  responsible  for  that. Always  fighting  amongst  each  other.  Disputing. And
then get us into it. Ain’t they got us into it twict already and we ain’t got no more
sense than to go over there and settle it for them and then they come on back over
here and snoop around and find your still and go straight to her. And liable to kiss
her hand any minute. Do you hear me?”

“No,” Mr. Shortley said.
“And I’ll tell you another thing,” she said. “I wouldn’t be a tall surprised if he

don’t know everything you say, whether it be in English or not.”
“I don’t speak no other language,” Mr. Shortley murmured.
“I suspect,” she said, “that before long there won’t be no more niggers on this
place. And I tell you what. I’d rather have niggers than them Poles. And what’s
furthermore,  I  aim  to  take  up  for  the  niggers  when  the  time  comes.  When
Gobblehook  first  come  here,  you  recollect  how  he  shook  their  hands,  like  he

didn’t know the difference, like he might have been as black as them, but when it
come to finding out Sulk was taking turkeys, he gone on and told her. I known he
was taking turkeys. I could have told her myself.”

Mr. Shortley was breathing softly as if he were asleep.
“A  nigger  don’t  know  when  he  has  a  friend,”  she  said.  “And  I’ll  tell  you
another thing. I get a heap out of Sledgewig. Sledgewig said that in Poland they
lived  in  a  brick  house  and  one  night  a  man  come  and  told  them  to  get  out  of  it
before daylight. Do you believe they ever lived in a brick house?

“Airs,” she said. “That’s just airs. A wooden house is good enough for me.
Chancey,” she said, “turn thisaway. I hate to see niggers mistreated and run out. I
have a heap of pity for niggers and poor folks. Ain’t I always had?” she asked. “I
say ain’t I always been a friend to niggers and poor folks?

“When the time comes,” she said, “I’ll stand up for the niggers and that’s that. I

ain’t going to see that priest drive out all the niggers.”

*   *   *

Mrs. McIntyre bought a new drag harrow and a tractor with a power lift because
she said, for the first time, she had someone who could handle machinery. She and
Mrs. Shortley had driven to the back field to inspect what he had harrowed the
day before. “That’s been done beautifully!” Mrs. McIntyre said, looking out over
the red undulating ground.

Mrs. McIntyre had changed since the Displaced Person had been working for
her and Mrs. Shortley had observed the change very closely: she had begun to act
like  somebody  who  was  getting  rich  secretly  and  she  didn’t  confide  in  Mrs.
Shortley the way she used to. Mrs. Shortley suspected that the priest was at the
bottom of the change. They were very slick. First he would get her into his Church
and then he would get his hand in her pocketbook. Well, Mrs. Shortley thought, the
more  fool  she!  Mrs.  Shortley  had  a  secret  herself.  She  knew  something  the
Displaced Person was doing that would floor Mrs. McIntyre. “I still say he ain’t
going to work forever for seventy dollars a month,” she murmured. She intended
to keep her secret to herself and Mr. Shortley.

“Well,” Mrs. McIntyre said, “I may have to get rid of some of this other help

so I can pay him more.”

Mrs. Shortley nodded to indicate she had known this for some time. “I’m not
saying  those  niggers  ain’t  had  it  coming,”  she  said.  “But  they  do  the  best  they
know how. You can always tell a nigger what to do and stand by until he does it.”
“That’s  what  the  Judge  said,”  Mrs.  McIntyre  said  and  looked  at  her  with
approval.  The  Judge  was  her  first  husband,  the  one  who  had  left  her  the  place.
Mrs. Shortley had heard that she had married him when she was thirty and he was
seventy-five, thinking she would be rich as soon as he died, but the old man was a
scoundrel and when his estate was settled, they found he didn’t have a nickel. All
he left her were the fifty acres and the house. But she always spoke of him in a
reverent way and quoted his sayings, such as, “One fellow’s misery is the other
fellow’s gain,” and “The devil you know is better than the devil you don’t.”

“However,”  Mrs.  Shortley  remarked,  “the  devil  you  know  is  better  than  the
devil you don’t,” and she had to turn away so that Mrs. McIntyre would not see
her smile. She had found out what the Displaced Person was up to through the old
man, Astor, and she had not told anybody but Mr. Shortley. Mr. Shortley had risen
straight up in bed like Lazarus from the tomb.

“Shut your mouth!” he had said.
“Yes,” she had said.
“Naw!” Mr. Shortley had said.
“Yes,” she had said.
Mr. Shortley had fallen back flat.
“The Pole don’t know any better,” Mrs. Shortley had said. “I reckon that priest

is putting him up to it is all. I blame the priest.”

The priest came frequently to see the Guizacs and he would always stop in and
visit  Mrs.  McIntyre  too  and  they  would  walk  around  the  place  and  she  would
point out her improvements and listen to his rattling talk. It suddenly came to Mrs.
Shortley that he was trying to persuade her to bring another Polish family onto the
place. With two of them here, there would be almost nothing spoken but Polish!
The  Negroes  would  be  gone  and  there  would  be  the  two  families  against  Mr.
Shortley  and  herself!  She  began  to  imagine  a  war  of  words,  to  see  the  Polish
words  and  the  English  words  coming  at  each  other,  stalking  forward,  not

sentences, just words, gabble gabble gabble, flung out high and shrill and stalking
forward and then grappling with each other. She saw the Polish words, dirty and
all-knowing  and  unreformed,  flinging  mud  on  the  clean  English  words  until
everything was equally dirty. She saw them all piled up in a room, all the dead
dirty words, theirs and hers too, piled up like the naked bodies in the newsreel.
God save me, she cried silently, from the stinking power of Satan! And she started
from  that  day  to  read  her  Bible  with  a  new  attention.  She  poured  over  the
Apocalypse and began to quote from the Prophets and before long she had come to
a deeper understanding of her existence. She saw plainly that the meaning of the
world was a mystery that had been planned and she was not surprised to suspect
that she had a special part in the plan because she was strong. She saw that the
Lord God Almighty had created the strong people to do what had to be done and
she felt that she would be ready when she was called. Right now she felt that her
business was to watch the priest.

His visits irked her more and more. On the last one, he went about picking up
feathers  off  the  ground.  He  found  two  peacock  feathers  and  four  or  five  turkey
feathers and an old brown hen feather and took them off with him like a bouquet.
This  foolish-acting  did  not  deceive  Mrs.  Shortley  any.  Here  he  was:  leading
foreigners  over  in  hordes  to  places  that  were  not  theirs,  to  cause  disputes,  to
uproot  niggers,  to  plant  the  Whore  of  Babylon  in  the  midst  of  the  righteous!
Whenever he came on the place, she hid herself behind something and watched
until he left.

It was on a Sunday afternoon that she had her vision. She had gone to drive in
the cows for Mr. Shortley who had a pain in his knee and she was walking slowly
through the pasture, her arms folded, her eyes on the distant low-lying clouds that
looked like rows and rows of white fish washed up on a great blue beach. She
paused  after  an  incline  to  heave  a  sigh  of  exhaustion  for  she  had  an  immense
weight to carry around and she was not as young as she used to be. At times she
could feel her heart, like a child’s fist, clenching and unclenching inside her chest,
and  when  the  feeling  came,  it  stopped  her  thought  altogether  and  she  would  go
about like a large hull of herself, moving for no reason; but she gained this incline
without a tremor and stood at the top of it, pleased with herself. Suddenly while

she watched, the sky folded back in two pieces like the curtain to a stage and a
gigantic figure stood facing her. It was the color of the sun in the early afternoon,
white-gold.  It  was  of  no  definite  shape  but  there  were  fiery  wheels  with  fierce
dark eyes in them, spinning rapidly all around it. She was not able to tell if the
figure was going forward or backward because its magnificence was so great. She
shut her eyes in order to look at it and it turned blood-red and the wheels turned
white. A voice, very resonant, said the one word, “Prophesy!”

She stood there, tottering slightly but still upright, her eyes shut tight and her
fists clenched and her straw sun hat low on her forehead. “The children of wicked
nations will be butchered,” she said in a loud voice. “Legs where arms should be,
foot to face, ear in the palm of hand. Who will remain whole? Who will remain
whole? Who?”

Presently she opened her eyes. The sky was full of white fish carried lazily on
their  sides  by  some  invisible  current  and  pieces  of  the  sun,  submerged  some
distance beyond them, appeared from time to time as if they were being washed in
the opposite direction. Woodenly she planted one foot in front of the other until
she had crossed the pasture and reached the lot. She walked through the barn like
one in a daze and did not speak to Mr. Shortley. She continued up the road until
she saw the priest’s car parked in front of Mrs. McIntyre’s house. “Here again,”
she muttered. “Come to destroy.”

Mrs. McIntyre and the priest were walking in the yard. In order not to meet
them face to face, she turned to the left and entered the feed house, a single-room
shack piled on one side with flowered sacks of scratch feed. There were spilled
oyster shells in one corner and a few old dirty calendars on the wall, advertising
calf feed and various patent medicine remedies. One showed a bearded gentleman
in a frock coat, holding up a bottle, and beneath his feet was the inscription, “I
have been made regular by this marvelous discovery.” Mrs. Shortley had always
felt close to this man as if he were some distinguished person she was acquainted
with but now her mind was on nothing but the dangerous presence of the priest.
She stationed herself at a crack between two boards where she could look out and
see him and Mrs. McIntyre strolling toward the turkey brooder, which was placed
just outside the feed house.

“Arrrrr!” he said as they approached the brooder. “Look at the little biddies!”

and he stooped and squinted through the wire.

Mrs. Shortley’s mouth twisted.
“Do you think the Guizacs will want to leave me?” Mrs. McIntyre asked. “Do

you think they’ll go to Chicago or some place like that?”

“And why should they do that now?” asked the priest, wiggling his finger at a

turkey, his big nose close to the wire.

“Money,” Mrs. McIntyre said.
“Arrrr, give them some morrre then,” he said indifferently. “They have to get

along.”

“So do I,” Mrs. McIntyre muttered. “It means I’m going to have to get rid of

some of these others.”

“And arrre the Shortleys satisfactory?” he inquired, paying more attention to

the turkeys than to her.

“Five times in the last month I’ve found  Mr.  Shortley  smoking  in  the  barn,”

Mrs. McIntyre said. “Five times.”

“And arrre the Negroes any better?”
“They lie and steal and have to be watched all the time,” she said.
“Tsk, tsk,” he said. “Which will you discharge?”
“I’ve  decided  to  give  Mr.  Shortley  his  month’s  notice  tomorrow,”  Mrs.

McIntyre said.

The  priest  scarcely  seemed  to  hear  her  he  was  so  busy  wiggling  his  finger
inside the wire. Mrs. Shortley sat down on an open sack of laying mash with a
dead thump that sent feed dust clouding up around her. She found herself looking
straight  ahead  at  the  opposite  wall  where  the  gentleman  on  the  calendar  was
holding up his marvelous discovery but she didn’t see him. She looked ahead as if
she saw nothing whatsoever. Then she rose and ran to her house. Her face was an
almost volcanic red.

She opened all the drawers and dragged out boxes and old battered suitcases
from under the bed. She began to unload the drawers into the boxes, all the time
without pause, without taking off the sunhat she had on her head. She set the two
girls to doing the same. When Mr. Shortley came in, she did not even look at him

but merely pointed one arm at him while she packed with the other. “Bring the car
around to the back door,” she said. “You ain’t waiting to be fired!”

Mr. Shortley had never in his life doubted her omniscience. He perceived the
entire situation in half a second and, with only a sour scowl, retreated out the door
and went to drive the automobile around to the back.

They tied the two iron beds to the top of the car and the two rocking chairs
inside the beds and rolled the two mattresses up between the rocking chairs. On
top of this they tied a crate of chickens. They loaded the inside of the car with the
old suitcases and boxes, leaving a small space for Annie Maude and Sarah Mae. It
took them the rest of the afternoon and half the night to do this but Mrs. Shortley
was determined that they would leave before four o’clock in the morning, that Mr.
Shortley should not adjust another milking machine on this place. All the time she
had  been  working,  her  face  was  changing  rapidly  from  red  to  white  and  back
again.

Just before dawn, as it began to drizzle rain, they were ready to leave. They
all got in the car and sat there cramped up between boxes and bundles and rolls of
bedding.  The  square  black  automobile  moved  off  with  more  than  its  customary
grinding noises as if it were protesting the load. In the back, the two long bony
yellow-haired girls were sitting on a pile of boxes and there was a beagle hound
puppy and a cat with two kittens somewhere under the blankets. The car moved
slowly, like some overfreighted leaking ark, away from their shack and past the
white house where Mrs. McIntyre was sleeping soundly—hardly guessing that her
cows  would  not  be  milked  by  Mr.  Shortley  that  morning—and  past  the  Pole’s
shack on top of the hill and on down the road to the gate where the two Negroes
were walking, one behind the other, on their way to help with the milking. They
looked straight at the car and its occupants but even as the dim yellow headlights
lit up their faces, they politely did not seem to see anything, or anyhow, to attach
significance to what was there. The loaded car might have been passing mist in the
early morning half-light. They continued up the road at the same even pace without
looking back.

A dark yellow sun was beginning to rise in a sky that was the same slick dark
gray as the highway. The fields stretched away, stiff and weedy, on either side.

“Where we goin?” Mr. Shortley asked for the first time.

Mrs. Shortley sat with one foot on a packing box so that her knee was pushed
into  her  stomach.  Mr.  Shortley’s  elbow  was  almost  under  her  nose  and  Sarah
Mae’s bare left foot was sticking over the front seat, touching her ear.

“Where we goin?” Mr. Shortley repeated and when she didn’t answer again,

he turned and looked at her.

Fierce heat seemed to be swelling slowly and fully into her face as if it were
welling up now for a final assault. She was sitting in an erect way in spite of the
fact that one leg was twisted under her and one knee was almost into her neck, but
there was a peculiar lack of light in her icy blue eyes. All the vision in them might
have been turned around, looking inside her. She suddenly grabbed Mr. Shortley’s
elbow and Sarah Mae’s foot at the same time and began to tug and pull on them as
if she were trying to fit the two extra limbs onto herself.

Mr. Shortley began to curse and quickly stopped the car and Sarah Mae yelled
to quit but Mrs. Shortley apparently intended to rearrange the whole car at once.
She  thrashed  forward  and  backward,  clutching  at  everything  she  could  get  her
hands on and hugging it to herself, Mr. Shortley’s head, Sarah Mae’s leg, the cat, a
wad  of  white  bedding,  her  own  big  moon-like  knee;  then  all  at  once  her  fierce
expression  faded  into  a  look  of  astonishment  and  her  grip  on  what  she  had
loosened. One of her eyes drew near to the other and seemed to collapse quietly
and she was still.

The  two  girls,  who  didn’t  know  what  had  happened  to  her,  began  to  say,
“Where we goin, Ma? Where we goin?” They thought she was playing a joke and
that  their  father,  staring  straight  ahead  at  her,  was  imitating  a  dead  man.  They
didn’t  know  that  she  had  had  a  great  experience  or  ever  been  displaced  in  the
world from all that belonged to her. They were frightened by the gray slick road
before them and they kept repeating in higher and higher voices, “Where we goin,
Ma? Where we goin?” while their mother, her huge body rolled back still against
the seat and her eyes like blue-painted glass, seemed to contemplate for the first
time the tremendous frontiers of her true country.

II

“Well,”  Mrs.  McIntyre  said  to  the  old  Negro,  “we  can  get  along  without  them.
We’ve seen them come and seen them go—black and white.” She was standing in
the calf barn while he cleaned it and she held a rake in her hand and now and then
pulled a corn cob from a corner or pointed to a soggy spot that he had missed.
When she discovered the Shortleys were gone, she was delighted as it meant she
wouldn’t have to fire them. The people she hired always left her—because they
were that kind of people. Of all the families she had had, the Shortleys were the
best if she didn’t count the Displaced Person. They had been not quite trash; Mrs.
Shortley was a good woman, and she would miss her but as the Judge used to say,
you  couldn’t  have  your  pie  and  eat  it  too,  and  she  was  satisfied  with  the  D.P.
“We’ve seen them come and seen them go,” she repeated with satisfaction.

“And me and you,” the old man said, stooping to drag his hoe under a feed

rack, “is still here.”

She caught exactly what he meant her to catch in his tone. Bars of sunlight fell
from the cracked ceiling across his back and cut him in three distinct parts. She
watched  his  long  hands  clenched  around  the  hoe  and  his  crooked  old  profile
pushed close to them. You might have been here  before I was, she said to herself,
but  it’s  mighty  likely  I’ll  be  here  when  you’re  gone.  “I’ve  spent  half  my  life
fooling  with  worthless  people,”  she  said  in  a  severe  voice,  “but  now  I’m
through.”

“Black and white,” he said, “is the same.”
“I  am  through,”  she  repeated  and  gave  her  dark  smock  that  she  had  thrown
over her shoulders like a cape a quick snatch at the neck. She had on a broad-
brimmed black straw hat that had cost her twenty dollars twenty years ago and that
she used now for a sunhat. “Money is the root of all evil,” she said. “The Judge
said so every day. He said he deplored money. He said the reason you niggers
were so uppity was because there was so much money in circulation.”

The old Negro had known the Judge. “Judge say he long for the day when he
be too poor to pay a nigger to work,” he said. “Say when that day come, the world
be back on its feet.”

She leaned forward, her hands on her hips  and  her  neck  stretched  and  said,
“Well that day has almost come around here and I’m telling each and every one of

you:  you  better  look  sharp.  I  don’t  have  to  put  up  with  foolishness  any  more.  I
have somebody now who has to work!”

The old man knew when to answer and when not. At length he said, “We seen

them come and we seen them go.”

“However,  the  Shortleys  were  not  the  worst  by  far,”  she  said.  “I  well

remember those Garrits.”

“They was before them Collinses,” he said.
“No, before the Ringfields.”
“Sweet Lord, them Ringfields!” he murmured.
“None of that kind want to work,” she said.
“We seen them come and we seen them go,” he said as if this were a refrain.
“But we ain’t never had one before,” he said, bending himself up until he faced
her, “like what we got now.” He was cinnamon-colored with eyes that were so
blurred with age that they seemed to be hung behind cobwebs.

She gave him an intense stare and held it until, lowering his hands on the hoe,
he bent down again and dragged a pile of shavings alongside the wheelbarrow.
She  said  stiffly,  “He  can  wash  out  that  barn  in  the  time  it  took  Mr.  Shortley  to
make up his mind he had to do it.”

“He from Pole,” the old man muttered.
“From Poland.”
“In Pole it ain’t like it is here,” he said. “They got different ways of doing,”

and he began to mumble unintelligibly.

“What are you saying?” she said. “If you have anything to say about him, say it

and say it aloud.”

He was silent, bending his knees precariously and edging the rake along the

underside of the trough.

“If you know anything he’s done that he shouldn’t, I expect you to report it to

me,” she said.

“It warn’t like it was what he should ought or oughtn’t,” he muttered. “It was

like what nobody else don’t do.”

“You  don’t  have  anything  against  him,”  she  said  shortly,  “and  he’s  here  to

stay.”

“We ain’t never had one like him before is all,”  he  murmured  and  gave  his

polite laugh.

“Times  are  changing,”  she  said.  “Do  you  know  what’s  happening  to  this
world?  It’s  swelling  up.  It’s  getting  so  full  of  people  that  only  the  smart  thrifty
energetic ones are going to survive,” and she tapped the words, smart, thrifty, and
energetic out on the palm of her hand. Through the far end of the stall she could
see down the road to where the Displaced Person was standing in the open barn
door with the green hose in his hand. There was a certain stiffness about his figure
that  seemed  to  make  it  necessary  for  her  to  approach  him  slowly,  even  in  her
thoughts.  She  had  decided  this  was  because  she  couldn’t  hold  an  easy
conversation  with  him.  Whenever  she  said  anything  to  him,  she  found  herself
shouting  and  nodding  extravagantly  and  she  would  be  conscious  that  one  of  the
Negroes was leaning behind the nearest shed, watching.

“No indeed!” she said, sitting down on one of the feed racks and folding her
arms, “I’ve made up my mind that I’ve had enough trashy people on this place to
last me a lifetime and I’m not going to spend my last years fooling with Shortleys
and Ringfields and Collins when the world is full of people who have to work.”

“Howcome they so many extra?” he asked.
“People  are  selfish,”  she  said.  “They  have  too  many  children.  There’s  no

sense in it any more.”

He had picked up the wheelbarrow handles and was backing out the door and
he paused, half in the sunlight and half out, and stood there chewing his gums as if
he had forgotten which direction he wanted to move in.

“What you colored people don’t realize,” she said, “is that I’m the one around
here who holds all the strings together. If you don’t work, I don’t make any money
and I can’t pay you. You’re all dependent on me but you each and every one act
like the shoe is on the other foot.”

It was not possible to tell from his face if he heard her. Finally he backed out
with the wheelbarrow. “Judge say the devil he know is better than the devil he
don’t,” he said in a clear mutter and trundled off.

She  got  up  and  followed  him,  a  deep  vertical  pit  appearing  suddenly  in  the
center of her forehead, just under the red bangs. “The Judge has long since ceased

to pay the bills around here,” she called in a piercing voice.

He was the only one of her Negroes who had known the Judge and he thought
this gave him title. He had had a low opinion of Mr. Crooms and Mr. McIntyre,
her other husbands, and in his veiled polite way, he had congratulated her after
each  of  her  divorces.  When  he  thought  it  necessary,  he  would  work  under  a
window where he knew she was sitting and talk to himself, a careful roundabout
discussion, question and answer and then refrain. Once she had got up silently and
slammed the window down so hard that he had fallen backwards off his feet. Or
occasionally he spoke with the peacock. The cock would follow him around the
place,  his  steady  eye  on  the  ear  of  corn  that  stuck  up  from  the  old  man’s  back
pocket  or  he  would  sit  near  him  and  pick  himself.  Once  from  the  open  kitchen
door, she had heard him say to the bird, “I remember when it was twenty of you
walking  about  this  place  and  now  it’s  only  you  and  two  hens.  Crooms  it  was
twelve. McIntyre it was five. You and two hens now.”

And  that  time  she  had  stepped  out  of  the  door  onto  the  porch  and  said,
“MISTER  Crooms  and  MISTER  McIntyre!  And  I  don’t  want  to  hear  you  call
either  of  them  anything  else  again.  And  you  can  understand  this:  when  that
peachicken dies there won’t be any replacements.”

She kept the peacock only out of a superstitious fear of annoying the Judge in
his  grave.  He  had  liked  to  see  them  walking  around  the  place  for  he  said  they
made him feel rich. Of her three husbands, the Judge was the one most present to
her although he was the only one she had buried. He was in the family graveyard,
a little space fenced in the middle of the back cornfield, with his mother and father
and  grandfather  and  three  great  aunts  and  two  infant  cousins.  Mr.  Crooms,  her
second, was forty miles away in the state asylum and Mr. McIntyre, her last, was
intoxicated, she supposed, in some hotel room in Florida. But the Judge, sunk in
the cornfield with his family, was always at home.

She had married him when he was an old man and because of his money but
there had been another reason that she would not admit then, even to herself: she
had liked him. He was a dirty snuff-dipping Court House figure, famous all over
the county for being rich, who wore hightop shoes, a string tie, a gray suit with a
black stripe in it, and a yellowed panama hat, winter and summer. His teeth and

hair  were  tobacco-colored  and  his  face  a  clay  pink  pitted  and  tracked  with
mysterious prehistoric-looking marks as if he had been unearthed among fossils.
There had been a peculiar odor about him of sweaty fondled bills but he never
carried money on him or had a nickel to show. She was his secretary for a few
months  and  the  old  man  with  his  sharp  eye  had  seen  at  once  that  here  was  a
woman  who  admired  him  for  himself.  The  three  years  that  he  lived  after  they
married were the happiest and most prosperous of Mrs. McIntyre’s life, but when
he died his estate proved to be bankrupt. He left her a mortgaged house and fifty
acres that he had managed to cut the timber off before he died. It was as if, as the
final triumph of a successful life, he had been able to take everything with him.

But  she  had  survived.  She  had  survived  a  succession  of  tenant  farmers  and
dairymen that the old man himself would have found hard to outdo, and she had
been able to meet the constant drain of a tribe of moody unpredictable Negroes,
and she had even managed to hold her own against the incidental bloodsuckers,
the  cattle  dealers  and  lumber  men  and  the  buyers  and  sellers  of  anything  who
drove up in pieced-together trucks and honked in the yard.

She stood slightly reared back with her arms  folded  under  her  smock  and  a
satisfied expression on her face as she watched the Displaced Person turn off the
hose  and  disappear  inside  the  barn.  She  was  sorry  that  the  poor  man  had  been
chased out of Poland and run across Europe and had had to take up in a tenant
shack in a strange country, but she had not been responsible for any of this. She
had had a hard time herself. She knew what it was to struggle. People ought to
have to struggle. Mr. Guizac had probably had everything given to him all the way
across Europe and over here. He had probably not had to struggle enough. She had
given  him  a  job.  She  didn’t  know  if  he  was  grateful  or  not.  She  didn’t  know
anything about him except that he did the work. The truth was that he was not very
real to her yet. He was a kind of miracle that she had seen happen and that she
talked about but that she still didn’t believe.

She  watched  as  he  came  out  of  the  barn  and  motioned  to  Sulk,  who  was
coming around the back of the lot. He gesticulated and then took something out of
his  pocket  and  the  two  of  them  stood  looking  at  it.  She  started  down  the  lane
toward them. The Negro’s figure was slack and tall and he was craning his round

head forward in his usual idiotic way. He was a little better than half-witted but
when  they  were  like  that  they  were  always  good  workers.  The  Judge  had  said
always hire you a half-witted nigger because they don’t have sense enough to stop
working. The Pole was gesticulating rapidly. He left something with the colored
boy and then walked off and before she rounded the turn in the lane, she heard the
tractor  crank  up.  He  was  on  his  way  to  the  field.  The  Negro  was  still  hanging
there, gaping at whatever he had in his hand.

She entered the lot and walked through the barn, looking with approval at the
wet spotless concrete floor. It was only nine-thirty and Mr. Shortley had never got
anything washed until eleven. As she came out at the other end, she saw the Negro
moving very slowly in a diagonal path across the road in front of her, his eyes still
on what Mr. Guizac had given him. He didn’t see her and he paused and dipped
his knees and leaned over his hand, his tongue describing little circles. He had a
photograph.  He  lifted  one  finger  and  traced  it  lightly  over  the  surface  of  the
picture. Then he looked up and saw her and seemed to freeze, his mouth in a half-
grin, his finger lifted.

“Why haven’t you gone to the field?” she asked.
He  raised  one  foot  and  opened  his  mouth  wider  while  the  hand  with  the

photograph edged toward his back pocket.

“What’s that?” she said.
“It ain’t nothing,” he muttered and handed it to her automatically.
It was a photograph of a girl of about twelve in a white dress. She had blond
hair with a wreath in it and she looked forward out of light eyes that were bland
and composed. “Who is this child?” Mrs. McIntyre asked.

“She his cousin,” the boy said in a high voice.
“Well what are you doing with it?” she asked.
“She going to mah me,” he said in an even higher voice.
“Marry you!” she shrieked.
“I pays half to get her over here,” he said. “I pays him three dollar a week. She
bigger now. She his cousin. She don’t care who she mah she so glad to get away
from there.” The high voice seemed to shoot up like a nervous jet of sound and
then fall flat as he watched her face. Her eyes were the color of blue granite when

the glare falls on it, but she was not looking at him. She was looking down the
road where the distant sound of the tractor could be heard.

“I don’t reckon she goin to come nohow,” the boy murmured.
“I’ll see that you get every cent of your money back,” she said in a toneless
voice and turned and walked off, holding the photograph bent in two. There was
nothing about her small stiff figure to indicate that she was shaken.

As soon as she got in the house, she lay down on her bed and shut her eyes and
pressed  her  hand  over  her  heart  as  if  she  were  trying  to  keep  it  in  place.  Her
mouth opened and she made two or three dry little sounds. Then after a minute she
sat up and said aloud, “They’re all the same. It’s always been like this,” and she
fell  back  flat  again.  “Twenty  years  of  being  beaten  and  done  in  and  they  even
robbed  his  grave!”  and  remembering  that,  she  began  to  cry  quietly,  wiping  her
eyes every now and then with the hem of her smock.

What she had thought of was the angel over the Judge’s grave. This had been a
naked granite cherub that the old man had seen in the city one day in a tombstone
store window. He had been taken with it at once, partly because its face reminded
him  of  his  wife  and  partly  because  he  wanted  a  genuine  work  of  art  over  his
grave. He had come home with it sitting on the green plush train seat beside him.
Mrs.  McIntyre  had  never  noticed  the  resemblance  to  herself.  She  had  always
thought it hideous but when the Herrins stole it off the old man’s grave, she was
shocked and outraged. Mrs. Herrin had thought it very pretty and had walked to
the  graveyard  frequently  to  see  it,  and  when  the  Herrins  left  the  angel  left  with
them, all but its toes, for the ax old man Herrin had used to break it off with had
struck slightly too high. Mrs. McIntyre had never been able to afford to have it
replaced.

When she had cried all she could, she got up and went into the back hall, a
closet-like space that was dark and quiet as a chapel and sat down on the edge of
the Judge’s black mechanical chair with her elbow on his desk. This was a giant
roll-top  piece  of  furniture  pocked  with  pigeon  holes  full  of  dusty  papers.  Old
bankbooks  and  ledgers  were  stacked  in  the  half-open  drawers  and  there  was  a
small safe, empty but locked, set like a tabernacle in the center of it. She had left
this  part  of  the  house  unchanged  since  the  old  man’s  time.  It  was  a  kind  of

memorial  to  him,  sacred  because  he  had  conducted  his  business  here.  With  the
slightest  tilt  one  way  or  the  other,  the  chair  gave  a  rusty  skeletal  groan  that
sounded something like him when he had complained of his poverty. It had been
his  first  principle  to  talk  as  if  he  were  the  poorest  man  in  the  world  and  she
followed it, not only because he had but because it was true. When she sat with
her  intense  constricted  face  turned  toward  the  empty  safe,  she  knew  there  was
nobody poorer in the world than she was.

She sat motionless at the desk for ten or fifteen minutes and then as if she had

gained some strength, she got up and got in her car and drove to the cornfield.

The road ran through a shadowy pine thicket and ended on top of a hill that
rolled  fan-wise  down  and  up  again  in  a  broad  expanse  of  tassled  green.  Mr.
Guizac was cutting from the outside of the field in a circular path to  the  center
where the graveyard was all but hidden by the corn, and she could see him on the
high far side of the slope, mounted on the tractor with the cutter and wagon behind
him. From time to time, he had to  get  off  the  tractor  and  climb  in  the  wagon  to
spread  the  silage  because  the  Negro  had  not  arrived.  She  watched  impatiently,
standing in front of her black coupe with her arms folded under her smock, while
he progressed slowly around the rim of the field, gradually getting close enough
for her to wave to him to get down. He stopped the machine and jumped off and
came running forward, wiping his red jaw with a piece of grease rag.

“I want to talk to you,” she said and beckoned him to the edge of the thicket
where it was shady. He took off the cap and followed her, smiling, but his smile
faded when she turned and faced him. Her eyebrows, thin and fierce as a spider’s
leg,  had  drawn  together  ominously  and  the  deep  vertical  pit  had  plunged  down
from under the red bangs into the bridge of her nose. She removed the bent picture
from her pocket and handed it to him silently. Then she stepped back and said,
“Mr. Guizac! You would bring this poor innocent child over here and try to marry
her  to  a  half-witted  thieving  black  stinking  nigger!  What  kind  of  a  monster  are
you!”

He took the photograph with a slowly returning smile. “My cousin,” he said.

“She twelve here. First Communion. Six-ten now.”

Monster! she said to herself and looked at him as if she were seeing him for

the first time. His forehead and skull were white where they had been protected by
his cap but the rest of his face was red and bristled with short yellow hairs. His
eyes were like two bright nails behind his gold-rimmed spectacles that had been
mended over the nose with haywire. His whole face looked as  if  it  might  have
been  patched  together  out  of  several  others.  “Mr.  Guizac,”  she  said,  beginning
slowly and then speaking faster until she ended breathless in the middle of a word,
“that nigger cannot have a white wife from Europe. You can’t talk to a nigger that
way. You’ll  excite  him  and  besides  it  can’t  be  done.  Maybe  it  can  be  done  in
Poland but it can’t be done here and you’ll have to stop. It’s all foolishness. That
nigger don’t have a grain of sense and you’ll excite…”

“She in camp three year,” he said.
“Your cousin,” she said in a positive voice, “cannot come over here and marry

one of my Negroes.”

“She six-ten year,” he said. “From Poland. Mamma die, pappa die. She wait in
camp. Three camp.” He pulled a wallet from his pocket and fingered through it
and  took  out  another  picture  of  the  same  girl,  a  few  years  older,  dressed  in
something  dark  and  shapeless.  She  was  standing  against  a  wall  with  a  short
woman  who  apparently  had  no  teeth.  “She  mamma,”  he  said,  pointing  to  the
woman. “She die in two camp.”

“Mr. Guizac,” Mrs. McIntyre said, pushing the picture back at him, “I will not
have  my  niggers  upset.  I  cannot  run  this  place  without  my  niggers.  I  can  run  it
without you but not without them and if you mention this girl to Sulk again, you
won’t have a job with me. Do you understand?”

His face showed no comprehension. He seemed to be piecing all these words

together in his mind to make a thought.

Mrs.  McIntyre  remembered  Mrs.  Shortley’s  words:  “He  understands
everything, he only pretends he don’t so as to do exactly as he pleases,” and her
face regained the look of shocked wrath she had begun with. “I cannot understand
how a man who calls himself a Christian,” she said, “could bring a poor innocent
girl  over  here  and  marry  her  to  something  like  that.  I  cannot  understand  it.  I
cannot!” and she shook her head and looked into the distance with a pained blue
gaze.

After a second he shrugged and let his arms drop as if he were tired. “She no

care black,” he said. “She in camp three year.”

Mrs. McIntyre felt a peculiar weakness behind her knees. “Mr. Guizac,” she
said, “I don’t want to have to speak to you about this again. If I do, you’ll have to
find another place yourself. Do you understand?”

The patched face did not say. She had the impression that he didn’t see her

there. “This is my place,” she said. “I say who will come here and who won’t.”

“Ya,” he said and put back on his cap.
“I am not responsible for the world’s misery,” she said as an afterthought.
“Ya,” he said.
“You have a good job. You should be grateful to be here,” she added, “but I’m

not sure you are.”

“Ya,” he said and gave his little shrug and turned back to the tractor.
She watched him get on and maneuver the machine into the corn again. When
he had passed her and rounded the turn, she climbed to the top of the slope and
stood with her arms folded and looked out grimly over the field. “They’re all the
same,” she muttered, “whether they come from Poland or Tennessee. I’ve handled
Herrins  and  Ringfields  and  Shortleys  and  I  can  handle  a  Guizac,”  and  she
narrowed  her  gaze  until  it  closed  entirely  around  the  diminishing  figure  on  the
tractor as if she were watching him through a gunsight. All her life she had been
fighting the world’s overflow and now she had it in the form of a Pole. “You’re
just like all the rest of them,” she said, “—only smart and thrifty and energetic but
so am I. And this is my place,” and she stood there, a small black-hatted, black-
smocked figure with an aging cherubic face, and folded her arms as if she were
equal  to  anything.  But  her  heart  was  beating  as  if  some  interior  violence  had
already been done to her. She opened her eyes to include the whole field so that
the figure on the tractor was no larger than a grasshopper in her widened view.

She  stood  there  for  some  time.  There  was  a  slight  breeze  and  the  corn
trembled  in  great  waves  on  both  sides  of  the  slope.  The  big  cutter,  with  its
monotonous roar, continued to shoot it pulverized into the wagon in a steady spurt
of fodder. By nightfall, the Displaced Person would have worked his way around
and  around  until  there  would  be  nothing  on  either  side  of  the  two  hills  but  the

stubble, and down in the center, risen like a little island, the graveyard where the
Judge lay grinning under his desecrated monument.

III
The priest, with his long bland face supported on one finger, had been talking for
ten minutes about Purgatory while Mrs. McIntyre squinted furiously at him from an
opposite  chair.  They  were  drinking  ginger  ale  on  her  front  porch  and  she  kept
rattling  the  ice  in  her  glass,  rattling  her  beads,  rattling  her  bracelet  like  an
impatient pony jingling its harness. There is no moral obligation to keep him, she
was saying under her breath, there is absolutely no moral obligation. Suddenly she
lurched up and her voice fell across his brogue like a drill into a mechanical saw.
“Listen,” she said, “I’m not theological. I’m practical! I want to talk to you about
something practical!”

“Arrrrrrr,” he groaned, grating to a halt.
She  had  put  at  least  a  finger  of  whiskey  in  her  own  ginger  ale  so  that  she
would be able to endure his full-length visit and she sat down awkwardly, finding
the chair closer to her than she had expected. “Mr. Guizac is not satisfactory,” she
said.

The old man raised his eyebrows in mock wonder.
“He’s extra,” she said. “He doesn’t fit in. I have to have somebody who fits

in.”

The priest carefully turned his hat on his knees. He had a little trick of waiting
a second silently and then swinging the conversation back into his own paths. He
was about eighty. She had never known a priest until she had gone to see this one
on the business of getting her the Displaced Person. After he had got her the Pole,
he  had  used  the  business  introduction  to  try  to  convert  her—just  as  she  had
supposed he would.

“Give  him  time,”  the  old  man  said.  “He’ll  learn  to  fit  in.  Where  is  that
beautiful birrrrd of yours?” he asked and then said, “Arrrrr, I see him!” and stood
up  and  looked  out  over  the  lawn  where  the  peacock  and  the  two  hens  were
stepping at a strained attention, their long necks ruffled, the cock’s violent blue
and the hens’ silver-green, glinting in the late afternoon sun.

“Mr.  Guizac,”  Mrs.  McIntyre  continued,  bearing  down  with  a  flat  steady
voice, “is very efficient. I’ll admit that. But he doesn’t understand how to get on
with my niggers and they don’t like him. I can’t have my niggers run off. And I
don’t like his attitude. He’s not the least grateful for being here.”

The priest had his hand on the screen door and he opened it, ready to make his

escape. “Arrrr, I must be off,” he murmured.

“I tell you if I had a white man who understood the Negroes, I’d have to let

Mr. Guizac go,” she said and stood up again.

He turned then and looked her in the face. “He has nowhere to go,” he said.
Then he said, “Dear lady, I know you well enough to know you wouldn’t turn him
out for a trifle!” and without waiting for an answer, he raised his hand and gave
her his blessing in a rumbling voice.

She smiled angrily and said, “I didn’t create this situation, of course.”
The priest let his eyes wander toward the birds. They had reached the middle
of  the  lawn.  The  cock  stopped  suddenly  and  curving  his  neck  backwards,  he
raised  his  tail  and  spread  it  with  a  shimmering  timbrous  noise.  Tiers  of  small
pregnant  suns  floated  in  a  green-gold  haze  over  his  head.  The  priest  stood
transfixed, his jaw slack. Mrs. McIntyre wondered where she had ever seen such
an idiotic old man. “Christ will come like that!” he said in a loud gay voice and
wiped his hand over his mouth and stood there, gaping.

Mrs. McIntyre’s face assumed a set puritanical expression and she reddened.
Christ in the conversation embarrassed her the way sex had her mother. “It is not
my  responsibility  that  Mr.  Guizac  has  nowhere  to  go,”  she  said.  “I  don’t  find
myself responsible for all the extra people in the world.”

The old man didn’t seem to hear her. His attention was fixed on the cock who
was  taking  minute  steps  backward,  his  head  against  the  spread  tail.  “The
Transfiguration,” he murmured.

She had no idea what he was talking about. “Mr. Guizac didn’t have to come

here in the first place,” she said, giving him a hard look.

The cock lowered his tail and began to pick grass.
“He didn’t have to come in the first place,” she repeated, emphasizing each

word.

The old man smiled absently. “He came to redeem us,” he said and blandly

reached for her hand and shook it and said he must go.

*   *   *

If  Mr.  Shortley  had  not  returned  a  few  weeks  later,  she  would  have  gone  out
looking for a new man to hire. She had not wanted him back but when she saw the
familiar black automobile drive up the road and stop by the side of the house, she
had the feeling that she was the one returning, after a long miserable trip, to her
own  place.  She  realized  all  at  once  that  it  was  Mrs.  Shortley  she  had  been
missing. She had had no one to talk to since Mrs. Shortley left, and she ran to the
door, expecting to see her heaving herself up the steps.

Mr. Shortley stood there alone. He had on a black felt hat and a shirt with red
and blue palm trees designed in it but the hollows in his long bitten blistered face
were deeper than they had been a month ago.

“Well!” she said. “Where is Mrs. Shortley?”
Mr. Shortley didn’t say anything. The change in his face seemed to have come
from the inside; he looked like a man who had gone for a long time without water.
“She  was  God’s  own  angel,”  he  said  in  a  loud  voice.  “She  was  the  sweetest
woman in the world.”

“Where is she?” Mrs. McIntyre murmured.
“Daid,”  he  said.  “She  had  herself  a  stroke  on  the  day  she  left  out  of  here.”
There was a corpse-like composure about his face. “I figure that Pole killed her,”
he said. “She seen through him from the first. She known he come from the devil.
She told me so.”

It took Mrs. McIntyre three days to get over Mrs. Shortley’s death. She told
herself that anyone would have thought they were kin. She rehired Mr. Shortley to
do farm work though actually she didn’t want him without his wife. She told him
she was going to give thirty days’ notice to the Displaced Person at the end of the
month and that then he could have his job back in the dairy. Mr. Shortley preferred
the  dairy  job  but  he  was  willing  to  wait.  He  said  it  would  give  him  some
satisfaction to see the Pole leave the place, and Mrs. McIntyre said it would give
her a great deal of satisfaction. She confessed that she should have been content

with the help she had in the first place and not have been reaching into other parts
of the world for it. Mr. Shortley said he never had cared for foreigners since he
had been in the first world’s war and seen what they were like. He said he had
seen all kinds then but that none of them were like us. He said he recalled the face
of one man who had thrown a hand-grenade at him and that the man had had little
round eye-glasses exactly like Mr. Guizac’s.

“But Mr. Guizac is a Pole, he’s not a German,” Mrs. McIntyre said.
“It  ain’t  a  great  deal  of  difference  in  them  two  kinds,”  Mr.  Shortley  had

explained.

The Negroes were pleased to see Mr. Shortley back. The Displaced Person
had expected them to work as hard as he worked himself, whereas Mr. Shortley
recognized their limitations. He had never been a very good worker himself with
Mrs. Shortley to keep him in line, but without her, he was even more forgetful and
slow. The Pole worked as fiercely as ever and seemed to have no inkling that he
was about to be fired. Mrs. McIntyre saw jobs done in a short time that she had
thought would never get done at all. Still she was resolved to get rid of him. The
sight of his small stiff figure moving quickly here and there had come to be the
most irritating sight on the place for her, and she felt she had been tricked by the
old priest. He had said there was no legal obligation for her to keep the Displaced
Person if he was not satisfactory, but then he had brought up the moral one.

She meant to tell him that her moral obligation was to her own people, to Mr.
Shortley, who had fought in the world war for his country and not to Mr. Guizac
who had merely arrived here to take advantage of whatever he could. She felt she
must have this out with the priest before she fired the Displaced Person. When the
first of the month came and the priest hadn’t called, she put off giving the Pole
notice for a little longer.

Mr. Shortley told himself that he should have known all along that no woman
was going to do what she said she was when she said she was. He didn’t know
how long he could afford to put up with her shilly-shallying. He thought himself
that she was going soft and was afraid to turn the Pole out for fear he would have
a hard time getting another place. He could tell her the truth about this: that if she
let  him  go,  in  three  years  he  would  own  his  own  house  and  have  a  television

aerial sitting on top of it. As a matter of policy, Mr. Shortley began to come to her
back door every evening to put certain facts before her. “A white man sometimes
don’t get the consideration a nigger gets,” he said, “but that don’t matter because
he’s still white, but sometimes,” and here he would pause and look off into the
distance, “a man that’s fought and bled and died in the service of his native land
don’t get the consideration of one of them like them he was fighting. I ast you: is
that right?” When he asked her such questions he could watch her face and tell he
was making an impression. She didn’t look too well these days. He noticed lines
around her eyes that hadn’t been there when he and Mrs. Shortley had been the
only white help on the place. Whenever he thought of Mrs. Shortley, he felt his
heart go down like an old bucket into a dry well.

The  old  priest  kept  away  as  if  he  had  been  frightened  by  his  last  visit  but
finally, seeing that the Displaced Person had not been fired, he ventured to call
again to take up giving Mrs. McIntyre instructions where he remembered leaving
them off. She had not asked to be instructed but he instructed anyway, forcing a
little definition of one of the sacraments or of some dogma into each conversation
he had, no matter with whom. He sat on her porch, taking no notice of her partly
mocking,  partly  outraged  expression  as  she  sat  shaking  her  foot,  waiting  for  an
opportunity to drive a wedge into his talk. “For,” he was saying, as if he spoke of
something that had happened yesterday in town, “when God sent his Only Begotten
Son,  Jesus  Christ  Our  Lord”—he  slightly  bowed  his  head—“as  a  Redeemer  to
mankind, He…”

“Father Flynn!” she said in a voice that made him jump. “I want to talk to you

about something serious!”

The skin under the old man’s right eye flinched.
“As far as I’m concerned,” she said and glared at him fiercely, “Christ was

just another D.P.”

He  raised  his  hands  slightly  and  let  them  drop  on  his  knees.  “Arrrrrr,”  he

murmured as if he were considering this.

“I’m going to let that man go,” she said. “I don’t have any obligation to him.
My obligation is to the people who’ve done something for their country, not to the
ones  who’ve  just  come  over  to  take  advantage  of  what  they  can  get,”  and  she

began  to  talk  rapidly,  remembering  all  her  arguments.  The  priest’s  attention
seemed  to  retire  to  some  private  oratory  to  wait  until  she  got  through.  Once  or
twice  his  gaze  roved  out  onto  the  lawn  as  if  he  were  hunting  some  means  of
escape but she didn’t stop. She told him how she had been hanging onto this place
for  thirty  years,  always  just  barely  making  it  against  people  who  came  from
nowhere and were going nowhere, who didn’t want anything but an automobile.
She said she had found out they were the same whether they came from Poland or
Tennessee. When the Guizacs got ready, she said, they would not hesitate to leave
her. She told him how the people who looked rich were the poorest of all because
they  had  the  most  to  keep  up.  She  asked  him  how  he  thought  she  paid  her  feed
bills. She told him she would like to have her house done over but she couldn’t
afford  it.  She  couldn’t  even  afford  to  have  the  monument  restored  over  her
husband’s  grave.  She  asked  him  if  he  would  like  to  guess  what  her  insurance
amounted  to  for  the  year.  Finally  she  asked  him  if  he  thought  she  was  made  of
money  and  the  old  man  suddenly  let  out  a  great  ugly  bellow  as  if  this  were  a
comical question.

When the visit was over, she felt let down, though she had clearly triumphed
over him. She made up her mind now that on the first of the month, she would give
the Displaced Person his thirty days’ notice and she told Mr. Shortley so.

Mr. Shortley didn’t say anything. His wife had been the only woman he was
ever  acquainted  with  who  was  never  scared  off  from  doing  what  she  said.  She
said the Pole had been sent by the devil and the priest. Mr. Shortley had no doubt
that the priest had got some peculiar control over Mrs. McIntyre and that before
long  she  would  start  attending  his  Masses.  She  looked  as  if  something  was
wearing her down from the inside. She was thinner and more fidgety, and not as
sharp as she used to be. She would look at a milk can now and not see how dirty it
was and he had seen her lips move when she was not talking. The Pole never did
anything the wrong way but all the same he was very irritating to her. Mr. Shortley
himself  did  things  as  he  pleased—not  always  her  way—but  she  didn’t  seem  to
notice. She had noticed though that the Pole and all his family were getting fat; she
pointed out to Mr. Shortley that the hollows had come out of their cheeks and that
they saved every cent they made. “Yes’m, and one of these days he’ll be able to

buy and sell you out,” Mr. Shortley had ventured to say, and he could tell that the
statement had shaken her.

“I’m just waiting for the first,” she had said.
Mr. Shortley waited too and the first came and went and she didn’t fire him.
He could have told anybody how it would be. He was not a violent man but he
hated to see a woman done in by a foreigner. He felt that that was one thing a man
couldn’t stand by and see happen.

There was no reason Mrs. McIntyre should not fire Mr. Guizac at once but she
put it off from day to day. She was worried about her bills and about her health.
She  didn’t  sleep  at  night  or  when  she  did  she  dreamed  about  the  Displaced
Person. She had never discharged anyone before; they had all left her. One night
she dreamed that Mr. Guizac and his family were moving into her house and that
she was moving in with Mr. Shortley. This was too much for her and she woke up
and didn’t sleep again for several nights; and one night she dreamed that the priest
came to call and droned on and on saying, “Dear lady, I know your tender heart
won’t suffer you to turn the porrrrr man out. Think of the thousands of them, think
of the ovens and the boxcars and the camps and the sick children and Christ Our
Lord.”

“He’s  extra  and  he’s  upset  the  balance  around  here,”  she  said,  “and  I’m  a
logical practical woman and there are no ovens here and no camps and no Christ
Our Lord and when he leaves, he’ll make more money. He’ll work at the mill and
buy a car and don’t talk to me—all they want is a car.”

“The ovens and the boxcars and the sick children,” droned the priest, “and our

dear Lord.”

“Just one too many,” she said.
The next morning, she made up her mind while she was eating her breakfast
that she would give him his notice at once, and she stood up and walked out of the
kitchen and down the road with her table napkin still in her hand. Mr. Guizac was
spraying the barn, standing in his swaybacked way with one hand on his hip. He
turned  off  the  hose  and  gave  her  an  impatient  kind  of  attention  as  if  she  were
interfering with his work. She had not thought of what she would say to him, she
had merely come. She stood in the barn door, looking severely at the wet spotless

floor and the dripping stanchions. “Ya goot?” he said.

“Mr.  Guizac,”  she  said,  “I  can  barely  meet  my  obligations  now.”  Then  she

said in a louder, stronger voice, emphasizing each word, “I have bills to pay.”

“I too,” Mr. Guizac said. “Much bills, little money,” and he shrugged.
At the other end of the barn, she saw a long beak-nosed shadow glide like a
snake halfway up the sunlit open door and stop; and somewhere behind her, she
was  aware  of  a  silence  where  the  sound  of  the  Negroes  shoveling  had  come  a
minute before. “This is my place,” she said angrily. “All of you are extra. Each
and every one of you are extra!”

“Ya,” Mr. Guizac said and turned on the hose again.
She wiped her mouth with the napkin she had in her hand and walked off, as if

she had accomplished what she came for.

Mr. Shortley’s shadow withdrew from the door and he leaned against the side
of  the  barn  and  lit  half  of  a  cigarette  that  he  took  out  of  his  pocket.  There  was
nothing for him to do now but wait on the hand of God to strike, but he knew one
thing: he was not going to wait with his mouth shut.

Starting that morning, he began to complain and to state his side of the case to
every person he saw, black or white. He complained in the grocery store and at
the courthouse and on the street corner and directly to Mrs. McIntyre herself, for
there was nothing underhanded about him. If the Pole could have understood what
he had to say, he would have said it to him too. “All men was created free and
equal,” he said to Mrs. McIntyre, “and I risked my life and limb to prove it. Gone
over there and fought and bled and died and come back on over here and find out
who’s got my job—just exactly who I been fighting. It was a hand-grenade come
that near to killing me and I seen who throwed it—little man with eye-glasses just
like his. Might have bought them at the same store. Small world,” and he gave a
bitter little laugh. Since he didn’t have Mrs. Shortley to do the talking any more,
he had started doing it himself and had found that he had a gift for it. He had the
power of making other people see his logic. He talked a good deal to the Negroes.
“Whyn’t  you  go  back  to Africa?”  he  asked  Sulk  one  morning  as  they  were

cleaning out the silo. “That’s your country, ain’t it?”

“I ain’t goin there,” the boy said. “They might eat me up.”

“Well,  if  you  behave  yourself  it  isn’t  any  reason  you  can’t  stay  here,”  Mr.
Shortley  said  kindly.  “Because  you  didn’t  run  away  from  nowhere.  Your
granddaddy was bought. He didn’t have a thing to do with coming. It’s the people
that run away from where they come from that I ain’t got any use for.”

“I never felt no need to travel,” the Negro said.
“Well,” Mr. Shortley said, “if I was going to travel again, it would be to either
China or Africa. You go to either of them two places and you can tell right away
what the difference is between you and them. You go to these other places and the
only  way  you  can  tell  is  if  they  say  something. And  then  you  can’t  always  tell
because about half of them know the English language. That’s where we make our
mistake,” he said, “—letting all them people onto English. There’d be a heap less
trouble  if  everybody  only  knew  his  own  language.  My  wife  said  knowing  two
languages was like having eyes in the back of your head. You couldn’t put nothing
over on her.”

“You sho couldn’t,” the boy muttered, and then he added, “She was fine. She

was sho fine. I never known a finer white woman than her.”

Mr. Shortley turned in the opposite direction and worked silently for a while.
After a few minutes he leaned up and tapped the colored boy on the shoulder with
the handle of his shovel. For a second he only looked at him while a great deal of
meaning gathered in his wet eyes. Then he said softly, “Revenge is mine, saith the
Lord.”

Mrs. McIntyre found that everybody in town knew Mr. Shortley’s version of
her  business  and  that  everyone  was  critical  of  her  conduct.  She  began  to
understand  that  she  had  a  moral  obligation  to  fire  the  Pole  and  that  she  was
shirking it because she found it hard to do. She could not stand the increasing guilt
any longer and on a cold Saturday morning, she started off after breakfast to fire
him. She walked down to the machine shed where she heard him cranking up the
tractor.

There was a heavy frost on the ground that made the fields look like the rough
backs of sheep; the sun was almost silver and the woods stuck up like dry bristles
on  the  sky  line.  The  countryside  seemed  to  be  receding  from  the  little  circle  of
noise around the shed. Mr. Guizac was squatting on the ground beside the small

tractor, putting in a part. Mrs. McIntyre hoped to get the fields turned over while
he  still  had  thirty  days  to  work  for  her.  The  colored  boy  was  standing  by  with
some tools in his hand and Mr. Shortley was under the shed about to get up on the
large tractor and back it out. She meant to wait until he and the Negro got out of
the way before she began her unpleasant duty.

She stood watching Mr. Guizac, stamping her feet on the hard ground, for the
cold was climbing like a paralysis up her feet and legs. She had on a heavy black
coat and a red head-kerchief with her black hat pulled down on top of it to keep
the glare out of her eyes. Under the black brim her face had an abstracted look and
once or twice her lips moved silently. Mr. Guizac shouted over the noise of the
tractor for the Negro to hand him a screwdriver and when he got it, he turned over
on his back on the icy ground and reached up under the machine. She could not see
his face, only his feet and legs and trunk sticking impudently out from the side of
the tractor. He had on rubber boots that were cracked and splashed with mud. He
raised one knee and then lowered it and turned himself slightly. Of all the things
she resented about him, she resented most that he hadn’t left on his own accord.

Mr. Shortley had got on the large tractor and was backing it out from under the
shed. He seemed to be warmed by it as if its heat and strength sent impulses up
through him that he obeyed instantly. He had headed it toward the small tractor but
he braked it on a slight incline and jumped off and turned back toward the shed.
Mrs. McIntyre was looking fixedly at Mr. Guizac’s legs lying flat on the ground
now.  She  heard  the  brake  on  the  large  tractor  slip  and,  looking  up,  she  saw  it
move forward, calculating its own path. Later she remembered that she had seen
the Negro jump silently out of the way as if a spring in the earth had released him
and  that  she  had  seen  Mr.  Shortley  turn  his  head  with  incredible  slowness  and
stare silently over his shoulder and that she had started to shout to the Displaced
Person but that she had not. She had felt her eyes and Mr. Shortley’s eyes and the
Negro’s eyes come together in one look that froze them in collusion forever, and
she  had  heard  the  little  noise  the  Pole  made  as  the  tractor  wheel  broke  his
backbone. The two men ran forward to help and she fainted.

She  remembered,  when  she  came  to,  running  somewhere,  perhaps  into  the
house  and  out  again  but  she  could  not  remember  what  for  or  if  she  had  fainted

again when she got there. When she finally came back to where the tractors were,
the ambulance had arrived. Mr. Guizac’s body was covered with the bent bodies
of his wife and two children and by a black one which hung over him, murmuring
words she didn’t understand. At first she thought this must be the doctor but then
with  a  feeling  of  annoyance  she  recognized  the  priest,  who  had  come  with  the
ambulance  and  was  slipping  something  into  the  crushed  man’s  mouth.  After  a
minute he stood up and she looked first at his bloody pants legs and then at his
face which was not averted from her but was as withdrawn and expressionless as
the rest of the countryside. She only stared at him for she was too shocked by her
experience  to  be  quite  herself.  Her  mind  was  not  taking  hold  of  all  that  was
happening. She felt she was in some foreign country where the people bent over
the body were natives, and she watched like a stranger while the dead man was
carried away in the ambulance.

That evening, Mr. Shortley left without notice to look for a new position and
the Negro, Sulk, was taken with a sudden desire to see more of the world and set
off for the southern part of the state. The old man Astor could not work without
company.  Mrs.  McIntyre  hardly  noticed  that  she  had  no  help  left  for  she  came
down with a nervous affliction and had to go to the hospital. When she came back,
she saw that the place would be too much for her to run now and she turned her
cows over to a professional auctioneer (who sold them at a loss) and retired to
live on what she had, while she tried to save her declining health. A numbness
developed  in  one  of  her  legs  and  her  hands  and  head  began  to  jiggle  and
eventually she had to stay in bed all the time with only a colored woman to wait
on her. Her eyesight grew steadily worse and she lost her voice altogether. Not
many  people  remembered  to  come  out  to  the  country  to  see  her  except  the  old
priest. He came regularly once a week with a bag of breadcrumbs and, after he
had fed these to the peacock, he would come in and sit by the side of her bed and
explain the doctrines of the Church.

A Temple of the Holy Ghost

ALL weekend the two girls were calling each other Temple One and Temple Two,
shaking  with  laughter  and  getting  so  red  and  hot  that  they  were  positively  ugly,
particularly Joanne who had spots on her face anyway. They came in the brown
convent uniforms they had to wear at Mount St. Scholastica but as soon as they
opened their suitcases, they took off the uniforms and put on red skirts and loud
blouses.  They  put  on  lipstick  and  their  Sunday  shoes  and  walked  around  in  the
high heels all over the house, always passing the long mirror in the hall slowly to
get a look at their legs. None of their ways were lost on the child. If only one of
them had come, that one would have played with her, but since there were two of
them, she was out of it and watched them suspiciously from a distance.

They were fourteen—two years older than she was—but neither of them was
bright,  which  was  why  they  had  been  sent  to  the  convent.  If  they  had  gone  to  a
regular  school,  they  wouldn’t  have  done  anything  but  think  about  boys;  at  the
convent the sisters, her mother said, would keep a grip on their necks. The child
decided, after observing them for a few hours, that they were practically morons
and  she  was  glad  to  think  that  they  were  only  second  cousins  and  she  couldn’t
have inherited any of their stupidity. Susan called herself Su-zan. She was very
skinny but she had a pretty pointed face and red hair. Joanne had yellow hair that
was  naturally  curly  but  she  talked  through  her  nose  and  when  she  laughed,  she
turned purple in patches. Neither one of them could say an intelligent thing and all
their sentences began, “You know this boy I know well one time he…”

They  were  to  stay  all  weekend  and  her  mother  said  she  didn’t  see  how  she
would entertain them since she didn’t know any boys their age. At this, the child,
struck  suddenly  with  genius,  shouted,  “There’s  Cheat!  Get  Cheat  to  come! Ask
Miss Kirby to get Cheat to come show them around!” and she nearly choked on the
food she had in her mouth. She doubled over laughing and hit the table with her
fist and looked at the two bewildered girls while water started in her eyes and
rolled down her fat cheeks and the braces she had in her mouth glared like tin. She

had never thought of anything so funny before.

Her mother laughed in a guarded way and Miss Kirby blushed and carried her
fork  delicately  to  her  mouth  with  one  pea  on  it.  She  was  a  long-faced  blonde
schoolteacher who boarded with them and Mr. Cheatam was her admirer, a rich
old farmer who arrived every Saturday afternoon in a fifteen-year-old baby-blue
Pontiac  powdered  with  red  clay  dust  and  black  inside  with  Negroes  that  he
charged  ten  cents  apiece  to  bring  into  town  on  Saturday  afternoons.  After  he
dumped them he came to see Miss Kirby, always bringing a little gift—a bag of
boiled peanuts or a watermelon or a stalk of sugar cane and once a wholesale box
of Baby Ruth candy bars. He was bald-headed except for a little fringe of rust-
colored  hair  and  his  face  was  nearly  the  same  color  as  the  unpaved  roads  and
washed like them with ruts and gulleys. He wore a pale green shirt with a thin
black  stripe  in  it  and  blue  galluses  and  his  trousers  cut  across  a  protruding
stomach that he pressed tenderly from time to time with his big flat thumb. All his
teeth  were  backed  with  gold  and  he  would  roll  his  eyes  at  Miss  Kirby  in  an
impish way and say, “Haw haw,” sitting in their porch swing with his legs spread
apart and his hightopped shoes pointing in opposite directions on the floor.

“I don’t think Cheat is going to be in town this weekend,” Miss Kirby said, not
in the least understanding that this was a joke, and the child was convulsed afresh,
threw herself backward in her chair, fell out of it, rolled on the floor and lay there
heaving. Her mother told her if she didn’t stop this foolishness she would have to
leave the table.

Yesterday her mother had arranged with Alonzo Myers to drive them the forty-
five miles to Mayville, where the convent was, to get the girls for the weekend
and Sunday afternoon he was hired to drive them back again. He was an eighteen-
year-old boy who weighed two hundred and fifty pounds and worked for the taxi
company  and  he  was  all  you  could  get  to  drive  you  anywhere.  He  smoked  or
rather chewed a short black cigar and he had a round sweaty chest that showed
through the yellow nylon shirt he wore. When he drove all the windows of the car
had to be open.

“Well there’s Alonzo!” the child roared from the floor. “Get Alonzo to show

em around! Get Alonzo!”

The two girls, who had seen Alonzo, began to scream their indignation.
Her mother thought this was funny too but she said, “That’ll be about enough
out of you,” and changed the subject. She asked them why they called each other
Temple One and Temple Two and this sent them off into gales of giggles. Finally
they managed to explain. Sister Perpetua, the oldest nun at the Sisters of Mercy in
Mayville, had given them a lecture on what to do if a young man should—here
they  laughed  so  hard  they  were  not  able  to  go  on  without  going  back  to  the
beginning—on what to do if a young man should—they put their heads in their laps
—on what to do if—they finally managed to shout it out—if he should “behave in
an ungentlemanly manner with them in the back of an automobile.” Sister Perpetua
said  they  were  to  say,  “Stop  sir!  I  am  a  Temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost!”  and  that
would put an end to it. The child sat up off the floor with a blank face. She didn’t
see anything so funny in this. What was really funny was the idea of Mr. Cheatam
or Alonzo Myers beauing them around. That killed her.

Her  mother  didn’t  laugh  at  what  they  had  said.  “I  think  you  girls  are  pretty

silly,” she said. “After all, that’s what you are—Temples of the Holy Ghost.”

The two of them looked up at her, politely concealing their giggles, but with
astonished  faces  as  if  they  were  beginning  to  realize  that  she  was  made  of  the
same stuff as Sister Perpetua.

Miss Kirby preserved her set expression and the child thought, it’s all over her
head  anyhow.  I  am  a  Temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  she  said  to  herself,  and  was
pleased with the phrase. It made her feel as if somebody had given her a present.

After dinner, her mother collapsed on the bed and said, “Those girls are going

to drive me crazy if I don’t get some entertainment for them. They’re awful.”

“I bet I know who you could get,” the child started.
“Now listen. I don’t want to hear any more about Mr. Cheatam,” her mother
said. “You embarrass Miss Kirby. He’s her only friend. Oh my Lord,” and she sat
up and looked mournfully out the window, “that poor soul is so lonesome she’ll
even ride in that car that smells like the last circle in hell.”

And  she’s  a  Temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  too,  the  child  reflected.   “I  wasn’t
thinking of him,” she said. “I was thinking of those two Wilkinses, Wendell and
Cory,  that  visit  old  lady  Buchell  out  on  her  farm.  They’re  her  grandsons.  They

work for her.”

“Now  that’s  an  idea,”  her  mother  murmured  and  gave  her  an  appreciative
look. But then she slumped again. “They’re only farm boys. These girls would turn
up their noses at them.”

“Huh,” the child said. “They wear pants. They’re sixteen and they got a car.
Somebody said they were both going to be Church of God preachers because you
don’t have to know nothing to be one.”

“They would be perfectly safe with those boys all right,” her mother said and
in a minute she got up and called their grandmother on the telephone and after she
had talked to the old woman a half an hour, it was arranged that Wendell and  Cory
would come to supper and afterwards take the girls to the fair.

Susan and Joanne were so pleased that they washed their hair and rolled it up
on  aluminum  curlers.  Hah,  thought  the  child,  sitting  cross-legged  on  the  bed  to
watch them undo the curlers, wait’ll you get a load of Wendell and Cory! “You’ll
like these boys,” she said. “Wendell is six feet tall ands got red hair. Cory is six
feet six inches talls got black hair and wears a sport jacket and they gottem this
car with a squirrel tail on the front.”

“How does a child like you know so much about these men?” Susan asked and

pushed her face up close to the mirror to watch the pupils in her eyes dilate.

The  child  lay  back  on  the  bed  and  began  to  count  the  narrow  boards  in  the
ceiling until she lost her place. I know them all right, she said to someone. We
fought in the world war together. They were under me and I saved them five times
from Japanese suicide divers and Wendell said I am going to marry that kid and
the other said oh no you ain’t I am and I said neither one of you is because I will
court marshall you all before you can bat an eye. “I’ve seen them around is all,”
she said.

When they came the girls stared at them a second and then began to giggle and
talk to each other about the convent. They sat in the swing together and Wendell
and  Cory  sat  on  the  banisters  together.  They  sat  like  monkeys,  their  knees  on  a
level with their shoulders and their arms hanging down between. They were short
thin boys with red faces and high cheekbones and pale seed-like eyes. They had
brought a harmonica and a guitar. One of them began to blow softly on the mouth

organ, watching the girls over it, and the  other  started  strumming  the  guitar  and
then began to sing, not watching them but keeping his head tilted upward as if he
were  only  interested  in  hearing  himself.  He  was  singing  a  hillbilly  song  that
sounded half like a love song and half like a hymn.

The child was standing on a barrel pushed into some bushes at the side of the
house, her face on a level with the porch floor. The sun was going down and the
sky was turning a bruised violet color that seemed to be connected with the sweet
mournful sound of the music. Wendell began to smile as he sang and to look at the
girls. He looked at Susan with a dog-like loving look and sang,

“I’ve found a friend in Jesus,
He’s everything to me,
He’s the lily of the valley,
He’s the One who’s set me free!”

Then he turned the same look on Joanne and sang,

“A wall of fire about me,
I’ve nothing now to fear,
He’s the lily of the valley,
And I’ll always have Him near!”

The girls looked at each other and held their lips stiff so as not to giggle but
Susan let out one anyway and clapped her hand on her mouth. The singer frowned
and for a few seconds only strummed the guitar. Then he began “The Old Rugged
Cross” and they listened politely but when he had finished they said, “Let us sing
one!”  and  before  he  could  start  another,  they  began  to  sing  with  their  convent-
trained voices,

“Tantum ergo Sacramentum
Veneremur Cernui:
Et antiquum documentum
Novo cedat ritui:”

The child watched the boys’ solemn faces turn with perplexed frowning stares

at each other as if they were uncertain whether they were being made fun of.

“Praestet fides supplementum
Sensuum defectui.
Genitori, Genitoque
Laus et jubilatio
Salus, honor, virtus quoque…”

The boys’ faces were dark red in the gray-purple light. They looked fierce and

startled.

“Sit et benedictio;
Procedenti ab utroque
Com par sit laudatio.
Amen.”

The girls dragged out the Amen and then there was a silence.
“That must be Jew singing,” Wendell said and began to tune the guitar.
The girls giggled idiotically but the child stamped her foot on the barrel. “You
big dumb ox!” she shouted. “You big dumb Church of God ox!” she roared and
fell off the barrel and scrambled up and shot around the corner of the house as they
jumped from the banister to see who was shouting.

Her mother had arranged for them to have supper in the back yard and she had
a table laid out there under some Japanese lanterns that she pulled out for garden
parties.  “I  ain’t  eating  with  them,”  the  child  said  and  snatched  her  plate  off  the
table and carried it to the kitchen and sat down with the thin blue-gummed cook
and ate her supper.

“Howcome you be so ugly sometime?” the cook asked.
“Those stupid idiots,” the child said.
The lanterns gilded the leaves of the trees orange on the level where they hung
and above them was black-green and below them were different dim muted colors
that made the girls sitting at the table look prettier than they were. From time to
time,  the  child  turned  her  head  and  glared  out  the  kitchen  window  at  the  scene
below.

“God  could  strike  you  deaf  dumb  and  blind,”  the  cook  said,  “and  then  you

wouldn’t be as smart as you is.”

“I would still be smarter than some,” the child said.
After  supper  they  left  for  the  fair.  She  wanted  to  go  to  the  fair  but  not  with
them so even if they had asked her she wouldn’t have gone. She went upstairs and
paced the long bedroom with her hands locked together behind her back and her
head thrust forward and an expression, fierce and dreamy both, on her face. She
didn’t  turn  on  the  electric  light  but  let  the  darkness  collect  and  make  the  room
smaller and more private. At regular intervals a light crossed the open window
and threw shadows on the wall. She stopped and stood looking out over the dark
slopes, past where the pond glinted silver, past the wall of woods to the speckled
sky where a long finger of light was revolving up and around and away, searching
the air as if it were hunting for the lost sun. It was the beacon light from the fair.

She could hear the distant sound of the calliope and she saw in her head all the
tents raised up in a kind of gold sawdust light and the diamond ring of the ferris
wheel going around and around up in the air and down again and the screeking
merry-go-round going around and around on the ground. A fair lasted five or six
days and there was a special afternoon for school children and a special night for
niggers. She had gone last year on the afternoon for school children and had seen
the monkeys and the fat man and had ridden on the ferris wheel. Certain tents were
closed  then  because  they  contained  things  that  would  be  known  only  to  grown
people but she had looked with interest at the advertising on the closed tents, at
the faded-looking pictures on the canvas of people in tights, with stiff stretched
composed faces like the faces of the martyrs waiting to have their tongues cut out
by  the  Roman  soldier.  She  had  imagined  that  what  was  inside  these  tents
concerned medicine and she had made up her mind to be a doctor when she grew
up.

She had since changed and decided to be an engineer but as she looked out the
window and followed the revolving searchlight as it widened and shortened and
wheeled in its arc, she felt that she would have to be much more than just a doctor
or an engineer. She would have to be a saint because that was the occupation that
included everything you could know; and yet she knew she would never be a saint.
She did not steal or murder but she was a born liar and slothful and she sassed her
mother  and  was  deliberately  ugly  to  almost  everybody.  She  was  eaten  up  also

with the sin of Pride, the worst one. She made fun of the Baptist preacher who
came to the school at commencement to give the devotional. She would pull down
her mouth and hold her forehead as if she were in agony and groan, “Fawther, we
thank Thee,” exactly the way he did and she had been told many times not to do it.
She could never be a saint, but she thought she could be a martyr if they killed her
quick.

She could stand to be shot but not to be burned in oil. She didn’t know if she
could  stand  to  be  torn  to  pieces  by  lions  or  not.  She  began  to  prepare  her
martyrdom,  seeing  herself  in  a  pair  of  tights  in  a  great  arena,  lit  by  the  early
Christians hanging in cages of fire, making a gold dusty light that fell on her and
the lions. The first lion charged forward and fell at her feet, converted. A whole
series of lions did the same. The lions liked her so much she even slept with them
and  finally  the  Romans  were  obliged  to  burn  her  but  to  their  astonishment  she
would not burn down and finding she was so hard to kill, they finally cut off her
head  very  quickly  with  a  sword  and  she  went  immediately  to  heaven.  She
rehearsed this several times, returning each time at the entrance of Paradise to the
lions.

Finally she got up from the window and got ready for bed and got in without
saying  her  prayers.  There  were  two  heavy  double  beds  in  the  room.  The  girls
were occupying the other one and she tried to think of something cold and clammy
that  she  could  hide  in  their  bed  but  her  thought  was  fruitless.  She  didn’t  have
anything she could think of, like a chicken carcass or a piece of beef liver. The
sound  of  the  calliope  coming  through  the  window  kept  her  awake  and  she
remembered that she hadn’t said her prayers and got up and knelt down and began
them. She took a running start and went through to the other side of the Apostle’s
Creed  and  then  hung  by  her  chin  on  the  side  of  the  bed,  empty-minded.  Her
prayers,  when  she  remembered  to  say  them,  were  usually  perfunctory  but
sometimes when she had done something wrong or heard music or lost something,
or sometimes for no reason at all, she would be moved to fervor and would think
of Christ on the long journey to Calvary, crushed three times on the rough cross.
Her  mind  would  stay  on  this  a  while  and  then  get  empty  and  when  something
roused her, she would find that she was thinking of a different thing entirely, of

some  dog  or  some  girl  or  something  she  was  going  to  do  some  day.  Tonight,
remembering  Wendell  and  Cory,  she  was  filled  with  thanksgiving  and  almost
weeping with delight, she said, “Lord, Lord, thank You that I’m not in the Church
of God, thank You Lord, thank You!”  and got back in bed and kept repeating it
until she went to sleep.

The girls came in at a quarter to twelve and waked her up with their giggling.
They turned on the small blue-shaded lamp to see to get undressed by and their
skinny shadows climbed up the wall and broke and continued moving about softly
on the ceiling. The child sat up to hear what all they had seen at the fair. Susan had
a plastic pistol full of cheap candy and Joanne a pasteboard cat with red polka
dots on it. “Did you see the monkeys dance?” the child asked. “Did you see that fat
man and those midgets?”

“All kinds of freaks,” Joanne said. And then she said to Susan, “I enjoyed it all
but the you-know-what,” and her face assumed a peculiar expression as if she had
bit into something that she didn’t know if she liked or not.

The other stood still and shook her head once and nodded slightly at the child.
“Little pitchers,” she said in a low voice but the child heard it and her heart began
to beat very fast.

She got out of her bed and climbed onto the footboard of theirs. They turned
off the light and got in but she didn’t move. She sat there, looking hard at them
until their faces were well defined in the dark. “I’m not as old as you all,” she
said, “but I’m about a million times smarter.”

“There are some things,” Susan said, “that a child of your age doesn’t know,”

and they both began to giggle.

“Go back to your own bed,” Joanne said.
The child didn’t move. “One time,” she said, her voice hollow-sounding in the

dark, “I saw this rabbit have rabbits.”

There was a silence. Then Susan said, “How?” in an indifferent tone and she
knew that she had them. She said she wouldn’t tell until they told about the you-
know-what. Actually she had never seen a rabbit have rabbits but she forgot this
as they began to tell what they had seen in the tent.

It  had  been  a  freak  with  a  particular  name  but  they  couldn’t  remember  the

name. The tent where it was had been divided into two parts by a black curtain,
one side for men and one for women. The freak went from one side to the other,
talking first to the men and then to the women, but everyone could hear. The stage
ran  all  the  way  across  the  front.  The  girls  heard  the  freak  say  to  the  men,  “I’m
going to show you this and if you laugh, God may strike you the same way.” The
freak had a country voice, slow and nasal and neither high nor low, just flat. “God
made me thisaway and if you laugh He may strike you the same way. This is the
way He wanted me to be and I ain’t disputing His way. I’m showing you because I
got to make the best of it. I expect you to act like ladies and gentlemen. I never
done it to myself nor had a thing to do with it but I’m making the best of it. I don’t
dispute hit.” Then there was a long silence on the other side of the tent and finally
the  freak  left  the  men  and  came  over  onto  the  women’s  side  and  said  the  same
thing.

The  child  felt  every  muscle  strained  as  if  she  were  hearing  the  answer  to  a
riddle that was more puzzling than the riddle itself. “You mean it had two heads?”
she said.

“No,” Susan said, “it was a man and woman both. It pulled up its dress and

showed us. It had on a blue dress.”

The child wanted to ask how it could be a man and woman both without two
heads but she did not. She wanted to get back into her own bed and think it out and
she began to climb down off the footboard.
“What about the rabbit?” Joanne asked.
The child stopped and only her face appeared over the footboard, abstracted,

absent. “It spit them out of its mouth,” she said, “six of them.”

She lay in bed trying to  picture  the  tent  with  the  freak  walking  from  side  to
side but she was too sleepy to figure it out. She was better able to see the faces of
the country people watching, the men more solemn than they were in church, and
the women stern and polite, with painted-looking eyes, standing as if they were
waiting for the first note of the piano to begin the hymn. She could hear the freak
saying, “God made me thisaway and I don’t dispute hit,” and the people saying,
“Amen. Amen.”

“God done this to me and I praise Him.”

“Amen. Amen.”
“He could strike you thisaway.”
“Amen. Amen.”
“But he has not.”
“Amen.”
“Raise yourself up. A temple of the Holy Ghost. You! You are God’s temple,
don’t you know? Don’t you know? God’s Spirit has a dwelling in you, don’t you
know?”

“Amen. Amen.”
“If anybody desecrates the temple of God, God will bring him to ruin and if
you laugh, He may strike you thisaway. A temple of God is a holy thing. Amen.
Amen.”

“I am a temple of the Holy Ghost.”
“Amen.”
The people began to slap their hands without making a loud noise and with a
regular beat between the Amens, more and more softly, as if they knew there was
a child near, half asleep.

*   *   *

The next  afternoon  the  girls  put  on  their  brown  convent  uniforms  again  and  the
child  and  her  mother  took  them  back  to  Mount  St.  Scholastica.  “Oh  glory,  oh
Pete!” they said. “Back to the salt mines.” Alonzo Myers drove them and the child
sat in front with him and her mother sat in back between the two girls, telling them
such things as how pleased she was to have had them and how they must come
back again and then about the good times she and their mothers had had when they
were girls at the convent. The child didn’t listen to any of this twaddle but kept as
close to the locked door as she could get and held her head out the window. They
had thought Alonzo would smell better on Sunday but he did not. With her hair
blowing  over  her  face  she  could  look  directly  into  the  ivory  sun  which  was
framed in the middle of the blue afternoon but when she pulled it away from her
eyes she had to squint.

Mount St. Scholastica was a red brick house set back in a garden in the center

of town. There was a filling station on one side of it and a firehouse on the other.
It had a high black grillework fence around it and narrow bricked walks between
old trees and japonica bushes that were heavy with blooms. A big moon-faced nun
came bustling to the door to let them in and embraced her mother and would have
done the same to her but that she stuck out her hand and preserved a frigid frown,
looking just past the sister’s shoes at the wainscoting. They had a tendency to kiss
even homely children, but the nun shook her hand vigorously and even cracked her
knuckles a little and said they must come to the chapel, that benediction was just
beginning. You  put  your  foot  in  their  door  and  they  got  you  praying,  the  child
thought as they hurried down the polished corridor.

You’d think she had to catch a train, she continued in the same ugly vein as
they entered the chapel where the sisters were kneeling on one side and the girls,
all in brown uniforms, on the other. The chapel smelled of incense. It was light
green and gold, a series of springing arches that ended with the one over the altar
where the priest was kneeling in front of the monstrance, bowed low. A small boy
in a surplice was standing behind him, swinging the censer. The child knelt down
between  her  mother  and  the  nun  and  they  were  well  into  the “Tantum  Ergo”
before  her  ugly  thoughts  stopped  and  she  began  to  realize  that  she  was  in  the
presence of God. Hep me not to be so mean, she began mechanically. Hep me not
to give her so much sass. Hep me not to talk like I do. Her mind began to get quiet
and then empty but when the priest raised the monstrance with the Host shining
ivory-colored in the center of it, she was thinking of the tent at the fair that had the
freak in it. The freak was saying, “I don’t dispute hit. This is the way He wanted
me to be.”

As  they  were  leaving  the  convent  door,  the  big  nun  swooped  down  on  her
mischievously and nearly smothered her in the black habit, mashing the side of her
face into the crucifix hitched onto her belt and then holding her off and looking at
her with little periwinkle eyes.

On  the  way  home  she  and  her  mother  sat  in  the  back  and Alonzo  drove  by
himself in the front. The child observed three folds of fat in the back of his neck
and  noted  that  his  ears  were  pointed  almost  like  a  pig’s.  Her  mother,  making
conversation, asked him if he had gone to the fair.

“Gone,” he said, “and never missed a thing and it was good I gone when I did

because they ain’t going to have it next week like they said they was.”

“Why?” asked her mother.
“They shut it on down,” he said. “Some of the preachers from town gone out

and inspected it and got the police to shut it on down.”

Her mother let the conversation drop and the child’s round face was lost in
thought. She turned it toward the window and looked out over a stretch of pasture
land that rose and fell with a gathering greenness until it touched the dark woods.
The sun was a huge red ball like an elevated Host drenched in blood and when it
sank out of sight, it left a line in the sky like a red clay road hanging over the trees.

The Artificial Nigger

MR. HEAD awakened to discover that the room was full of moonlight. He sat up
and stared at the floor boards—the color of silver—and then at the ticking on his
pillow,  which  might  have  been  brocade,  and  after  a  second,  he  saw  half  of  the
moon five feet away in his shaving mirror, paused as if it were waiting for his
permission  to  enter.  It  rolled  forward  and  cast  a  dignifying  light  on  everything.
The straight chair against the wall looked stiff and attentive as if it were awaiting
an order and Mr. Head’s trousers, hanging to the back of it, had an almost noble
air, like the garment some great man had just flung to his servant; but the face on
the moon was a grave one. It gazed across the room and out the window where it
floated over the horse stall and appeared to contemplate itself with the look of a
young man who sees his old age before him.

Mr. Head could have said to it that age was a choice blessing and that only
with years does a man enter into that calm understanding of life that makes him a
suitable guide for the young. This, at least, had been his own experience.

He sat up and grasped the iron posts at the foot of his bed and raised himself
until he could see the face on the alarm clock which sat on an overturned bucket
beside the chair. The hour was two in the morning. The alarm on the clock did not
work but he was not dependent on any  mechanical  means  to  awaken  him.  Sixty
years  had  not  dulled  his  responses;  his  physical  reactions,  like  his  moral  ones,
were guided by his will and strong character, and these could be seen plainly in
his features. He had a long tube-like face with a long rounded open jaw and a long
depressed  nose.  His  eyes  were  alert  but  quiet,  and  in  the  miraculous  moonlight
they had a look of composure and of ancient wisdom as if they belonged to one of
the great guides of men. He might have been Vergil summoned in the middle of the
night to go to Dante, or better, Raphael, awakened by a blast of God’s light to fly
to  the  side  of  Tobias.  The  only  dark  spot  in  the  room  was  Nelson’s  pallet,
underneath the shadow of the window.

Nelson was hunched over on his side, his knees under his chin and his heels

under his bottom. His new suit and hat were in the boxes that they had been sent in
and these were on the floor at the foot of the pallet where he could get his hands
on them as soon as he woke up. The slop jar, out of the shadow and made snow-
white in the moonlight, appeared to stand guard over him like a small personal
angel. Mr. Head lay back down, feeling entirely confident that he could carry out
the moral mission of the coming day. He meant to be up before Nelson and to have
the breakfast cooking by the time he awakened. The boy was always irked when
Mr. Head was the first up. They would have to leave the house at four to get to the
railroad junction by five-thirty. The train was to stop for them at five forty-five
and  they  had  to  be  there  on  time  for  this  train  was  stopping  merely  to
accommodate them.

This would be the boy’s first trip to the city though he claimed it would be his
second because he had been born there. Mr. Head had tried to point out to him that
when he was born he didn’t have the intelligence to determine his whereabouts but
this had made no impression on the child at all and he continued to insist that this
was to be his second trip. It would be Mr. Head’s third trip. Nelson had said, “I
will’ve already been there twict and I ain’t but ten.”

Mr. Head had contradicted him.
“If you ain’t been there in fifteen years, how you know you’ll be able to find

your way about?” Nelson had asked. “How you know it hasn’t changed some?”

“Have you ever,” Mr. Head had asked, “seen me lost?”
Nelson certainly had not but he was a child who was never satisfied until he
had given an impudent answer and he replied, “It’s nowhere around here to get
lost at.”

“The day is going to come,” Mr. Head prophesied, “when you’ll find you ain’t
as smart as you think you are.” He had been thinking about this trip for several
months but it was for the most part in moral terms that he conceived it. It was to be
a lesson that the boy would never forget. He was to find out from it that he had no
cause for pride merely because he had been born in a city. He was to find out that
the city is not a great place. Mr. Head meant him to see everything there is to see
in a city so that he would be content to stay at home for the rest of his life. He fell
asleep thinking how the boy would at last find out that he was not as smart as he

thought he was.

He was awakened at three-thirty by the smell of fatback frying and he leaped
off his cot. The pallet was empty and the clothes boxes had been thrown open. He
put  on  his  trousers  and  ran  into  the  other  room.  The  boy  had  a  corn  pone  on
cooking  and  had  fried  the  meat.  He  was  sitting  in  the  half-dark  at  the  table,
drinking cold coffee out of a can. He had on his new suit and his new gray hat
pulled low over his eyes. It was too big for him but they had ordered it a size
large because they expected his head to grow. He didn’t say anything but his entire
figure suggested satisfaction at having arisen before Mr. Head.

Mr. Head went to the stove and brought the meat to the table in the skillet. “It’s
no hurry,” he said. “You’ll get there soon enough and it’s no guarantee you’ll like
it when you do neither,” and he sat down across from the boy whose hat teetered
back slowly to reveal a fiercely expressionless face, very much the same shape as
the old man’s. They were grandfather and grandson but they looked enough alike
to be brothers and brothers not too far apart in age, for Mr. Head had a youthful
expression by daylight, while the boy’s look was ancient, as if he knew everything
already and would be pleased to forget it.

Mr.  Head  had  once  had  a  wife  and  daughter  and  when  the  wife  died,  the
daughter ran away and returned after an interval with Nelson. Then one morning,
without getting out of bed, she died and left Mr. Head with sole care of the year-
old  child.  He  had  made  the  mistake  of  telling  Nelson  that  he  had  been  born  in
Atlanta.  If  he  hadn’t  told  him  that,  Nelson  couldn’t  have  insisted  that  this  was
going to be his second trip.

“You may not like it a bit,” Mr. Head continued. “It’ll be full of niggers.”
The boy made a face as if he could handle a nigger.
“All right,” Mr. Head said. “You ain’t ever seen a nigger.”
“You wasn’t up very early,” Nelson said.
“You  ain’t  ever  seen  a  nigger,”  Mr.  Head  repeated.  “There  hasn’t  been  a
nigger  in  this  county  since  we  run  that  one  out  twelve  years  ago  and  that  was
before you were born.” He looked at the boy as if he were daring him to say he
had ever seen a Negro.

“How  you  know  I  never  saw  a  nigger  when  I  lived  there  before?”  Nelson

asked. “I probably saw a lot of niggers.”

“If you seen one you didn’t know what he was,” Mr. Head said, completely

exasperated. “A six-month-old child don’t know a nigger from anybody else.”

“I  reckon  I’ll  know  a  nigger  if  I  see  one,”  the  boy  said  and  got  up  and

straightened his slick sharply creased gray hat and went outside to the privy.

They reached the junction some time before the  train  was  due  to  arrive  and
stood about two feet from the first set of tracks. Mr. Head carried a paper sack
with some biscuits and a can of sardines in it for their lunch. A coarse-looking
orange-colored sun coming up behind the east range of mountains was making the
sky a dull red behind them, but in front of them it was still gray and they faced a
gray transparent moon, hardly stronger than a thumbprint and completely without
light. A small tin switch box and a black fuel tank were all there was to mark the
place as a junction; the tracks were double and did not converge again until they
were  hidden  behind  the  bends  at  either  end  of  the  clearing.  Trains  passing
appeared to emerge from a tunnel of trees and, hit for a second by the cold sky,
vanish  terrified  into  the  woods  again.  Mr.  Head  had  had  to  make  special
arrangements  with  the  ticket  agent  to  have  this  train  stop  and  he  was  secretly
afraid it would not, in which case, he knew Nelson would say, “I never thought no
train  was  going  to  stop  for  you.”  Under  the  useless  morning  moon  the  tracks
looked white and fragile. Both the old man and the child stared ahead as if they
were awaiting an apparition.

Then suddenly, before Mr. Head could make up his mind to turn back, there
was  a  deep  warning  bleat  and  the  train  appeared,  gliding  very  slowly,  almost
silently around the bend of trees about two hundred yards down the track, with one
yellow front light shining. Mr. Head was still not certain it would stop and he felt
it  would  make  an  even  bigger  idiot  of  him  if  it  went  by  slowly.  Both  he  and
Nelson, however, were prepared to ignore the train if it passed them.

The engine charged by, filling their noses with the smell of hot metal and then
the second coach came to a stop exactly where they were standing. A conductor
with the face of an ancient bloated bulldog was on the step as if he expected them,
though he did not look as if it mattered one way or the other to him if they got on
or not. “To the right,” he said.

Their entry took only a fraction of a second and the train was already speeding
on as they entered the quiet car. Most of the travelers were still sleeping, some
with their heads hanging off the chair arms, some stretched across two seats, and
some  sprawled  out  with  their  feet  in  the  aisle.  Mr.  Head  saw  two  unoccupied
seats and pushed Nelson toward them. “Get in there by the winder,” he said in his
normal voice which was very loud at this hour of the morning. “Nobody cares if
you sit there because it’s nobody in it. Sit right there.”

“I heard you,” the boy muttered. “It’s no use in you yelling,” and he sat down
and turned his head to the glass. There he saw a pale ghost-like face scowling at
him beneath the brim of a pale ghost-like hat. His grandfather, looking quickly too,
saw a different ghost, pale but grinning, under a black hat.

Mr.  Head  sat  down  and  settled  himself  and  took  out  his  ticket  and  started
reading  aloud  everything  that  was  printed  on  it.  People  began  to  stir.  Several
woke up and stared at him. “Take off your hat,” he said to Nelson and took off his
own and put it on his knee. He had a small amount of white hair that had turned
tobacco-colored over the years and this lay flat across the back of his head. The
front of his head was bald and creased. Nelson took off his hat and put it on his
knee and they waited for the conductor to come ask for their tickets.

The man across the aisle from them was spread out over two seats, his feet
propped on the window and his head jutting into the aisle. He had on a light blue
suit and a yellow shirt unbuttoned at the neck. His eyes had just opened and Mr.
Head  was  ready  to  introduce  himself  when  the  conductor  came  up  from  behind
and growled, “Tickets.”

When  the  conductor  had  gone,  Mr.  Head  gave  Nelson  the  return  half  of  his
ticket and said, “Now put that in your pocket and don’t lose it or you’ll have to
stay in the city.”

“Maybe I will,” Nelson said as if this were a reasonable suggestion.
Mr.  Head  ignored  him.  “First  time  this  boy  has  ever  been  on  a  train,”  he
explained to the man across the aisle, who was sitting up now on the edge of his
seat with both feet on the floor.

Nelson jerked his hat on again and turned angrily to the window.
“He’s never seen anything before,” Mr. Head continued. “Ignorant as the day

he was born, but I mean for him to get his fill once and for all.”

The  boy  leaned  forward,  across  his  grandfather  and  toward  the  stranger.  “I
was born in the city,” he said. “I was born there. This is my second trip.” He said
it  in  a  high  positive  voice  but  the  man  across  the  aisle  didn’t  look  as  if  he
understood. There were heavy purple circles under his eyes.

Mr. Head reached across the aisle and tapped him on the arm. “The thing to do
with a boy,” he said sagely, “is to show him all it is to show. Don’t hold nothing
back.”

“Yeah,” the man said. He gazed down at his swollen feet and lifted the left one
about ten inches from the floor. After a minute he put it down and lifted the other.
All through the car people began to get up and move about and yawn and stretch.
Separate voices could be heard here and there and then a general hum. Suddenly
Mr.  Head’s  serene  expression  changed.  His  mouth  almost  closed  and  a  light,
fierce and cautious both, came into his eyes. He was looking down the length of
the  car.  Without  turning,  he  caught  Nelson  by  the  arm  and  pulled  him  forward.
“Look,” he said.

A huge coffee-colored man was coming slowly forward. He had on a light suit
and a yellow satin tie with a ruby pin in it. One of his hands rested on his stomach
which rode majestically under his buttoned coat, and in the other he held the head
of a black walking stick that he picked up and set down with a deliberate outward
motion each time he took a step. He was proceeding very slowly, his large brown
eyes gazing over the heads of the passengers. He had a small white mustache and
white crinkly hair. Behind him there were two young women, both coffee-colored,
one in a yellow dress and one in a green. Their progress was kept at the rate of his
and they chatted in low throaty voices as they followed him.

Mr. Head’s grip was tightening insistently on Nelson’s arm. As the procession
passed them, the light from a sapphire ring on the brown hand that picked up the
cane reflected in Mr. Head’s eye, but he did not look up nor did the tremendous
man look at him. The group proceeded up the rest of the aisle and out of the car.
Mr. Head’s grip on Nelson’s arm loosened. “What was that?” he asked.

“A man,” the boy said and gave him an indignant look as if he were tired of

having his intelligence insulted.

“What kind of a man?” Mr. Head persisted, his voice expressionless.
“A  fat  man,”  Nelson  said.  He  was  beginning  to  feel  that  he  had  better  be

cautious.

“You don’t know what kind?” Mr. Head said in a final tone.
“An old man,” the boy said and had a sudden foreboding that he was not going

to enjoy the day.

“That was a nigger,” Mr. Head said and sat back.
Nelson jumped up on the seat and stood looking backward to the end of the car

but the Negro had gone.

“I’d of thought you’d know a nigger since you seen so many when you was in
the city on your first visit,” Mr. Head continued. “That’s his first nigger,” he said
to the man across the aisle.

The boy slid down into the seat. “You said they were black,” he said in an
angry  voice.  “You  never  said  they  were  tan.  How  do  you  expect  me  to  know
anything when you don’t tell me right?”

“You’re just ignorant is all,” Mr. Head said and he got up and moved over in

the vacant seat by the man across the aisle.

Nelson turned backward again and looked where the Negro had disappeared.
He felt that the Negro had deliberately walked down the aisle in order to make a
fool of him and he hated him with a fierce raw fresh hate; and also, he understood
now  why  his  grandfather  disliked  them.  He  looked  toward  the  window  and  the
face there seemed to suggest that he might be inadequate to the day’s exactions. He
wondered if he would even recognize the city when they came to it.

After  he  had  told  several  stories,  Mr.  Head  realized  that  the  man  he  was
talking to was asleep and he got up and suggested to Nelson that they walk over
the train and see the parts of it. He particularly wanted the boy to see the toilet so
they  went  first  to  the  men’s  room  and  examined  the  plumbing.  Mr.  Head
demonstrated the ice-water cooler as if he had invented it and showed Nelson the
bowl  with  the  single  spigot  where  the  travelers  brushed  their  teeth.  They  went
through several cars and came to the diner.

This was the most elegant car in the train. It was painted a rich egg-yellow and
had a wine-colored carpet on the floor. There were wide windows over the tables

and great spaces of the rolling view were caught in miniature in the sides of the
coffee pots and in the glasses. Three very black Negroes in white suits and aprons
were running up and down the aisle, swinging trays and bowing and bending over
the travelers eating breakfast. One of them rushed up to Mr. Head and Nelson and
said,  holding  up  two  fingers,  “Space  for  two!”  but  Mr.  Head  replied  in  a  loud
voice, “We eaten before we left!”

The  waiter  wore  large  brown  spectacles  that  increased  the  size  of  his  eye
whites. “Stan’ aside then please,” he said with an airy wave of the arm as if he
were brushing aside flies.

Neither Nelson nor Mr. Head moved a fraction of an inch. “Look,” Mr. Head

said.

The near corner of the diner, containing two tables, was set off from the rest
by a saffron-colored curtain. One table was set but empty but at the other, facing
them, his back to the drape, sat the tremendous Negro. He was speaking in a soft
voice to the two women while he buttered a muffin. He had a heavy sad face and
his neck bulged over his white collar on either side. “They rope them off,” Mr.
Head  explained.  Then  he  said,  “Let’s  go  see  the  kitchen,”  and  they  walked  the
length of the diner but the black waiter was coming fast behind them.

“Passengers  are  not  allowed  in  the  kitchen!”  he  said  in  a  haughty  voice.

“Passengers are NOT allowed in the kitchen!”

Mr.  Head  stopped  where  he  was  and  turned.  “And  there’s  good  reason  for
that,” he shouted into the Negro’s chest, “because the cockroaches would run the
passengers out!”

All the travelers laughed and Mr. Head and Nelson walked out, grinning. Mr.
Head was known at home for his quick wit and Nelson felt a sudden keen pride in
him. He realized the old man would be his only support in the strange place they
were approaching. He would be entirely alone in the world if he were ever lost
from his grandfather. A terrible excitement shook him and he wanted to take hold
of Mr. Head’s coat and hold on like a child.

As they went back to their seats they could see through the passing windows
that the countryside was becoming speckled with small houses and shacks and that
a highway ran alongside the train. Cars sped by on it, very small and fast. Nelson

felt that there was less breath in the air than there had been thirty minutes ago. The
man across the aisle had left and there was no one near for Mr. Head to hold a
conversation with so he looked out the window, through his own reflection, and
read  aloud  the  names  of  the  buildings  they  were  passing.  “The  Dixie  Chemical
Corp!” he announced. “Southern Maid Flour! Dixie Doors! Southern Belle Cotton
Products! Patty’s Peanut Butter! Southern Mammy Cane Syrup!”

“Hush up!” Nelson hissed.
All over the car people were beginning to get up and take their luggage off the
overhead racks. Women were putting on their coats and hats. The conductor stuck
his head in the car and snarled, “Firstopppppmry,” and Nelson lunged out of his
sitting position, trembling. Mr. Head pushed him down by the shoulder.

“Keep your seat,” he said in dignified tones. “The first stop is on the edge of
town.  The  second  stop  is  at  the  main  railroad  station.”  He  had  come  by  this
knowledge on his first trip when he had got off at the first stop and had had to pay
a man fifteen cents to take him into the heart of town. Nelson sat back down, very
pale.  For  the  first  time  in  his  life,  he  understood  that  his  grandfather  was
indispensable to him.

The train stopped and let off a few passengers and glided on as if it had never
ceased  moving.  Outside,  behind  rows  of  brown  rickety  houses,  a  line  of  blue
buildings stood up, and beyond them a pale rose-gray sky faded away to nothing.
The train moved into the railroad yard. Looking down, Nelson saw lines and lines
of silver tracks multiplying and criss-crossing. Then before he could start counting
them, the face in the window started out at him, gray but distinct, and he looked the
other way. The train was in the station. Both he and Mr. Head jumped up and ran
to the door. Neither noticed that they had left the paper sack with the lunch in it on
the seat.

They walked stiffly through the small station and came out of a heavy door into
the squall of traffic. Crowds were hurrying to work. Nelson didn’t know where to
look. Mr. Head leaned against the side of the building and glared in front of him.

Finally Nelson said, “Well, how do you see what all it is to see?”
Mr. Head didn’t answer. Then as if the sight of people passing had given him
the clue, he said, “You walk,” and started off down the street. Nelson followed,

steadying his hat. So many sights and sounds were flooding in on him that for the
first block he hardly knew what he was seeing. At the second corner, Mr. Head
turned and looked behind him at the station they had left, a putty-colored terminal
with a concrete dome on top. He thought that if he could keep the dome always in
sight, he would be able to get back in the afternoon to catch the train again.

As they walked along, Nelson began to distinguish details and take note of the
store  windows,  jammed  with  every  kind  of  equipment—hardware,  drygoods,
chicken feed, liquor. They passed one that Mr. Head called his particular attention
to where you walked in and sat on a chair with your feet upon two rests and let a
Negro  polish  your  shoes.  They  walked  slowly  and  stopped  and  stood  at  the
entrances so he could see what went on in each place but they did not go into any
of them. Mr. Head was determined not to go into any city store because on his first
trip here, he had got lost in a large one and had found his way out only after many
people had insulted him.

They  came  in  the  middle  of  the  next  block  to  a  store  that  had  a  weighing
machine in front of it and they both in turn stepped up on it and put in a penny and
received  a  ticket.  Mr.  Head’s  ticket  said,  “You  weigh  120  pounds.  You  are
upright and brave and all your friends admire you.” He put the ticket in his pocket,
surprised  that  the  machine  should  have  got  his  character  correct  but  his  weight
wrong, for he had weighed on a grain scale not long before and knew he weighed
110. Nelson’s ticket said, “You weigh 98 pounds. You have a great destiny ahead
of  you  but  beware  of  dark  women.”  Nelson  did  not  know  any  women  and  he
weighed only 68 pounds but Mr. Head pointed out that the machine had probably
printed the number upside down, meaning the 9 for a 6.

They walked on and at the end of five blocks the dome of the terminal sank out
of sight and Mr. Head turned to the left. Nelson could have stood in front of every
store window for an hour if there had not been another more interesting one next to
it. Suddenly he said, “I was born here!” Mr. Head turned and looked at him with
horror.  There  was  a  sweaty  brightness  about  his  face.  “This  is  where  I  come
from!” he said.

Mr.  Head  was  appalled.  He  saw  the  moment  had  come  for  drastic  action.
“Lemme show you one thing you ain’t seen yet,” he said and took him to the corner

where there was a sewer entrance. “Squat down,” he said, “and stick you head in
there,” and he held the back of the boy’s coat while he got down and put his head
in the sewer. He drew it back quickly, hearing a gurgling in the depths under the
sidewalk.  Then  Mr.  Head  explained  the  sewer  system,  how  the  entire  city  was
underlined with it, how it contained all the drainage and was full of rats and how
a man could slide into it and be sucked along down endless pitchblack tunnels. At
any minute any man in the city might be sucked into the sewer and never heard
from again. He described it so well that Nelson was for some seconds shaken. He
connected the sewer passages with the entrance to hell and understood for the first
time how the world was put together in its lower parts. He drew away from the
curb.

Then he said, “Yes, but you can stay away from the holes,” and his face took
on that stubborn look that was so exasperating to his grandfather. “This is where I
come from!” he said.

Mr. Head was dismayed but he only muttered, “You’ll get your fill,” and they
walked on. At the end of two more blocks he turned to the left, feeling that he was
circling the dome; and he was correct for in a half-hour they passed in front of the
railroad station again. At first Nelson did not notice that he was seeing the same
stores twice but when they passed the one where you put your feet on the rests
while the Negro polished your shoes, he perceived that they were walking in a
circle.

“We  done  been  here!”  he  shouted.  “I  don’t  believe  you  know  where  you’re

at!”

“The  direction  just  slipped  my  mind  for  a  minute,”  Mr.  Head  said  and  they
turned down a different street. He still did not intend to let the dome get too far
away and after two blocks in their new direction, he turned to the left. This street
contained  two-  and  three-story  wooden  dwellings.  Anyone  passing  on  the
sidewalk could see into the rooms and Mr. Head, glancing through one window,
saw a woman lying on an iron bed, looking out, with a sheet pulled over her. Her
knowing expression shook him. A fierce-looking boy on a bicycle came driving
down out of nowhere and he had to jump to the side to keep from being hit. “It’s
nothing to them if they knock you down,” he said. “You better keep closer to me.”

They walked on for some time on streets like this before he remembered to
turn again. The houses they were passing now were all unpainted and the wood in
them looked rotten; the street between was narrower. Nelson saw a colored man.
Then another. Then another. “Niggers live in these houses,” he observed.

“Well come on and we’ll go somewheres else,” Mr. Head said. “We   didn’t
come to look at niggers,” and they turned down another street but they continued to
see Negroes everywhere. Nelson’s skin began to prickle and they stepped along at
a faster pace in order to leave the neighborhood as soon as possible. There were
colored men in their undershirts standing in the doors and colored women rocking
on the sagging porches. Colored children played in the gutters and stopped what
they were doing to look at them. Before long they began to pass rows of stores
with  colored  customers  in  them  but  they  didn’t  pause  at  the  entrances  of  these.
Black eyes in black faces were watching them from every direction. “Yes,” Mr.
Head said, “this is where you were born—right here with all these niggers.”

Nelson scowled. “I think you done got us lost,” he said.
Mr. Head swung around sharply and looked for the dome. It was nowhere in

sight. “I ain’t got us lost either,” he said. “You’re just tired of walking.”

“I ain’t tired, I’m hungry,” Nelson said. “Give me a biscuit.”
They discovered then that they had lost the lunch.
“You were the one holding the sack,” Nelson said. “I would have kepaholt of

it.”

“If you want to direct this trip, I’ll go on by myself and leave you right here,”
Mr. Head said and was pleased to see the boy turn white. However, he realized
they were lost and drifting farther every minute from the station. He was hungry
himself  and  beginning  to  be  thirsty  and  since  they  had  been  in  the  colored
neighborhood, they had both begun to sweat. Nelson had on his shoes and he was
unaccustomed to them. The concrete sidewalks were very hard. They both wanted
to find a place to sit down but this was impossible and they kept on walking, the
boy muttering under his breath, “First you lost the sack and then you lost the way,”
and Mr. Head growling from time to time, “Anybody wants to be from this nigger
heaven can be from it!”

By  now  the  sun  was  well  forward  in  the  sky.  The  odor  of  dinners  cooking

drifted out to them. The Negroes were all at their doors to see them pass. “Whyn’t
you ast one of these niggers the way?” Nelson said. “You got us lost.”

“This is where you were born,” Mr. Head said. “You can ast one yourself if

you want to.”

Nelson was afraid of the colored men and he didn’t want to be laughed at by
the  colored  children.  Up  ahead  he  saw  a  large  colored  woman  leaning  in  a
doorway that opened onto the sidewalk. Her hair stood straight out from her head
for about four inches all around and she was resting on bare brown feet that turned
pink at the sides. She had on a pink dress that showed her exact shape. As they
came  abreast  of  her,  she  lazily  lifted  one  hand  to  her  head  and  her  fingers
disappeared into her hair.

Nelson stopped. He felt his breath drawn up by the woman’s dark eyes. “How

do you get back to town?” he said in a voice that did not sound like his own.

After  a  minute  she  said,  “You  in  town  now,”  in  a  rich  low  tone  that  made

Nelson feel as if a cool spray had been turned on him.

“How do you get back to the train?” he said in the same reed-like voice.
“You can catch you a car,” she said.
He understood she was making fun of him but he was too paralyzed even to
scowl. He stood drinking  in  every  detail  of  her.  His  eyes  traveled  up  from  her
great  knees  to  her  forehead  and  then  made  a  triangular  path  from  the  glistening
sweat on her neck down and across her tremendous bosom and over her bare arm
back to where her fingers lay hidden in her hair. He suddenly wanted her to reach
down and pick him up and draw him against her and then he wanted to feel her
breath on his face. He wanted to look down and down into her eyes while she held
him tighter and tighter. He had never had such a feeling before. He felt as if he
were reeling down through a pitchblack tunnel.

“You can go a block down yonder and catch you a car take you to the railroad

station, Sugarpie,” she said.

Nelson  would  have  collapsed  at  her  feet  if  Mr.  Head  had  not  pulled  him

roughly away. “You act like you don’t have any sense!” the old man growled.

They hurried down the street and Nelson did not look back at the woman. He
pushed  his  hat  sharply  forward  over  his  face  which  was  already  burning  with

shame. The sneering ghost he had seen in the train window and all the foreboding
feelings he had on the way returned to him and he remembered that his ticket from
the scale had said to beware of dark women and that his grandfather’s had said he
was upright and brave. He took hold of the old man’s hand, a sign of dependence
that he seldom showed.

They  headed  down  the  street  toward  the  car  tracks  where  a  long  yellow
rattling trolley was coming. Mr. Head had never boarded a streetcar and he let
that one pass. Nelson was silent. From time to time his mouth trembled slightly but
his  grandfather,  occupied  with  his  own  problems,  paid  him  no  attention.  They
stood on the corner and neither looked at the Negroes who were passing, going
about  their  business  just  as  if  they  had  been  white,  except  that  most  of  them
stopped and eyed Mr. Head and Nelson. It occurred to Mr. Head that since the
streetcar  ran  on  tracks,  they  could  simply  follow  the  tracks.  He  gave  Nelson  a
slight push and explained that  they  would  follow  the  tracks  on  into  the  railroad
station, walking, and they set off.

Presently to their great relief they began to see white people again and Nelson
sat  down  on  the  sidewalk  against  the  wall  of  a  building.  “I  got  to  rest  myself
some,” he said. “You lost the sack and the direction. You can just wait on me to
rest myself.”

“There’s the tracks in front of us,” Mr. Head said. “All we got to do is keep
them  in  sight  and  you  could  have  remembered  the  sack  as  good  as  me.  This  is
where you were born. This is your old home town. This is your second trip. You
ought to know how to do,” and he squatted down and continued in this vein but the
boy, easing his burning feet out of his shoes, did not answer.

“And standing there grinning like a chim-pan-zee while a nigger woman gives

you direction. Great Gawd!” Mr. Head said.

“I never said I was nothing but born here,” the boy said in a shaky voice. “I
never said I would or wouldn’t like it. I never said I wanted to come. I only said I
was born here and I never had nothing to do with that. I want to go home. I never
wanted to come in the first place. It was all your big idea. How you know you
ain’t following the tracks in the wrong direction?”

This last had occurred to Mr. Head too. “All these people are white,” he said.

“We ain’t passed here before,” Nelson said. This was a neighborhood of brick
buildings  that  might  have  been  lived  in  or  might  not. A  few  empty  automobiles
were parked along the curb and there was an occasional passerby. The heat of the
pavement  came  up  through  Nelson’s  thin  suit.  His  eyelids  began  to  droop,  and
after a few minutes his head tilted forward. His shoulders twitched once or twice
and then he fell over on his side and lay sprawled in an exhausted fit of sleep.

Mr. Head watched him silently. He was very tired himself but they could not
both sleep at the same time and he could not have slept anyway because he did not
know where he was. In a few minutes Nelson would wake up, refreshed by his
sleep and very cocky, and would begin complaining that he had lost the sack and
the way. You’d have a mighty sorry time if I wasn’t here, Mr. Head thought; and
then another idea occurred to him. He looked at the sprawled figure for several
minutes;  presently  he  stood  up.  He  justified  what  he  was  going  to  do  on  the
grounds that it is sometimes necessary to teach a child a lesson he won’t forget,
particularly  when  the  child  is  always  reasserting  his  position  with  some  new
impudence. He walked without a sound to the corner about twenty feet away and
sat down on a covered garbage can in the alley where he could look out and watch
Nelson wake up alone.

The boy was dozing fitfully, half conscious of vague noises and black forms
moving up from some dark part of him into the light. His face worked in his sleep
and he had pulled his knees up under his chin. The sun shed a dull dry light on the
narrow street; everything looked like exactly what it was. After a while Mr. Head,
hunched like an old monkey on the garbage can lid, decided that if Nelson didn’t
wake up soon, he would make a loud noise by bamming his foot against the can.
He looked at his watch and discovered that it was two o’clock. Their train left at
six and the possibility of missing it was too awful for him to think of. He kicked
his foot backwards on the can and a hollow boom reverberated in the alley.

Nelson  shot  up  onto  his  feet  with  a  shout.  He  looked  where  his  grandfather
should have been and stared. He seemed to whirl several times and then, picking
up  his  feet  and  throwing  his  head  back,  he  dashed  down  the  street  like  a  wild
maddened pony. Mr. Head jumped off the can and galloped after but the child was
almost  out  of  sight.  He  saw  a  streak  of  gray  disappearing  diagonally  a  block

ahead. He ran as fast as he could, looking both ways down every intersection, but
without sight of him again. Then as he passed the third intersection, completely
winded,  he  saw  about  half  a  block  down  the  street  a  scene  that  stopped  him
altogether. He crouched behind a trash box to watch and get his bearings.

Nelson  was  sitting  with  both  legs  spread  out  and  by  his  side  lay  an  elderly
woman,  screaming.  Groceries  were  scattered  about  the  sidewalk.  A  crowd  of
women had already gathered to see justice done and Mr. Head distinctly heard the
old woman on the pavement shout, “You’ve broken my ankle and your daddy’ll
pay for it! Every nickel! Police! Police!” Several of the women were plucking at
Nelson’s shoulder but the boy seemed too dazed to get up.

Something forced Mr. Head from behind the trash box and forward, but only at
a  creeping  pace.  He  had  never  in  his  life  been  accosted  by  a  policeman.  The
women were milling around Nelson as if they might suddenly all dive on him at
once and tear him to pieces, and the old woman continued to scream that her ankle
was broken and to call for an officer. Mr. Head came on so slowly that he could
have been taking a backward step after each forward one, but when he was about
ten feet away, Nelson saw him and sprang. The child caught him around the hips
and clung panting against him.

The women all turned on Mr. Head. The injured one sat up and shouted, “You
sir! You’ll pay every penny of my doctor’s bill that your boy has caused. He’s a
juve-nile  deliquent!  Where  is  an  officer?  Somebody  take  this  man’s  name  and
address!”

Mr. Head was trying to detach Nelson’s fingers from the flesh in the back of
his legs. The old man’s head had lowered itself into his collar like a turtle’s; his
eyes were glazed with fear and caution.

“Your boy has broken my ankle!” the old woman shouted. “Police!”
Mr.  Head  sensed  the  approach  of  the  policeman  from  behind.  He  stared
straight ahead at the women who were massed in their fury like a solid wall to
block his escape, “This is not my boy,” he said. “I never seen him before.”

He felt Nelson’s fingers fall out of his flesh.
The  women  dropped  back,  staring  at  him  with  horror,  as  if  they  were  so
repulsed by a man who would deny his own image and likeness that they could not

bear  to  lay  hands  on  him.  Mr.  Head  walked  on,  through  a  space  they  silently
cleared, and left. Nelson behind. Ahead of him he saw nothing but a hollow tunnel
that had once been the street.

The  boy  remained  standing  where  he  was,  his  neck  craned  forward  and  his
hands hanging by his sides. His hat was jammed on his head so that there were no
longer any creases in it. The injured woman got up and shook her fist at him and
the others gave him pitying looks, but he didn’t notice any of them. There was no
policeman in sight.

In a minute he began to move mechanically, making no effort to catch up with
his grandfather but merely following at about twenty paces. They walked on for
five  blocks  in  this  way.  Mr.  Head’s  shoulders  were  sagging  and  his  neck  hung
forward at such an angle that it was not visible from behind. He was afraid to turn
his  head.  Finally  he  cut  a  short  hopeful  glance  over  his  shoulder.  Twenty  feet
behind him, he saw two small eyes piercing into his back like pitchfork prongs.

The boy was not of a forgiving nature but this was the first time he had ever
had anything to forgive. Mr. Head had never disgraced himself before. After two
more  blocks,  he  turned  and  called  over  his  shoulder  in  a  high  desperately  gay
voice, “Let’s us go get us a Co’ Cola somewheres!”

Nelson, with a dignity he had never shown before, turned and stood with his

back to his grandfather.

Mr. Head began to feel the depth of his denial. His face as they  walked  on
became  all  hollows  and  bare  ridges.  He  saw  nothing  they  were  passing  but  he
perceived  that  they  had  lost  the  car  tracks.  There  was  no  dome  to  be  seen
anywhere and the afternoon was advancing. He knew that if dark overtook them in
the city, they would be beaten and robbed. The speed of God’s justice was only
what he expected for himself, but he could not stand to think that his sins would be
visited upon Nelson and that even now, he was leading the boy to his doom.

They  continued  to  walk  on  block  after  block  through  an  endless  section  of
small  brick  houses  until  Mr.  Head  almost  fell  over  a  water  spigot  sticking  up
about six inches off the edge of a grass plot. He had not had a drink of water since
early morning but he felt he did not deserve it now. Then he thought that Nelson
would be thirsty and they would both drink and be brought together. He squatted

down and put his mouth to the nozzle and turned a cold stream of water into his
throat. Then he called out in the high desperate voice, “Come on and getcher some
water!”

This time the child stared through him for nearly sixty seconds. Mr. Head got
up and walked on as if he had drunk poison. Nelson, though he had not had water
since  some  he  had  drunk  out  of  a  paper  cup  on  the  train,  passed  by  the  spigot,
disdaining to drink where his grandfather had. When Mr. Head realized this, he
lost  all  hope.  His  face  in  the  waning  afternoon  light  looked  ravaged  and
abandoned. He could feel the boy’s steady hate, traveling at an even pace behind
him and he knew that (if by some miracle they escaped being murdered in the city)
it would continue just that way for the rest of his life. He knew that now he was
wandering  into  a  black  strange  place  where  nothing  was  like  it  had  ever  been
before, a long old age without respect and an end that would be welcome because
it would be the end.

As for Nelson, his mind had frozen around his grandfather’s treachery as if he
were  trying  to  preserve  it  intact  to  present  at  the  final  judgment.  He  walked
without looking to one side or the other, but every now and then his mouth would
twitch and this was when he felt, from some remote place inside himself, a black
mysterious form reach up as if it would melt his frozen vision in one hot grasp.

The  sun  dropped  down  behind  a  row  of  houses  and  hardly  noticing,  they
passed into an elegant suburban section where mansions were set back from the
road by lawns with birdbaths on them. Here everything was entirely deserted. For
blocks  they  didn’t  pass  even  a  dog.  The  big  white  houses  were  like  partially
submerged icebergs  in  the  distance.  There  were  no  sidewalks,  only  drives,  and
these  wound  around  and  around  in  endless  ridiculous  circles.  Nelson  made  no
move  to  come  nearer  to  Mr.  Head.  The  old  man  felt  that  if  he  saw  a  sewer
entrance he would drop down into it and let himself be carried away; and he could
imagine  the  boy  standing  by,  watching  with  only  a  slight  interest,  while  he
disappeared.

A  loud  bark  jarred  him  to  attention  and  he  looked  up  to  see  a  fat  man
approaching with two bulldogs. He waved both arms like someone shipwrecked
on a desert island. “I’m lost!” he called. “I’m lost and can’t find my way and me

and this boy have got to catch this train and I can’t find the station. Oh Gawd I’m
lost! Oh hep me Gawd I’m lost!”

The man, who was bald-headed and had on golf knickers, asked him what train
he  was  trying  to  catch  and  Mr.  Head  began  to  get  out  his  tickets,  trembling  so
violently he could hardly hold them. Nelson had come up to within fifteen feet and
stood watching.

“Well,” the fat man said, giving him back the tickets, “you won’t have time to
get back to town to make this but you can catch it at the suburb stop. That’s three
blocks from here,” and he began explaining how to get there.

Mr. Head stared as if he were slowly returning from the dead and when the
man  had  finished  and  gone  off  with  the  dogs  jumping  at  his  heels,  he  turned  to
Nelson and said breathlessly, “We’re going to get home!”

The child was standing about ten feet away, his face bloodless under the gray
hat. His eyes were triumphantly cold. There was no light in them, no feeling, no
interest. He was merely there, a small figure, waiting. Home was nothing to him.

Mr.  Head  turned  slowly.  He  felt  he  knew  now  what  time  would  be  like
without seasons and what heat would be like without light and what man would be
like without salvation. He didn’t care if he never made the train and if it had not
been for what suddenly caught his attention, like a cry out of the gathering dusk, he
might have forgotten there was a station to go to.

He  had  not  walked  five  hundred  yards  down  the  road  when  he  saw,  within
reach of him, the plaster figure of a Negro sitting bent over on a low yellow brick
fence that curved around a wide lawn. The Negro was about Nelson’s size and he
was pitched forward at an unsteady angle because the putty that held him to the
wall  had  cracked.  One  of  his  eyes  was  entirely  white  and  he  held  a  piece  of
brown watermelon.

Mr.  Head  stood  looking  at  him  silently  until  Nelson  stopped  at  a  little
distance. Then as the two of them stood there, Mr. Head breathed, “An artificial
nigger!”

It was not possible to tell if the artificial Negro were meant to be young or
old; he looked too miserable to be either. He was meant to look happy because his
mouth was stretched up at the corners but the chipped eye and the angle he was

cocked at gave him a wild look of misery instead.

“An artificial nigger!” Nelson repeated in Mr. Head’s exact tone.
The two of them stood there with their necks forward at almost the same angle
and  their  shoulders  curved  in  almost  exactly  the  same  way  and  their  hands
trembling identically in their pockets. Mr. Head looked like an ancient child and
Nelson like a miniature old man. They stood gazing at the artificial Negro as if
they were faced with some great mystery, some monument to another’s victory that
brought them together in their common defeat. They could both feel it dissolving
their differences like an action of mercy. Mr. Head had never known before what
mercy felt like because he had been too good to deserve any, but he felt he knew
now. He looked at Nelson and understood that he must say something to the child
to show that he was still wise and in the look the boy returned he saw a hungry
need for that assurance. Nelson’s eyes seemed to implore him to explain once and
for all the mystery of existence.

Mr.  Head  opened  his  lips  to  make  a  lofty  statement  and  heard  himself  say,

“They ain’t got enough real ones here. They got to have an artificial one.”

After a second, the boy nodded with a strange shivering about his mouth, and

said, “Let’s go home before we get ourselves lost again.”

Their train glided into the suburb stop just as they reached the station and they
boarded it together, and ten minutes before it was due to arrive at the junction,
they went to the door and stood ready to jump off if it did not stop; but it did, just
as  the  moon,  restored  to  its  full  splendor,  sprang  from  a  cloud  and  flooded  the
clearing  with  light. As  they  stepped  off,  the  sage  grass  was  shivering  gently  in
shades of silver and the clinkers under their feet glittered with a fresh black light.
The  treetops,  fencing  the  junction  like  the  protecting  walls  of  a  garden,  were
darker than the sky which was hung with gigantic white clouds illuminated like
lanterns.

Mr. Head stood very still and felt the action of mercy touch him again but this
time  he  knew  that  there  were  no  words  in  the  world  that  could  name  it.  He
understood that it grew out of agony, which is not denied to any man and which is
given in strange ways to children. He understood it was all a man could carry into
death to give his Maker and he suddenly burned with shame that he had so little of

it to take with him. He stood appalled, judging himself with the thoroughness of
God, while the action of mercy covered his pride like a flame and consumed it.
He had never thought himself a great sinner before but he saw now that his true
depravity had been hidden from him lest it cause him despair. He realized that he
was forgiven for sins from the beginning of time, when he had conceived in his
own heart the sin of Adam, until the present, when he had denied poor Nelson. He
saw that no sin was too monstrous for him to claim as his own, and since God
loved in proportion as He forgave, he felt ready at that instant to enter Paradise.

Nelson, composing his expression under the shadow of his hat brim, watched
him with a mixture of fatigue and suspicion, but as the train glided past them and
disappeared like a frightened serpent into the woods, even his face lightened and
he muttered, “I’m glad I’ve went once, but I’ll never go back again!”

Good Country People

BESIDES the neutral expression that she wore when she was alone, Mrs. Freeman
had two others, forward and reverse, that she used for all her human dealings. Her
forward expression was steady and driving like the advance of a heavy truck. Her
eyes  never  swerved  to  left  or  right  but  turned  as  the  story  turned  as  if  they
followed  a  yellow  line  down  the  center  of  it.  She  seldom  used  the  other
expression because it was not often necessary for her to retract a statement, but
when  she  did,  her  face  came  to  a  complete  stop,  there  was  an  almost
imperceptible  movement  of  her  black  eyes,  during  which  they  seemed  to  be
receding, and then the observer would see that Mrs. Freeman, though she might
stand  there  as  real  as  several  grain  sacks  thrown  on  top  of  each  other,  was  no
longer there in spirit. As for getting anything across to her when this was the case,
Mrs. Hopewell had given it up. She might talk her head off. Mrs. Freeman could
never be brought to admit herself wrong on any point. She would stand there and if
she could be brought to say anything, it was something like, “Well, I wouldn’t of
said it was and I wouldn’t of said it wasn’t,” or letting her gaze range over the top
kitchen shelf where there was an assortment of dusty bottles, she might remark, “I
see you ain’t ate many of them figs you put up last summer.”

They  carried  on  their  most  important  business  in  the  kitchen  at  breakfast.
Every morning Mrs. Hopewell got up at seven o’clock and lit her gas heater and
Joy’s. Joy was her daughter, a large blonde girl who had an artificial leg. Mrs.
Hopewell thought of her as a child though she was thirty-two years old and highly
educated.  Joy  would  get  up  while  her  mother  was  eating  and  lumber  into  the
bathroom and slam the door, and before long, Mrs. Freeman would arrive at the
back door. Joy would hear her mother call, “Come on in,” and then they would
talk for a while in low voices that were indistinguishable in the bathroom. By the
time Joy came in, they had usually finished the weather report and were on one or
the  other  of  Mrs.  Freeman’s  daughters,  Glynese  or  Carramae,  Joy  called  them
Glycerin and Caramel. Glynese, a redhead, was eighteen and had many admirers;

Carramae, a blonde, was only fifteen but already married and pregnant. She could
not  keep  anything  on  her  stomach.  Every  morning  Mrs.  Freeman  told  Mrs.
Hopewell how many times she had vomited since the last report.

Mrs. Hopewell liked to tell people that Glynese and Carramae were two of
the finest girls she knew and that Mrs. Freeman was a lady and that she was never
ashamed to take her anywhere or introduce her to anybody they might meet. Then
she would tell how she had happened to hire the Freemans in the first place and
how they were a godsend to her and how she had had them four years. The reason
for her keeping them so long was that they were not trash. They were good country
people. She had telephoned the man whose name they had given as a reference and
he  had  told  her  that  Mr.  Freeman  was  a  good  farmer  but  that  his  wife  was  the
nosiest woman ever to walk the earth. “She’s got to be into everything,” the man
said. “If she don’t get there before the dust settles, you can bet she’s dead, that’s
all. She’ll want to know all your business. I can stand him real good,” he had said,
“but me nor my wife neither could have stood that woman one more minute on this
place.” That had put Mrs. Hopewell off for a few days.

She had hired them in the end because there were no other applicants but she
had  made  up  her  mind  beforehand  exactly  how  she  would  handle  the  woman.
Since she was the type who had to be into everything, then, Mrs. Hopewell had
decided, she would not only let her be into everything, she would see to it that she
was  into  everything—she  would  give  her  the  responsibility  of  everything,  she
would put her in charge. Mrs. Hopewell had no bad qualities of her own but she
was able to use other people’s in such a constructive way that she never felt the
lack. She had hired the Freemans and she had kept them four years.

Nothing is perfect. This was one of Mrs. Hopewell’s favorite sayings. Another
was: that is life! And still another, the most important, was: well, other people
have their opinions too. She would make these statements, usually at the table, in a
tone of gentle insistence as if no one held them but her, and the large hulking Joy,
whose  constant  outrage  had  obliterated  every  expression  from  her  face,  would
stare just a little to the side of her, her eyes icy blue, with the look of someone
who has achieved blindness by an act of will and means to keep it.

When  Mrs.  Hopewell  said  to  Mrs.  Freeman  that  life  was  like  that,  Mrs.

Freeman would say, “I always said so myself.” Nothing had been arrived at by
anyone  that  had  not  first  been  arrived  at  by  her.  She  was  quicker  than  Mr.
Freeman.  When  Mrs.  Hopewell  said  to  her  after  they  had  been  on  the  place  a
while,  “You  know,  you’re  the  wheel  behind  the  wheel,”  and  winked,  Mrs.
Freeman had said, “I know it. I’ve always been quick. It’s some that are quicker
than others.”

“Everybody is different,” Mrs. Hopewell said.
“Yes, most people is,” Mrs. Freeman said.
“It takes all kinds to make the world.”
“I always said it did myself.”
The  girl  was  used  to  this  kind  of  dialogue  for  breakfast  and  more  of  it  for
dinner; sometimes they had it for supper too. When they had no guest they ate in
the kitchen because that was easier. Mrs. Freeman always managed to arrive at
some point during the meal and to watch them finish it. She would stand  in  the
doorway if it were summer but in the winter she would stand with one elbow on
top  of  the  refrigerator  and  look  down  on  them,  or  she  would  stand  by  the  gas
heater, lifting the back of her skirt slightly. Occasionally she would stand against
the wall and roll her head from side to side. At no time was she in any hurry to
leave. All this was very trying on Mrs. Hopewell but she was a woman of great
patience.  She  realized  that  nothing  is  perfect  and  that  in  the  Freemans  she  had
good country people and that if, in this day and age, you get good country people,
you had better hang onto them.

She  had  had  plenty  of  experience  with  trash.  Before  the  Freemans  she  had
averaged one tenant family a year. The wives of these farmers were not the kind
you  would  want  to  be  around  you  for  very  long.  Mrs.  Hopewell,  who  had
divorced her husband long ago, needed someone to walk over the fields with her;
and when Joy had to be impressed for these services, her remarks were usually so
ugly  and  her  face  so  glum  that  Mrs.  Hopewell  would  say,  “If  you  can’t  come
pleasantly, I don’t want you at all,” to which the girl, standing square and rigid-
shouldered with her neck thrust slightly forward, would reply, “If you want me,
here I am—LIKE I AM.”

Mrs. Hopewell excused this attitude because of the leg (which had been shot

off  in  a  hunting  accident  when  Joy  was  ten).  It  was  hard  for  Mrs.  Hopewell  to
realize that her child was thirty-two now and that for more than twenty years she
had had only one leg. She thought of her still as a child because it tore her heart to
think instead of the poor stout girl in her thirties who had never danced a step or
had  any normal  good  times.  Her  name  was  really  Joy  but  as  soon  as  she  was
twenty-one and away from home, she had had it legally changed. Mrs. Hopewell
was certain that she had thought and thought until she had hit upon the ugliest name
in  any  language.  Then  she  had  gone  and  had  the  beautiful  name,  Joy,  changed
without telling her mother until after she had done it. Her legal name was Hulga.

When Mrs. Hopewell thought the name, Hulga, she thought of the broad blank
hull of a battleship. She would not use it. She continued to call her Joy to which
the girl responded but in a purely mechanical way.

Hulga had learned to tolerate Mrs. Freeman who saved her from taking walks
with  her  mother.  Even  Glynese  and  Carramae  were  useful  when  they  occupied
attention that might otherwise have been directed at her. At first she had thought
she could not stand Mrs. Freeman for she had found that it was not possible to be
rude to her. Mrs. Freeman would take on strange resentments and for days together
she  would  be  sullen  but  the  source  of  her  displeasure  was  always  obscure;  a
direct  attack,  a  positive  leer,  blatant  ugliness  to  her  face—these  never  touched
her. And without warning one day, she began calling her Hulga.

She  did  not  call  her  that  in  front  of  Mrs.  Hopewell  who  would  have  been
incensed but when she and the girl happened to be out of the house together, she
would  say  something  and  add  the  name  Hulga  to  the  end  of  it,  and  the  big
spectacled Joy-Hulga would scowl and redden as if her privacy had been intruded
upon.  She  considered  the  name  her  personal  affair.  She  had  arrived  at  it  first
purely  on  the  basis  of  its  ugly  sound  and  then  the  full  genius  of  its  fitness  had
struck her. She had a vision of the name working like the ugly sweating Vulcan
who  stayed  in  the  furnace  and  to  whom,  presumably,  the  goddess  had  to  come
when called. She saw it as the name of her highest creative act. One of her major
triumphs was that her mother had not been able to turn her dust into Joy, but the
greater  one  was  that  she  had  been  able  to  turn  it  herself  into  Hulga.  However,
Mrs.  Freeman’s  relish  for  using  the  name  only  irritated  her.  It  was  as  if  Mrs.

Freeman’s beady steel-pointed eyes had penetrated far enough behind her face to
reach  some  secret  fact.  Something  about  her  seemed  to  fascinate  Mrs.  Freeman
and then one day Hulga realized that it was the artificial leg. Mrs. Freeman had a
special fondness for the details of secret infections, hidden deformities, assaults
upon  children.  Of  diseases,  she  preferred  the  lingering  or  incurable.  Hulga  had
heard Mrs. Hopewell give her the details of the hunting accident, how the leg had
been literally  blasted  off,  how  she  had  never  lost  consciousness.  Mrs.  Freeman
could listen to it any time as if it had happened an hour ago.

When Hulga stumped into the kitchen in the morning (she could walk without
making the awful noise but she made it—Mrs. Hopewell was certain—because it
was ugly-sounding), she glanced at them and did not speak. Mrs. Hopewell would
be in her red kimono with her hair tied around her head in rags. She would be
sitting at the table, finishing her breakfast and Mrs. Freeman would be hanging by
her elbow outward from the refrigerator, looking down at the table. Hulga always
put her eggs on the stove to boil and then stood over them with her arms folded,
and Mrs. Hopewell would look at her—a kind of indirect gaze divided between
her and Mrs. Freeman—and would think that if she would only keep herself up a
little, she wouldn’t be so bad looking. There was nothing wrong with her face that
a pleasant expression wouldn’t help. Mrs. Hopewell said that people who looked
on the bright side of things would be beautiful even if they were not.

Whenever she looked at Joy this way, she could not help but feel that it would
have been better if the child had not taken the Ph.D. It had certainly not brought her
out any and now that she had it, there was no more excuse for her to go to school
again. Mrs. Hopewell thought it was nice for girls to go to school to have a good
time but Joy had “gone through.” Anyhow, she would not have been strong enough
to go again. The doctors had told Mrs. Hopewell that with the best of care, Joy
might see forty-five. She had a weak heart. Joy had made it plain that if it had not
been for this condition, she would be far from these red hills and good country
people. She would be in a university lecturing to people who knew what she was
talking about. And Mrs. Hopewell could very well picture her there, looking like
a scarecrow and lecturing to more of the same. Here she went about all day in a
six-year-old  skirt  and  a  yellow  sweat  shirt  with  a  faded  cowboy  on  a  horse

embossed on it. She thought this was funny; Mrs. Hopewell thought it was idiotic
and showed simply that she was still a child. She was brilliant but she didn’t have
a grain of sense. It seemed to Mrs. Hopewell that every year she grew less like
other people and more like herself—bloated, rude, and squint-eyed. And she said
such strange things! To her own mother she had said—without warning, without
excuse, standing up in the middle of a meal with her face purple and her mouth
half  full—“Woman!  do  you  ever  look  inside?  Do  you  ever  look  inside  and  see
what  you  are not?  God!”  she  had  cried  sinking  down  again  and  staring  at  her
plate,  “Malebranche  was  right:  we  are  not  our  own  light.  We  are  not  our  own
light!” Mrs. Hopewell had no idea to this day what brought that on. She had only
made the remark, hoping Joy would take it in, that a smile never hurt anyone.

The girl had taken the Ph.D. in philosophy and this left Mrs. Hopewell at a
complete  loss. You  could  say,  “My  daughter  is  a  nurse,”  or  “My  daughter  is  a
schoolteacher,”  or  even,  “My  daughter  is  a  chemical  engineer.” You  could  not
say, “My daughter is a philosopher.” That was something that had ended with the
Greeks  and  Romans.  All  day  Joy  sat  on  her  neck  in  a  deep  chair,  reading.
Sometimes she went for walks but she didn’t like dogs or cats or birds or flowers
or nature or nice young men. She looked at nice young men as if she could smell
their stupidity.

One day Mrs. Hopewell had picked up one of the books the girl had just put
down  and  opening  it  at  random,  she  read,  “Science,  on  the  other  hand,  has  to
assert its soberness and seriousness afresh and declare that it is concerned solely
with  what-is.  Nothing—how  can  it  be  for  science  anything  but  a  horror  and  a
phantasm? If science is right, then one thing stands firm: science wishes to know
nothing of nothing. Such is after all the strictly scientific approach to Nothing. We
know  it  by  wishing  to  know  nothing  of  Nothing.”  These  words  had  been
underlined with a blue pencil and they worked on Mrs. Hopewell like some evil
incantation in gibberish. She shut the book quickly and went out of the room as if
she were having a chill.

This  morning  when  the  girl  came  in,  Mrs.  Freeman  was  on  Carramae.  “She
thrown up four times after supper,” she said, “and was up twict in the night after
three o’clock. Yesterday she didn’t do nothing but ramble in the bureau drawer.

All she did. Stand up there and see what she could run up on.”

“She’s  got  to  eat,”  Mrs.  Hopewell  muttered,  sipping  her  coffee,  while  she
watched Joy’s back at the stove. She was wondering what the child had said to the
Bible  salesman.  She  could  not  imagine  what  kind  of  a  conversation  she  could
possibly have had with him.

He  was  a  tall  gaunt  hatless  youth  who  had  called  yesterday  to  sell  them  a
Bible. He had appeared at the door, carrying a large black suitcase that weighted
him so heavily on one side that he had to brace himself against the door facing. He
seemed on the point of collapse but he said in a cheerful voice. “Good morning,
Mrs. Cedars!” and set the suitcase down on the mat. He was not a bad-looking
young  man  though  he  had  on  a  bright  blue  suit  and  yellow  socks  that  were  not
pulled up far enough. He had prominent face bones and a streak of sticky-looking
brown hair falling across his forehead.

“I’m Mrs. Hopewell,” she said.
“Oh!” he said, pretending to look puzzled but with his eyes sparkling, “I saw it
said ‘The Cedars’ on the mailbox so I thought you was Mrs. Cedars!” and he burst
out in a pleasant laugh. He picked up the satchel and under cover of a pant, he fell
forward into her hall. It was rather as if the suitcase had moved first, jerking him
after it. “Mrs. Hopewell!” he said and grabbed her hand. “I hope you are well!”
and he laughed again and then all at once his face sobered completely. He paused
and gave her a straight earnest look and said, “Lady, I’ve come to speak of serious
things.”

“Well,  come  in,”  she  muttered,  none  too  pleased  because  her  dinner  was
almost ready. He came into the parlor and sat down on the edge of a straight chair
and put the suitcase between his feet and glanced around the room as if he were
sizing her up by it. Her silver gleamed on the two sideboards; she decided he had
never been in a room as elegant as this.

“Mrs.  Hopewell,”  he  began,  using  her  name  in  a  way  that  sounded  almost

intimate, “I know you believe in Chrustian service.”

“Well yes,” she murmured.
“I know,” he said and paused, looking very wise with his head cocked on one

side, “that you’re a good woman. Friends have told me.”

Mrs. Hopewell never liked to be taken for a fool. “What are you selling?” she

asked.

“Bibles,”  the  young  man  said  and  his  eye  raced  around  the  room  before  he
added, “I see you have no family Bible in your parlor, I see that is the one lack
you got!”

Mrs.  Hopewell  could  not  say,  “My  daughter  is  an  atheist  and  won’t  let  me
keep the Bible in the parlor.” She said, stiffening slightly, “I keep my Bible by my
bedside.” This was not the truth. It was in the attic somewhere.
“Lady,” he said, “the word of God ought to be in the parlor.”
“Well, I think that’s a matter of taste,” she began. “I think…”
“Lady,” he said, “for a Chrustian, the word of God ought to be in every room
in the house besides in his heart. I know you’re a Chrustian because I can see it in
every line of your face.”

She stood up and said, “Well, young man, I don’t want to buy a Bible and I

smell my dinner burning.”

He didn’t get up. He began to twist his hands and looking down at them, he
said softly, “Well lady, I’ll tell you the truth—not many people want to buy  one
nowadays and besides, I know I’m real simple. I don’t know how to say a thing
but  to  say  it.  I’m  just  a  country  boy.”  He  glanced  up  into  her  unfriendly  face.
“People like you don’t like to fool with country people like me!”

“Why!” she cried, “good country people are the salt of the earth! Besides, we
all have different ways of doing, it takes all kinds to make the world go ’round.
That’s life!”

“You said a mouthful,” he said.
“Why, I think there aren’t enough good country people in the world!” she said,

stirred. “I think that’s what’s wrong with it!”

His  face  had  brightened.  “I  didn’t  inraduce  myself,”  he  said.  “I’m  Manley
Pointer  from  out  in  the  country  around  Willohobie,  not  even  from  a  place,  just
from near a place.”

“You wait a minute,” she said. “I have to see about my dinner.” She went out

to the kitchen and found Joy standing near the door where she had been listening.

“Get rid of the salt of the earth,” she said, “and let’s eat.”

Mrs.  Hopewell  gave  her  a  pained  look  and  turned  the  heat  down  under  the
vegetables. “I can’t be rude to anybody,” she murmured and went back into the
parlor.

He had opened the suitcase and was sitting with a Bible on each knee.
“You might as well put those up,” she told him. “I don’t want one.”
“I  appreciate  your  honesty,”  he  said.  “You  don’t  see  any  more  real  honest

people unless you go way out in the country.”

“I  know,”  she  said,  “real  genuine  folks!”  Through  the  crack  in  the  door  she

heard a groan.

“I  guess  a  lot  of  boys  come  telling  you  they’re  working  their  way  through
college,” he said, “but I’m not going to tell you that. Somehow,” he said, “I don’t
want to go to college. I want to devote my life to Chrustian service. See,” he said,
lowering  his  voice,  “I  got  this  heart  condition.  I  may  not  live  long.  When  you
know it’s something wrong with you and you may not live long, well then, lady…”
He paused, with his mouth open, and stared at her.

He and Joy had the same condition! She knew that her eyes were filling with
tears but she collected herself quickly and murmured, “Won’t you stay for dinner?
We’d love to have you!” and was sorry the instant she heard herself say it.
“Yes mam,” he said in an abashed voice, “I would sher love to do that!”
Joy had given him one look on being introduced to him and then throughout the
meal  had  not  glanced  at  him  again.  He  had  addressed  several  remarks  to  her,
which  she  had  pretended  not  to  hear.  Mrs.  Hopewell  could  not  understand
deliberate  rudeness,  although  she  lived  with  it,  and  she  felt  she  had  always  to
overflow with hospitality to make up for Joy’s lack of courtesy. She urged him to
talk about himself and he did. He said he was the seventh child of twelve and that
his father had been crushed under a tree when he himself was eight year old. He
had been crushed very badly, in fact, almost cut in two and was practically not
recognizable. His mother had got along the best she could by hard working and
she had always seen that her children went to Sunday School and that they read the
Bible  every  evening.  He  was  now  nineteen  year  old  and  he  had  been  selling
Bibles for four months. In that time he had sold seventy-seven Bibles and had the
promise of two more sales. He wanted to become a missionary because he thought

that was the way you could do most for people. “He who losest his life shall find
it,”  he  said  simply  and  he  was  so  sincere,  so  genuine  and  earnest  that  Mrs.
Hopewell  would  not  for  the  world  have  smiled.  He  prevented  his  peas  from
sliding  onto  the  table  by  blocking  them  with  a  piece  of  bread  which  he  later
cleaned his plate with. She could see Joy observing sidewise how he handled his
knife and fork and she saw too that every few minutes, the boy would dart a keen
appraising glance at the girl as if he were trying to attract her attention.

After  dinner  Joy  cleared  the  dishes  off  the  table  and  disappeared  and  Mrs.
Hopewell was left to talk with him. He told her again about his childhood and his
father’s accident and  about  various  things  that  had  happened  to  him.  Every  five
minutes or so she would stifle a yawn. He sat for two hours until finally she told
him she must go because she had an appointment in town. He packed his Bibles
and thanked her and prepared to leave, but in the doorway he stopped and wrung
her hand and said that not on any of his trips had he met a lady as nice as her and
he asked if he could come again. She had said she would always be happy to see
him.

Joy  had  been  standing  in  the  road,  apparently  looking  at  something  in  the
distance, when he came down the steps toward her, bent to the side with his heavy
valise.  He  stopped  where  she  was  standing  and  confronted  her  directly.  Mrs.
Hopewell could not hear what he said but she trembled to think what Joy would
say to him. She could see that after a minute Joy said something and that then the
boy began to speak again, making an excited gesture with his free hand. After a
minute Joy said something else at which the boy began to speak once more. Then
to her amazement, Mrs. Hopewell saw the two of them walk off together, toward
the  gate.  Joy  had  walked  all  the  way  to  the  gate  with  him  and  Mrs.  Hopewell
could not imagine what they had said to each other, and she had not yet dared to
ask.

Mrs.  Freeman  was  insisting  upon  her  attention.  She  had  moved  from  the
refrigerator to the heater so that Mrs. Hopewell had to turn and face her in order
to seem to be listening. “Glynese gone out with Harvey Hill again last night,” she
said. “She had this sty.”

“Hill,”  Mrs.  Hopewell  said  absently,  “is  that  the  one  who  works  in  the

garage?”

“Nome,  he’s  the  one  that  goes  to  chiropracter  school,”  Mrs.  Freeman  said.
“She had this sty. Been had it two days. So she says when he brought her in the
other night he says, ‘Lemme get rid of that sty for you,’ and she says, ‘How?’ and
he says, ‘You just lay yourself down acrost the seat of that car and I’ll show you.’
So she done it and he popped her neck. Kept on a-popping it several times until
she made him quit. This morning,” Mrs. Freeman said, “she ain’t got no sty. She
ain’t got no traces of a sty.”

“I never heard of that before,” Mrs. Hopewell said.
“He ast her to marry him before the Ordinary,” Mrs. Freeman went on, “and

she told him she wasn’t going to be married in no office.”

“Well, Glynese is a fine girl,” Mrs. Hopewell said. “Glynese and Carramae

are both fine girls.”

“Carramae  said  when  her  and  Lyman  was  married  Lyman  said  it  sure  felt
sacred to him. She said he said he wouldn’t take five hundred dollars for being
married by a preacher.”

“How much would he take?” the girl asked from the stove.
“He said he wouldn’t take five hundred dollars,” Mrs. Freeman repeated.
“Well we all have work to do,” Mrs. Hopewell said.
“Lyman said it just felt more sacred to him,” Mrs. Freeman said. “The doctor
wants  Carramae  to  eat  prunes.  Says  instead  of  medicine.  Says  them  cramps  is
coming from pressure. You know where I think it is?”

“She’ll be better in a few weeks,” Mrs. Hopewell said.
“In the tube,” Mrs. Freeman said. “Else she wouldn’t be as sick as she is.”
Hulga had cracked her two eggs into a saucer and was bringing them to the
table along with a cup of coffee that she had filled too full. She sat down carefully
and  began  to  eat,  meaning  to  keep  Mrs.  Freeman  there  by  questions  if  for  any
reason she showed an inclination to leave. She could perceive her mother’s eye
on her. The first round-about question would be about the Bible salesman and she
did not wish to bring it on. “How did he pop her neck?” she asked.

Mrs.  Freeman  went  into  a  description  of  how  he  had  popped  her  neck.  She
said he owned a ’55 Mercury but that Glynese said she would rather marry a man

with only a ’36 Plymouth who would be married by a preacher. The girl asked
what if he had a ’32 Plymouth and Mrs. Freeman said what Glynese had said was
a ’36 Plymouth.

Mrs. Hopewell said there were not many girls with Glynese’s common sense.
She said what she admired in those girls was their common sense. She said that
reminded  her  that  they  had  had  a  nice  visitor  yesterday,  a  young  man  selling
Bibles. “Lord,” she said, “he bored me to death but he was so sincere and genuine
I couldn’t be rude to him. He was just good country people, you know,” she said,
“—just the salt of the earth.”

“I seen him walk up,” Mrs. Freeman said, “and then later—I seen him walk
off,” and Hulga could feel the slight shift in her voice, the slight insinuation, that
he had not walked off alone, had he?  Her  face  remained  expressionless  but  the
color  rose  into  her  neck  and  she  seemed  to  swallow  it  down  with  the  next
spoonful of egg. Mrs. Freeman was looking at her as if they had a secret together.
“Well,  it  takes  all  kinds  of  people  to  make  the  world  go  ’round,”  Mrs.

Hopewell said. “It’s very good we aren’t all alike.”

“Some people are more alike than others,” Mrs. Freeman said.
Hulga got up and stumped, with about twice the noise that was necessary, into
her room and locked the door. She was to meet the Bible salesman at ten o’clock
at the gate. She had thought about it half the night. She had started thinking of it as
a great joke and then she had begun to see profound implications in it. She had lain
in  bed  imagining  dialogues  for  them  that  were  insane  on  the  surface  but  that
reached  below  to  depths  that  no  Bible  salesman  would  be  aware  of.  Their
conversation yesterday had been of this kind.

He had stopped in front of her and had simply stood there. His face was bony
and sweaty and bright, with a little pointed nose in the center of it, and his look
was different from what it had been at the dinner table. He was gazing at her with
open curiosity, with fascination, like a child watching a new fantastic animal at
the zoo, and he was breathing as if he had run a great distance to reach her. His
gaze  seemed  somehow  familiar  but  she  could  not  think  where  she  had  been
regarded with it before. For almost a minute he didn’t say anything. Then on what
seemed an insuck of breath, he whispered, “You ever ate a chicken that was two

days old?”

The  girl  looked  at  him  stonily.  He  might  have  just  put  this  question  up  for
consideration at the meeting of a philosophical association. “Yes,” she presently
replied as if she had considered it from all angles.

“It must have been mighty small!” he said triumphantly and shook all over with
little nervous giggles, getting very red in the face, and subsiding finally into his
gaze  of  complete  admiration,  while  the  girl’s  expression  remained  exactly  the
same.

“How old are you?” he asked softly.
She  waited  some  time  before  she  answered.  Then  in  a  flat  voice  she  said,

“Seventeen.”

His smiles came in succession like waves breaking on the surface of a little
lake. “I see you got a wooden leg,” he said. “I think you’re brave. I think you’re
real sweet.”

The girl stood blank and solid and silent.
“Walk to the gate with me,” he said. “You’re a brave sweet little thing and I

liked you the minute I seen you walk in the door.”

Hulga began to move forward.
“What’s your name?” he asked, smiling down on the top of her head.
“Hulga,” she said.
“Hulga,” he murmured, “Hulga. Hulga. I never heard of anybody name Hulga

before. You’re shy, aren’t you, Hulga?” he asked.

She nodded, watching his large red hand on the handle of the giant valise.
“I like girls that wear glasses,” he said. “I think a lot. I’m not like these people

that a serious thought don’t ever enter their heads. It’s because I may die.”

“I may die too,” she said suddenly and looked up at him. His eyes were very

small and brown, glittering feverishly.

“Listen,” he said, “don’t you think some people was meant to meet on account
of what all they got in common and all? Like they both think serious thoughts and
all?” He shifted the valise to his other hand so that the hand nearest her was free.
He caught hold of her elbow and shook it a little. “I don’t work on Saturday,” he
said. “I like to walk in the woods and see what Mother Nature is wearing. O’er

the  hills  and  far  away.  Pic-nics  and  things.  Couldn’t  we  go  on  a  pic-nic
tomorrow? Say yes, Hulga,” he said and gave her a dying look as if he felt his
insides about to drop out of him. He had even seemed to sway slightly toward her.
During the night she had imagined that she seduced him. She imagined that the
two of them walked on the place until they came to the storage barn beyond the
two back fields and there, she imagined, that things came to such a pass that she
very  easily  seduced  him  and  that  then,  of  course,  she  had  to  reckon  with  his
remorse.  True  genius  can  get  an  idea  across  even  to  an  inferior  mind.  She
imagined  that  she  took  his  remorse  in  hand  and  changed  it  into  a  deeper
understanding of life. She took all his shame away and  turned  it  into  something
useful.

She set off for the gate at exactly ten o’clock, escaping without drawing Mrs.
Hopewell’s  attention.  She  didn’t  take  anything  to  eat,  forgetting  that  food  is
usually taken on a picnic. She wore a pair of slacks and a dirty white shirt, and as
an afterthought, she had put some Vapex on the collar of it since she did not own
any perfume. When she reached the gate no one was there.

She looked up and down the empty highway and had the furious feeling that
she had been tricked, that he had only meant to make her walk to the gate after the
idea  of  him.  Then  suddenly  he  stood  up,  very  tall,  from  behind  a  bush  on  the
opposite  embankment.  Smiling,  he  lifted  his  hat  which  was  new  and  wide-
brimmed. He had not worn it yesterday and she wondered if he had bought it for
the occasion. It was toast-colored with a red and white band around it and was
slightly too large for him. He stepped from behind the bush still carrying the black
valise. He had on the same suit and the same yellow socks sucked down in his
shoes from walking. He crossed the highway and said, “I knew you’d come!”

The girl wondered acidly how he had known this. She pointed to the valise

and asked, “Why did you bring your Bibles?”

He  took  her  elbow,  smiling  down  on  her  as  if  he  could  not  stop.  “You  can
never tell when you’ll need the word of God, Hulga,” he said. She had a moment
in which she doubted that this was actually happening and then they began to climb
the  embankment.  They  went  down  into  the  pasture  toward  the  woods.  The  boy
walked lightly by her side, bouncing on his toes. The valise did not seem to be

heavy  today;  he  even  swung  it.  They  crossed  half  the  pasture  without  saying
anything and then, putting his hand easily on the small of her back, he asked softly,
“Where does your wooden leg join on?”

She  turned  an  ugly  red  and  glared  at  him  and  for  an  instant  the  boy  looked
abashed. “I didn’t mean you no harm,” he said. “I only meant you’re so brave and
all. I guess God takes care of you.”

“No,”  she  said,  looking  forward  and  walking  fast,  “I  don’t  even  believe  in

God.”

At  this  he  stopped  and  whistled.  “No!”  he  exclaimed  as  if  he  were  too

astonished to say anything else.

She walked on and in a second he was bouncing at her side, fanning with his
hat. “That’s very unusual for a girl,” he remarked, watching her out of the corner
of his eye. When they reached the edge of the wood, he put his hand on her back
again and drew her against him without a word and kissed her heavily.

The kiss, which had more pressure than feeling behind it, produced that extra
surge  of  adrenalin  in  the  girl  that  enables  one  to  carry  a  packed  trunk  out  of  a
burning  house,  but  in  her,  the  power  went  at  once  to  the  brain.  Even  before  he
released her, her mind, clear and detached and ironic anyway, was regarding him
from a great distance, with amusement but with pity. She had never been kissed
before and she was pleased to discover that it was an unexceptional experience
and all a matter of the mind’s control. Some people might enjoy drain water if they
were told it was vodka. When the boy, looking expectant but uncertain, pushed her
gently away, she turned and walked on, saying nothing as if such business, for her,
were common enough.

He came along panting at her side, trying to help her when he saw a root that
she might trip over. He caught and held back the long swaying blades of thorn vine
until she had passed beyond them. She led the way and he came breathing heavily
behind her. Then they came out on a sunlit hillside, sloping softly into another one
a little smaller. Beyond, they could see the rusted top of the old barn where the
extra hay was stored.

The  hill  was  sprinkled  with  small  pink  weeds.  “Then  you  ain’t  saved?”  he

asked suddenly, stopping.

The  girl  smiled.  It  was  the  first  time  she  had  smiled  at  him  at  all.  “In  my
economy,” she said, “I’m saved and you are damned but I told you I didn’t believe
in God.”

Nothing seemed to destroy the boy’s look of admiration. He gazed at her now
as if the fantastic animal at the zoo had put its paw through the bars and given him
a loving poke. She thought he looked as if he wanted to kiss her again and she
walked on before he had the chance.

“Ain’t there somewheres we can sit down sometime?” he murmured, his voice

softening toward the end of the sentence.

“In that barn,” she said.
They made for it rapidly as if it might slide away like a train. It was a large
two-story barn, cool and dark inside. The boy pointed up the ladder that led into
the loft and said, “It’s too bad we can’t go up there.”

“Why can’t we?” she asked.
“Yer leg,” he said reverently.
The girl gave him a contemptuous look and putting both hands on the ladder,
she  climbed  it  while  he  stood  below,  apparently  awestruck.  She  pulled  herself
expertly through the opening and then looked down at him and said, “Well, come
on if you’re coming,” and he began to climb the ladder, awkwardly bringing the
suitcase with him.

“We won’t need the Bible,” she observed.
“You never can tell,” he said, panting. After he had got into the loft, he was a
few  seconds  catching  his  breath.  She  had  sat  down  in  a  pile  of  straw. A  wide
sheath of sunlight, filled with dust particles, slanted over her. She lay back against
a bale, her face turned away, looking out the front opening of the barn where hay
was thrown from a wagon into the loft. The two pink-speckled hillsides lay back
against  a  dark  ridge  of  woods.  The  sky  was  cloudless  and  cold  blue.  The  boy
dropped down by her side and put one arm under her and the other over her and
began methodically kissing her face, making little noises like a fish. He did not
remove  his  hat  but  it  was  pushed  far  enough  back  not  to  interfere.  When  her
glasses got in his way, he took them off of her and slipped them into his pocket.

The girl at first did not return any of the kisses but presently she began to and

after she had put several on his cheek, she reached his lips and remained there,
kissing him again and again as if she were trying to draw all the breath out of him.
His breath was clear and sweet like a child’s and the kisses were sticky like a
child’s. He mumbled about loving her and about knowing when he first seen her
that he loved her, but the mumbling was like the sleepy fretting of a child being put
to sleep by his mother. Her mind, throughout this, never stopped or lost itself for a
second to her feelings. “You ain’t said you loved me none,” he whispered finally,
pulling back from her. “You got to say that.”

She looked away from him off into the hollow sky and men down at a black
ridge and then down farmer into what appeared to be two green swelling lakes.
She  didn’t  realize  he  had  taken  her  glasses  but  this  landscape  could  not  seem
exceptional to her for she seldom paid any close attention to her surroundings.

“You got to say it,” he repeated. “You got to say you love me.”
She was always careful how she committed herself. “In a sense,” she began,
“if you use the word loosely, you might say that. But it’s not a word I use. I don’t
have illusions. I’m one of those people who see through to nothing.”

The boy was frowning. “You got to say it. I said it and you got to say it,” he

said.

The girl looked at him almost tenderly. “You poor baby,” she murmured. “It’s
just as well you don’t understand,” and she pulled him by the neck, face-down,
against her. “We are all damned,” she said, “but some of us have taken off our
blindfolds and see that there’s nothing to see. It’s a kind of salvation.”

The  boy’s  astonished  eyes  looked  blankly  through  the  ends  of  her  hair.

“Okay,” he almost whined, “but do you love me or don’tcher?”

“Yes,” she said and added, “in a sense. But I must tell you something. There
mustn’t be anything dishonest between us.” She lifted his head and looked him in
the eye. “I am thirty years old,” she said. “I have a number of degrees.”

The boy’s look was irritated but dogged. “I don’t care,” he said. “I don’t care
a thing about what all you done. I just want to know if you love me or don’tcher?”
and he caught her to him and wildly planted her face with kisses until she said,
“Yes, yes.”

“Okay then,” he said, letting her go. “Prove it.”

She smiled, looking dreamily out on the shifty landscape. She had seduced him
without even making up her mind to try. “How?” she asked, feeling that he should
be delayed a little.

He leaned over and put his lips to her ear. “Show me where your wooden leg

joins on,” he whispered.

The girl uttered a sharp little cry and her face instantly drained of color. The
obscenity  of  the  suggestion  was  not  what  shocked  her.  As  a  child  she  had
sometimes been subject to feelings of shame but education had removed the last
traces of that as a good surgeon scrapes for cancer; she would no more have felt it
over what he was asking than she would have believed in his Bible. But she was
as  sensitive  about  the  artificial  leg  as  a  peacock  about  his  tail.  No  one  ever
touched it but her. She took care of it as someone else would his soul, in private
and almost with her own eyes turned away. “No,” she said.

“I known it,” he muttered, sitting up. “You’re just playing me for a sucker.”
“Oh no no!” she cried. “It joins on at the knee. Only at the knee. Why do you

want to see it?”

The  boy  gave  her  a  long  penetrating  look.  “Because,”  he  said,  “it’s  what

makes you different. You ain’t like anybody else.”

She sat staring at him. There was nothing about her face or her round freezing-
blue  eyes  to  indicate  that  this  had  moved  her;  but  she  felt  as  if  her  heart  had
stopped and left her mind to pump her blood. She decided that for the first time in
her life she was face to face with real innocence. This boy, with an instinct that
came from beyond wisdom, had touched the truth about her. When after a minute,
she  said  in  a  hoarse  high  voice,  “All  right,”  it  was  like  surrendering  to  him
completely. It was like losing her own life and finding it again, miraculously, in
his.

Very gently he began to roll the slack leg up. The artificial limb, in a white
sock and brown flat shoe, was bound in a heavy material like canvas and ended in
an ugly jointure where it was attached to the stump. The boy’s face and his voice
were entirely reverent as he uncovered it and said, “Now show me how to take it
off and on.”

She took it off for him and put it back on again and then he took it off himself,

handling it as tenderly as if it were a real one. “See!” he said with a delighted
child’s face. “Now I can do it myself!”

“Put it back on,” she said. She was thinking that she would run away with him
and that every night he would take the leg off and every morning put it back on
again. “Put it back on,” she said.

“Not yet,” he murmured, setting it on its foot out of her reach. “Leave it off for

a while. You got me instead.”

She gave a little cry of alarm but he pushed her down and began to kiss her
again.  Without  the  leg  she  felt  entirely  dependent  on  him.  Her  brain  seemed  to
have stopped thinking altogether and to be about some other function that it was
not very good at. Different expressions raced back and forth over her face. Every
now and then the  boy,  his  eyes  like  two  steel  spikes,  would  glance  behind  him
where the leg stood. Finally she pushed him off and said, “Put it back on me now.”
“Wait,” he said. He leaned the other way and pulled the valise toward him and
opened it. It had a pale blue spotted lining and there were only two Bibles in it.
He took one of these out and opened the cover of it. It was hollow and contained a
pocket flask of whiskey, a pack of cards, and a small blue box with printing on it.
He laid these out in front of her one at a time in an evenly-spaced row, like one
presenting offerings at the shrine of a goddess. He put the blue box in her hand.
THIS PRODUCT TO BE USED ONLY FOR THE PREVENTION OF DISEASE,
she read, and dropped it. The boy was unscrewing the top of the flask. He stopped
and pointed, with a smile, to the deck of cards. It was not an ordinary deck but one
with an obscene picture on the back of each card. “Take a swig,” he said, offering
her the bottle first. He held it in front of her, but like one mesmerized, she did not
move.

Her voice when she spoke had an almost pleading sound. “Aren’t you,” she

murmured, “aren’t you just good country people?”

The boy cocked his head. He looked as if he were just beginning to understand
that she might be trying to insult him. “Yeah,” he said, curling his lip slightly, “but
it ain’t held me back none. I’m as good as you any day in the week.”

“Give me my leg,” she said.
He pushed it farther away with his foot. “Come on now, let’s begin to have us

a good time,” he said coaxingly. “We ain’t got to know one another good yet.”

“Give me my leg!” she screamed and tried to lunge for it but he pushed her

down easily.

“What’s  the  matter  with  you  all  of  a  sudden?”  he  asked,  frowning  as  he
screwed the top on the flask and put it quickly back inside the Bible. “You just a
while ago said you didn’t believe in nothing. I thought you was some girl!”

Her face was almost purple. “You’re a Christian!” she hissed. “You’re a fine
Christian!  You’re  just  like  them  all—say  one  thing  and  do  another.  You’re  a
perfect Christian, you’re…”

The boy’s mouth was set angrily. “I hope you don’t think,” he said in a lofty
indignant tone, “that I believe in that crap! I may sell Bibles but I know which end
is up and I wasn’t born yesterday and I know where I’m going!”

“Give me my leg!” she screeched. He jumped  up  so  quickly  that  she  barely
saw him sweep the cards and the blue box into the Bible and throw the Bible into
the  valise.  She  saw  him  grab  the  leg  and  then  she  saw  it  for  an  instant  slanted
forlornly  across  the  inside  of  the  suitcase  with  a  Bible  at  either  side  of  its
opposite ends. He slammed the lid shut and snatched up the valise and swung it
down the hole and then stepped through himself.

When all of him had passed but his head, he turned and regarded her with a
look  that  no  longer  had  any  admiration  in  it.  “I’ve  gotten  a  lot  of  interesting
things,” he said. “One time I got a woman’s glass eye this way. And you needn’t to
think you’ll catch me because Pointer ain’t really my name. I use a different name
at  every  house  I  call  at  and  don’t  stay  nowhere  long. And  I’ll  tell  you  another
thing, Hulga,” he said, using the name as if he didn’t think much of it, “you ain’t so
smart.  I  been  believing  in  nothing  ever  since  I  was  born!”  and  then  the  toast-
colored hat disappeared down the hole and the girl was left, sitting on the straw in
the dusty sunlight. When she turned her churning face toward the opening, she saw
his blue figure struggling successfully over the green speckled lake.

Mrs. Hopewell and Mrs. Freeman, who were in the back pasture, digging up
onions, saw him emerge a little later from the woods and head across the meadow
toward the highway. “Why, that looks like that nice dull young man that tried to
sell me a Bible yesterday,” Mrs. Hopewell said, squinting. “He must have been

selling them to the Negroes back in there. He was so simple,” he said, “but I guess
the world would be better off if we were all that simple.”

Mrs.  Freeman’s  gaze  drove  forward  and  just  touched  him  before  he
disappeared  under  the  hill.  Then  she  returned  her  attention  to  the  evil-smelling
onion shoot she was lifting from the ground. “Some can’t be that simple,” she said.
“I know I never could.”

You Can’t Be Any Poorer Than Dead

FRANCIS MARION TARWATER’S uncle had been dead for only half a day when the
boy got too drunk to finish digging his grave and a Negro named Buford Munson,
who  had  come  to  get  a  jug  filled,  had  to  finish  it  and  drag  the  body  from  the
breakfast table where it was still sitting and bury it in a decent and Christian way,
with the sign of its Saviour at the head of the grave and enough dirt on top to keep
the dogs from digging it up. Buford had come along about noon, and when he left
at sundown, the boy, Tarwater, had never returned from the still.

The old man had been Tarwater’s great uncle, or said he was, and they had
always lived together so far as the child knew. His uncle had said he was seventy
years of age at the time he had rescued him and undertaken to bring him up; he was
eighty-four when he died. Tarwater figured this made his own age fourteen. His
uncle had taught him figures, reading, writing, and history beginning with Adam
expelled  from  the  Garden  and  going  on  down  through  the  presidents  to  Herbert
Hoover  and  on  in  speculation  toward  the  Second  Coming  and  the  Day  of
Judgment. Besides giving him a good education, he had rescued him from his only
other connection, old Tarwater’s nephew, a school teacher who had no child of
his own at the time and wanted this one of his dead sister’s to raise according to
his own ideas. The old man was in a position to know what his ideas were.

He had lived for three months in the nephew’s house on what he had thought at
the time was Charity but what he said he had found out was not Charity or anything
like  it. All  the  time  he  had  lived  there,  the  nephew  had  secretly  been  making  a
study of him. The nephew, who had taken him in under the name of Charity, had at
the same time been creeping into his soul by the back door, asking him questions
that meant more than one thing, planting traps around the house and watching him
fall  into  them,  and  finally  coming  up  with  a  written  study  of  him  for  a  school
teacher  magazine.  The  stench  of  his  behavior  had  reached  heaven  and  the  Lord
Himself had rescued the old man. He had sent him a rage of vision, had told him to
fly with the orphan boy to the farthest part of the backwoods and raise him up to

justify his Redemption. The Lord had assured him a long life and he had snatched
the child from under the school teacher’s nose and taken him to live in a clearing
that he had title to for his lifetime.

Eventually Rayber, the school teacher, had discovered where they were and
had come out to the clearing to get the boy back. He had had to leave his car on the
dirt  road  and  walk  a  mile  through  the  woods,  on  a  path  that  appeared  and
disappeared,  before  he  came  to  the  corn  patch  with  the  gaunt  two-story  shack
standing in the middle of it. The old man had been fond of recalling for Tarwater
the red, sweating, bitten face of his nephew bobbing up and down through the corn
and behind it the pink, flowered hat of a welfare woman he had brought along with
him. The corn was planted up to two feet from the porch step, and as the nephew
came out of it, the old man appeared in the door with his shotgun and said that he
would shoot any foot that touched his step, and the two stood facing each other
while the welfare woman bristled out of the corn like a peahen upset on the nest.
The old man said if it hadn’t been for the welfare woman his nephew wouldn’t
have taken a step, but she stood there waiting, pushing back the wisps of dyed red
hair that were plastered on her long forehead. Both their faces were scratched and
bleeding from thorn bushes, and the old man recalled a switch of blackberry bush
hanging from the sleeve of the welfare woman’s blouse. She only had to let out her
breath slowly as if she were releasing the last patience on earth and the nephew
lifted his foot and set it down on the step and the old man shot him in the leg. The
two  of  them  had  scuttled  off,  making  a  disappearing  rattle  in  the  corn,  and  the
woman had screamed, “You knew he was crazy!”; but when they came out of the
corn on the other side, old Tarwater had noted from the upstairs window where he
had run that she had her arm around him and was holding him up while he hopped
into the woods; and later he learned that he had married her though she was twice
his age and he could only possibly get one child out of her. She had never let him
come back again.

The  morning  the  old  man  died,  he  came  down  and  cooked  the  breakfast  as
usual  and  died  before  he  got  the  first  spoonful  to  his  mouth.  The  downstairs  of
their shack was all kitchen, large and dark, with a wood stove in the center of it
and a board table drawn up to the stove. Sacks of feed and mash were stacked in

the corners, and scrap metal, wood shavings, old rope, ladders, and other tinder
were wherever he or Tarwater had let them fall. They had slept in the kitchen until
a wild cat sprang in the window one night and frightened him into carrying the bed
upstairs where there were two empty rooms. He prophesied at the time that the
stairsteps would take ten years off his life. At the moment of his death, he had sat
down to his breakfast and lifted his knife in one square red hand halfway to his
mouth and then, with a look of complete astonishment, he had lowered it until the
hand rested on the edge of the plate and tilted it up off the table.

He was a bull-like old man with a short head set directly into his shoulders
and silver protruding eyes that looked like two fish straining to get out of a net of
red threads. He had on a putty-colored hat with the brim turned up all around and
over his undershirt a gray coat that had once been black. Tarwater, sitting across
the table from him, saw red ropes appear in his face and a tremor pass over him. It
was like the tremor of a quake that had begun at his heart and run outward and was
just  reaching  the  surface.  His  mouth  twisted  down  sharply  on  one  side  and  he
remained exactly as he was, perfectly balanced, his back a good six inches from
the chair back and his stomach caught just under the edge of the table. His eyes,
dead silver, were focused on the boy across from him.

Tarwater felt the tremor transfer itself and run lightly over him. He knew the
old man was dead without touching him and he continued to sit across the table
from the corpse, finishing his breakfast in a kind of sullen embarrassment, as if he
were in the presence of a new personality and couldn’t think of anything to say.
Finally he said in a querulous tone, “Just hold your horses. I already told you I
would do it right.” The voice sounded like a stranger’s voice, as if the death had
changed him instead of the old man.

He got up and took his plate out the back door and set it down on the bottom
step, and two long-legged black game roosters tore across the yard and finished
what was on it. He sat down on a long pine box on the back porch, and his hands
began absently to unravel a length of rope, while his long cross-shaped face stared
ahead beyond the clearing over woods that ran in gray and purple folds until they
touched the light-blue fortress line of trees set against the empty morning sky.

The  clearing  was  not  simply  off  the  dirt  road  but  off  the  wagon  track  and

footpath, and the nearest neighbors, colored not white, still had to walk through
the woods, pushing plum branches out of their way to get to it. The old man had
started an acre of cotton to the left and had run it beyond the fence line almost up
to the house on one side. The two strands of barbed wire ran through the middle of
the patch. A line of fog, hump-shaped, was creeping toward it, ready like a white
hound dog to crouch under and crawl across the yard.

“I’m going to move that fence,” Tarwater said. “I ain’t going to have my fence
in the middle of a field.” The voice was loud and still strange and disagreeable
and he finished the rest of his thought in his head: because this place is mine now
whether  I  own  it  or  not  because  I’m  here  and  nobody  can’t  get  me  off.  If  any
school teacher comes here to claim the property, I’ll kill him.

He had on a faded pair of overalls and a gray hat pulled down over his ears
like a cap. He followed his uncle’s custom of never taking off his hat except in
bed. He had always followed his uncle’s customs up to this date but: if I want to
move  that  fence  before  I  bury  him,  there  wouldn’t  be  a  soul  to  hinder  me,  he
thought; no voice will be lifted.

“Bury him first and get it over with,” the loud stranger’s disagreeable voice

said, and he got up and went to look for the shovel.

The pine box he had been sitting on was his uncle’s coffin but he didn’t intend
to use it. The old man was too heavy for a thin boy to hoist over the side of a box,
and though old Tarwater had built it himself a few years before, he had said that if
it wasn’t feasible to get him into it when the time came, then just to put him in the
hole as he was, only to be sure the hole was deep. He wanted it ten foot, he said,
not just eight. He had worked on the box a long time, and when he finished it he
had scratched on the top, MASON TARWATER, WITH GOD, and had climbed
into it where it stood on the back porch and had lain there for some time, nothing
showing but his stomach which rose over the top like overleavened bread. The
boy had stood at the side of the box, studying him. “This is the end of us all,” the
old man said with satisfaction, his gravel voice hearty in the coffin.

“It’s too much of you for the box,” Tarwater said. “I’ll have to sit on the lid or

wait until you rot a little.”

“Don’t wait,” old Tarwater had said. “Listen. If it ain’t feasible to use the box

when the time comes, if you can’t lift it or whatever, just get me in the hole, but I
want it deep. I want it ten foot, not just eight—ten. You can roll me to it if nothing
else. I’ll roll. Get two boards and set them down the steps and start me rolling and
dig where I stop and don’t let me roll over into it until it’s deep enough. Prop me
with some bricks so I won’t roll into it and don’t let the dogs nudge me over the
edge before it’s finished. You better pen up the dogs,” he said.

“What if you die in bed?” the boy asked. “How’m I going to get you down the

stairs?”

“I ain’t going to die in bed,” the old man said. “As soon as I hear the summons,
I’m going to run downstairs. I’ll get as close to the door as I can. If I should get
stuck up there, you’ll have to roll me down the stairs, that’s all.”

“My Lord,” the child said.
The  old  man  sat  up  in  the  box  and  brought  his  fist  down  on  the  edge  of  it.
“Listen,”  he  said.  “I  never  asked  much  of  you.  I  taken  you  and  raised  you  and
saved you from that ass in town and now all I’m asking in return is when I die to
get me in the ground where the dead belong and set up a cross over me to show
I’m there. That’s all in the world I’m asking you to do.”

“I’ll be doing good if I get you in the ground,” Tarwater said. “I’ll be too wore

out set up any cross. I ain’t bothering with trifles.”

“Trifles!”  his  uncle  hissed.  “You’ll  learn  what  a  trifle  is  on  the  day  those
crosses are gathered! Burying the dead right may be the only honor you ever do
yourself. I brought you out here to raise you a Christian,” he hollered, “and I’m
damned if you won’t be one!”

“If  I  don’t  have  the  strength  to  do  it,”  the  child  said,  watching  him  with  a
careful detachment, “I’ll notify my uncle in town and he can come out and take
care of you. The school teacher,” he drawled, observing that the pockmarks in his
uncle’s face had already turned pale against the purple, “he’ll ’tend to you.”

The  threads  that  restrained  the  old  man’s  eyes  thickened.  He  gripped  both
sides  of  the  coffin  and  pushed  forward  as  if  he  were  going  to  drive  it  off  the
porch. “He’d burn me,” he said hoarsely. “He’d have me cremated in an oven and
scatter  my  ashes.  ‘Uncle,’  he  said  to  me,  ‘you’re  a  type  that’s  almost  extinct!’
He’d be willing to pay the undertaker to burn me to be able to scatter my ashes,”

he said. “He don’t believe in the Resurrection. He don’t believe in the Last Day.
He don’t believe in…”

“The dead don’t bother with particulars,” the boy interrupted.
The old man grabbed the front of his overalls and pulled him up against the
side  of  the  box  so  that  their  faces  were  not  two  inches  apart.  “The  world  was
made for the dead. Think of all the dead there are,” he said and then, as if he had
conceived  the  answer  for  all  insolence,  he  said,  “There’s  a  million  times  more
dead than living and the dead are dead a million times longer than the living are
alive!” and he released him with a laugh.

The boy had shown only by a slight quiver in the eyes that he was shaken by
this, and after a minute he had said, “The school teacher is my uncle. The only
blood connection I’ll have and a living man and if I wanted to go to him, I’d go,
now.”

The  old  man  looked  at  him  silently  for  what  seemed  a  full  minute.  Then  he
slammed his hands on the sides of the box and roared, “Whom the plague beckons,
to the plague! Whom the sword, to the sword! Whom fire, to fire!” and the child
trembled visibly.

A living man, he thought as he went to get the shovel, but he better not come
out here and try to get me off this property because I’ll kill him. Go to him and be
dammed, his uncle had said. I’ve saved you from him this far and if you go to him
the minute I’m in the ground, there’s nothing I can do about it.

The shovel lay against the side of the hen house. “I’ll never set my foot in the
city again,” Tarwater said. “I’ll never go to him. Him nor nobody else will ever
get me off this place.” He decided to dig the grave under the fig tree because the
old man would be good for the figs. The ground was sandy on top and solid brick
underneath and the shovel made a clanging sound when he struck it in the sand.
Two hundred pounds of dead mountain to bury, he thought, and stood with one foot
on the shovel, leaning forward, studying the white sky through the leaves of the
tree. It would take all day to get a hole big enough out of this rock and the school
teacher would burn him in a minute.

Tarwater had never seen the school teacher but he had seen his child, a boy
who resembled old Tarwater himself. The old man had been so shocked by the

likeness that the time he and Tarwater had gone there, he had only stood in the
door, staring at the little boy and rolling his tongue around outside his mouth like
an old idiot. That had been the first and only time the old man had seen the boy.
“Three months there,” he would say. “It shames me. Betrayed for three months in
the house of my own kin, and if when I’m dead you want to turn me over to my
betrayer  and  see  my  body  burned,  go  ahead.  Go  ahead,  boy!”  he  had  shouted,
sitting up splotch-faced in his box. “Go ahead and let him burn me but watch out
for the crab that begins to grip your neck after that!” and he had clawed his hand in
the air to show Tarwater his grip. “I been leavened by the yeast he don’t believe
in,” he said, “and I won’t be burned. And when I’m gone you’ll be better off in
these woods by yourself with just as much light as that dwarf sun wants to let in
than you would be in the city with him!”

The white fog had eased through the yard and disappeared into the next bottom
and now the air was clear and blank. “The dead are poor,” Tarwater said in the
voice of the stranger. “You can’t be any poorer than dead. He’ll have to take what
he gets.” Nobody to bother me, he thought. Ever. No hand uplifted to hinder me
from anything. A sand-colored hound beat its tail on the ground nearby and a few
black chickens scratched in the raw clay he was turning up. The sun had slipped
over the blue line of trees and, circled by a haze of yellow, was moving slowly
across the sky. “Now I can do anything I want to,” he said, softening the stranger’s
voice so that he could stand it. Could kill off all those chickens if I had a mind to,
he  thought,  watching  the  worthless  black  game  bantams  that  his  uncle  had  been
fond of keeping.

“He  favored  a  lot  of  foolishness,”  the  stranger  said.  “The  truth  is  he  was
childish. Why, that school teacher never did him any harm. You take, all he did
was to watch him and write down what he seen and heard and put it in a paper for
school teachers to read. Now what was wrong in that? Why nothing. Who cares
what a school teacher reads? And the old fool acted like he had been killed in his
very  soul.  Well,  he  wasn’t  so  near  dead  then  as  he  thought  he  was.  Lived  on
fifteen years and raised up a boy to bury him, suitable to his own taste.”

As Tarwater slashed at the ground with the shovel, the stranger’s voice took
on a kind of restrained fury and he kept repeating, “You got to bury him whole and

completely by hand and that school teacher would burn him in a minute.” After he
had dug for an hour or more, the grave was only a foot deep, not as deep yet as the
corpse.  He  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  it  for  a  while.  The  sun  was  like  a  furious
white blister in the sky. “The dead are a heap more trouble than the living,” the
stranger said. “That school teacher wouldn’t consider for a minute that on the last
day all the bodies marked by crosses will be gathered. In the rest of the world
they do things different than what you been taught.”

“I been there oncet,” Tarwater muttered. “Nobody has to tell me.”
His uncle two or three years before had gone there to call on the lawyers to try
and get the property unentailed so that it would skip the school teacher and go to
Tarwater.  Tarwater  had  sat  at  the  lawyer’s  twelfth-story  window  and  looked
down into the pit of the city street while his uncle transacted the business. On the
way from the railroad station he had walked tall in the mass of moving metal and
concrete speckled with the very small eyes of people. The glitter of his own eyes
was  shaded  under  the  stiff  rooflike  brim  of  a  new  gray  hat  balanced  perfectly
straight on his buttressing ears. Before coming he had read facts in the  almanac
and he knew that there were 60,000 people here who were seeing him for the first
time. He wanted to stop and shake hands with each of them and say his name was
Francis M. Tarwater and that he was here only for the day to accompany his uncle
on business at a lawyer’s. His head jerked backwards after each passing figure
until they began to pass too thickly and he observed that their eyes didn’t grab at
you  like  the  eyes  of  country  people.  Several  of  them  bumped  into  him  and  this
contact that should have made an acquaintance for life made nothing because the
hulks  shoved  on  with  ducked  heads  and  muttered  apologies  that  he  would  have
accepted if they had waited. At the lawyer’s window, he had knelt down and let
his  face  hang  out  upside-down  over  the  floating  speckled  street  moving  like  a
river of tin below and had watched the glints on it from the sun which drifted pale
in a pale sky. You have to do something particular here to make them look at you,
he thought. They ain’t going to look at you just because God made you. When I
come for good, he said to himself, I’ll do something to make every eye stick on me
for what I done; and leaning forward, he saw his hat drop down gently, lost and
casual,  dallied  slightly  by  the  breeze  on  its  way  to  be  smashed  in  the  traffic

below. He clutched at his bare head and fell back inside the room.

His uncle was in argument with the lawyer, both hitting the desk that separated
them, bending their knees and hitting their fists at the same time. The lawyer, a tall
dome-headed man with an eagle’s nose, kept repeating in a restrained shriek, “But
I didn’t make the will. I didn’t make the law,” and his uncle’s voice  grated,  “I
can’t help it. My daddy wouldn’t have wanted it this way. It has to skip him. My
daddy wouldn’t have seen a fool inherit his property. That’s not how he intended
it.”

“My hat is gone,” Tarwater said.
The  lawyer  threw  himself  backwards  into  his  chair  and  screaked  it  toward
Tarwater  and  saw  him  without  interest  from  pale-blue  eyes  and  screaked  it
forward again and said to his uncle, “There’s nothing I can do. You’re wasting
your time and mine. You might as well resign yourself to this will.”

“Listen,” old Tarwater said, “at one time I thought I was finished, old and sick
and about to die and no money, nothing, and I accepted his hospitality because he
was my closest blood connection and you could have called it his duty to take me,
only I thought it was Charity, I thought…”

“I can’t help what you thought or did or what your connection thought or did,”

the lawyer said and closed his eyes.

“My hat fell,” Tarwater said.
“I’m only a lawyer,” the lawyer said, letting his glance rove over the lines of

clay-colored books of law that fortressed his office.

“A car is liable to have run over it by now.”
“Listen,” his uncle said, “all the time he was studying me for a paper he was
writing. Only had me there to study me for this paper. Taking secret tests on me,
his own kin, looking into my soul like a Peeping Tom, and then says to me, ‘Uncle,
you’re  a  type  that’s  almost  extinct!’ Almost  extinct!”  the  old  man  piped,  barely
able to force a thread of sound from his throat. “You see how extinct I am!”

The lawyer shut his eyes and smiled into one cheek.
“Other  lawyers,”  the  old  man  growled,  and  they  had  left  and  visited  three
more without stopping, and Tarwater had counted eleven men who might have had
on his hat or might not. Finally when they came out of the fourth lawyer’s office,

they sat down on the window ledge of a bank building and his uncle felt in his
pocket for some biscuits he had brought and handed one to Tarwater. The old man
unbuttoned his coat and allowed his stomach to ease forward and rest on his lap
while he ate. His face worked wrathfully; the skin between the pockmarks grew
pink and then purple and then white and the pockmarks appeared to jump from one
spot  to  another.  Tarwater  was  very  pale  and  his  eyes  glittered  with  a  peculiar
hollow depth. He had an old work handkerchief tied around his head, knotted at
the four corners. He didn’t observe the passing people who observed him now.
“Thank God, we’re finished here and can go home,” he muttered.

“We  ain’t  finished  here,”  the  old  man  said  and  got  up  abruptly  and  started

down the street.

“My Jesus,” the boy hissed, jumping to catch up with him. “Can’t we sit down
for one minute? Ain’t you got any sense? They all tell you the same thing. It’s only
one law and it’s nothing you can do about it. I got sense enough to get that; why
ain’t you? What’s the matter with you?”

The old man strode on with his head thrust forward as if he were smelling out

an enemy.

“Where we going?” Tarwater asked after they had walked out of the business
streets and were passing between rows of gray bulbous houses with sooty porches
that overhung the sidewalks. “Listen,” he said, hitting his uncle’s hip, “I never ast
to come.”

“You  would  have  asked  to  come  soon  enough,”  the  old  man  muttered.  “Get

your fill now.”

“I never ast for no fill. I never ast to come at all. I’m here before I knew this

here was here.”

“Just remember,” the old man said, “just remember that I told you to remember
when you ast to come that you never liked it when you were here,” and they kept
on  going,  crossing  one  length  of  sidewalk  after  another,  row  after  row  of
overhanging  houses  with  half-open  doors  that  let  a  little  dried  light  fall  on  the
stained passageways inside. Finally they came out into another section where the
houses were squat and almost identical and each one had a square of grass in front
of  it  like  a  dog  gripping  a  stolen  steak. After  a  few  blocks,  Tarwater  dropped

down on the sidewalk and said, “I ain’t going a step further.”

“I don’t even know where I’m going and I ain’t going no further!” he shouted at
his uncle’s heavy figure which didn’t stop or look back. In a second he jumped up
and  followed  him  again,  thinking:  If  anything  happened  to  him,  I  would  be  lost
here.

The  old  man  kept  straining  forward  as  if  his  blood  scent  were  leading  him
closer and closer to the place where his enemy was hiding. He suddenly turned up
the short walk of a pale-yellow house and moved rigidly to the white door, his
heavy shoulders hunched as if he were going to crash through like a bulldozer. He
struck  the  wood  with  his  fist,  ignoring  a  polished  brass  knocker.  By  the  time
Tarwater came up behind him, the door had opened and a small pink-faced fat boy
stood in it. He was a white-haired child and wore steel-rimmed spectacles and
had pale-silver eyes like the old man’s. The two stood staring at each other, old
Tarwater with his fist raised and his mouth open and his tongue lolling idiotically
from  side  to  side.  For  a  second  the  little  fat  boy  seemed  shocked  still  with
astonishment. Then he guffawed. He raised his fist and opened his mouth and let
his  tongue  roll  out  as  far  as  it  would  go.  The  old  man’s  eyes  seemed  about  to
strain out of their sockets.

“Tell your father,” he roared, “that I’m not extinct!”
The little boy shook as if a blast had hit him and pushed the door almost shut,
hiding himself all but one spectacled eye. The old man grabbed Tarwater by the
shoulder  and  swung  him  around  and  pushed  him  down  the  path  away  from  the
place.

He had never been back there again, never seen his cousin again, never seen
the  school  teacher  at  all,  and  he  hoped  to  God,  he  told  the  stranger  digging  the
grave  along  with  him  now,  that  he  would  never  see  him,  though  he  had  nothing
against him and he would dislike to kill him, but if he came out here, messing with
what was none of his business except by law, then he would be obliged to.

“Listen,” the stranger said, “what would he want to come out here for—where

there’s nothing?”

Tarwater  began  to  dig  again  and  didn’t  answer.  He  didn’t  search  out  the
stranger’s face, but he knew by now it was sharp and friendly and wise, shadowed

under a stiff broad-brimmed hat. He had lost his dislike for the sound of the voice.
Only, every now and then it sounded like a stranger’s voice to him. He began to
feel  that  he  was  only  just  now  meeting  himself,  as  if,  as  long  as  his  uncle  had
lived, he had been deprived of his own acquaintance.

“I ain’t denying the old man was a good one,” his new friend said, “but like
you said: you can’t be any poorer than dead. They have to take what they can get.
His soul is off this mortal earth now and his body is not going to feel the pinch—
of fire or anything else.”

“It was the last day he was thinking of,” Tarwater said.
“Well now,” the stranger said, “don’t you think any cross you set up in the year
1954 or 5 or 6 would be rotted out by the year the Day of Judgment comes in?
Rotted to as much dust as his ashes if you reduced him to ashes? And lemme ast
you this: what’s God going to do with sailors drowned at sea that the fish have et
and the fish that et them et by other fish and they et by yet others? And what about
people that get burned up naturally in house fires? Burnt up one way or another or
lost  in  machines  until  they’re  a  pulp? And  all  these  sojers  blasted  to  nothing?
What about all these naturally left without a piece to fit a piece?”

“If  I  burnt  him,”  Tarwater  said,  “it  wouldn’t  be  natural,  it  would  be

deliberate.”

“Oh,  I  see,”  the  stranger  said.  “It  ain’t  the  Day  of  Judgment  for  him  you’re

worried about, it’s the Day of Judgment for you.”

“That’s my bidnis,” Tarwater said.
“I ain’t buttin into your bidnis,” the stranger said. “It don’t mean a thing to me.
You’re left by yourself in this empty place. Forever by yourself in the empty place
with just as much light as that dwarf sun wants to let in. You don’t mean a thing to
a soul as far as I can see.”

“Redeemed,” Tarwater muttered.
“Do you smoke?” the stranger asked.
“Smoke if I want to and don’t if I don’t,” Tarwater said. “Bury if need be and

don’t if don’t.”

“Go take a look at him and see if he’s fell off his chair,” his friend suggested.
Tarwater let the shovel drop in the grave and returned to the house. He opened

the front door a crack and put his face to it. His uncle glared slightly to the side of
him,  like  a  judge  intent  upon  some  terrible  evidence.  The  child  shut  the  door
quickly and went back to the grave. He was cold in spite of the sweat that stuck
his shirt to his back.

The  sun  was  directly  overhead,  apparently  dead  still,  holding  its  breath
waiting  out  the  noontime.  The  grave  was  about  two  feet  deep.  “Ten  foot  now,
remember,” the stranger said and laughed. “Old men are selfish. You got to expect
the least from them. The least from everybody,” he added, and let out a flat sigh
that was like a gust of sand raised and dropped suddenly by the wind.

Tarwater  looked  up  and  saw  two  figures  cutting  across  the  field,  a  colored
man and woman, each dangling an empty vinegar jug by a finger. The woman, tall
and  Indian-like,  had  on  a  green  sunhat.  She  stooped  under  the  fence  without
pausing  and  came  on  across  the  yard  toward  the  grave;  the  man  held  the  wire
down and swung his leg over and followed at her elbow. They kept their eyes on
the  hole  and  stopped  at  the  edge  of  it,  looking  down  into  the  raw  ground  with
shocked satisfied expressions. The man,  Buford,  had  a  crinkled,  burnt-rag  face,
darker than his hat. “Old man passed,” he said.

The  woman  lifted  her  head  and  let  out  a  slow  sustained  wail,  piercing  and
formal. She set her jug down on the ground and crossed her arms and then lifted
them in the air and wailed again.

“Tell her to shut up that,” Tarwater said. “I’m in charge here now and I don’t

want no nigger-mourning.”

“I seen his spirit for two nights,” she said. “Seen him two nights and he was

unrested.”

“He ain’t been dead but since this morning,” Tarwater said. “If you all want

your jugs filled, give them to me and dig while I’m gone.”

“He’d  been  perdicting  his  passing  for  many  years,”  Buford  said.  “She  seen
him in her dream several nights and he wasn’t rested. I known him well. I known
him very well indeed.”

“Poor sweet sugar boy,” the woman said to Tarwater, “what you going to do

here now by yourself in this lonesome place?”

“Mind by bidnis,” the boy growled, jerking the jug out of her hand, and started

off so quickly that he almost fell. He stalked across the back field toward the rim
of trees that surrounded the clearing.

The birds had gone into the deep woods to escape the noon sun and one thrush,
hidden some distance ahead of him, called the same four notes again and again,
stopping each time after them to make a silence. Tarwater began to walk faster,
then  he  began  to  lope,  and  in  a  second  he  was  running  like  something  hunted,
sliding down slopes waxed with pine needles and grasping the limbs of trees to
pull  himself,  panting,  up  the  slippery  inclines.  He  crashed  through  a  wall  of
honeysuckle and leapt across a sandy stream bed that was almost dry now and fell
down against the high clay bank that formed the back wall of a cove where the old
man had kept his extra liquor hidden. He hid it in a hollow of the bank, covered
with a large stone. Tarwater began to fight at the stone to pull it away, while the
stranger stood over his shoulder, panting, “He was crazy! He was crazy! That’s
the long and short of it. He was crazy!” Tarwater got the stone away and pulled
out a black jug and sat down against the bank with it. “Crazy!” the stranger hissed,
collapsing by his side. The sun appeared, edging its way secretly behind the tops
of the trees that rose over the hiding place.

“A man, seventy years of age, to bring a baby out into the backwoods to raise
him right! Suppose he had died when you were four years old? Could you have
toted mash to the still then and supported yourself? I never heard of no four-year-
old running a still.

“Never  did  I  hear  of  that,”  he  continued.  “You  weren’t  anything  to  him  but
something that would grow big enough to bury him when the time came, and now
that he’s dead, he’s shut of you but you got two hundred pounds of him to carry
below the face of the earth. And don’t think he wouldn’t heat up like a coal stove
to see you take a drop of liquor,” he added. “He might say it would hurt you but
what  he  would  mean  was  you  might  get  so  much  you  wouldn’t  be  in  no  fit
condition to bury him. He said he brought you out here to raise you according to
principle and that was the principle: that you should be fit when the time came to
bury him so he would have a cross to mark where he was at.

“Well,” he said in a softer tone, when the boy had taken a long swallow from

the black jug, “a little won’t interfere. Moderation never hurt no one.”

A  burning  arm  slid  down  Tarwater’s  throat  as  if  the  devil  were  already
reaching  inside  him  to  finger  his  soul.  He  squinted  at  the  angry  sun  creeping
behind the topmost fringe of the trees.

“Take it easy,” his friend said. “Do you remember them nigger gospel singers
you  saw  one  time,  all  drunk,  all  singing,  all  dancing  around  that  black  Ford
automobile? Jesus, they wouldn’t have been near so glad they were redeemed if
they  hadn’t  had  that  liquor  in  them.  I  wouldn’t  pay  too  much  attention  to  my
Redemption if I was you,” he said. “Some people take everything too hard.”

Tarwater drank more slowly. He had been drunk only one time before and that
time his uncle had beat him with a board for it, saying liquor would dissolve a
child’s gut; another of his lies because his gut had not dissolved.

“It should be clear to you,” his kind friend said, “how all your life you been
tricked by that old man. You could have been a city slicker for the last ten years.
Instead, you been deprived of any company but his, you been living in a two-story
barn in the middle of this earth’s bald patch, following behind a mule and plow
since you were seven. And how do you know the education he give you is true to
the fact? Maybe he taught you a system of figures nobody else uses? How do you
know that two added to two makes four? Four added to four makes eight? Maybe
other people don’t use that system. How do you know if there was an Adam or if
Jesus eased your situation any when He redeemed you? Or how you know if He
actually done it? Nothing but that old man’s word and it ought to be obvious to you
by now that he was crazy. And as for Judgment Day,” the stranger said, “every day
is Judgment Day.

“Ain’t  you  old  enough  to  have  learnt  that  yet  for  yourself?  Don’t  everything
you do, everything you have ever done, work itself out right or wrong before your
eye and usually before the sun has set? Have you ever got by with anything? No
you ain’t nor ever thought you would,” he said. “You might as well drink all that
liquor since you’ve already drunk so much. Once you pass the moderation mark
you’ve passed it, and that gyration you feel working down from the top of your
brain,” he said, “that’s the Hand of God laying a blessing on you. He has given
you your release. That old man was the stone before your door and the Lord has
rolled it away. He ain’t rolled it quite far enough yet, of course. You got to finish

up yourself but He’s done the main part. Praise Him.”

Tarwater had ceased to have any feeling in his legs. He dozed for a while, his
head hanging to the side and his mouth open and the liquor trickling slowly down
the side of his overalls where the jug had overturned in his lap. Eventually there
was just a drip at the neck of the bottle, forming and filling and dropping, silent
and  measured  and  sun-colored.  The  bright,  even  sky  began  to  fade,  coarsening
with clouds until every shadow had gone in. He woke with a wrench forward, his
eyes focusing and unfocusing on something that looked like burnt rag hanging close
to his face.

Buford said, “This ain’t no way for you to act. Old man don’t deserve this.
There’s no rest until the dead is buried.” He was squatting on his heels, one hand
gripped around Tarwater’s arm. “I gone yonder to the door and seen him sitting
there at the table, not even laid out on a cooling board. He ought to be laid out and
have some salt on his bosom if you mean to keep him overnight.”

The boy’s lids pinched together to hold the image steady and in a second he
made out the two small red blistered eyes. “He deserves to lie in a grave that fits
him,” Buford said. “He was deep in this life, he was deep in Jesus’ misery.”

“Nigger,” the child said, working his strange swollen tongue, “take your hand

off me.”

Buford lifted his hand. “He needs to be rested,” he said.
“He’ll be rested all right when I get through with him,” Tarwater said vaguely.

“Go on and lea’ me to my bidnis.”

“Nobody going to bother you,” Buford said, standing up. He waited a minute,
bent, looking down at the limp figure sprawled against the bank. The boy’s head
was tilted backwards over a root that jutted out of the clay wall. His mouth hung
open, and his hat, turned up in front, cut a straight line across his forehead, just
over his half-open eyes. His cheekbones protruded, narrow and thin like the arms
of  a  cross,  and  the  hollows  under  them  had  an  ancient  look  as  if  the  child’s
skeleton  beneath  were  as  old  as  the  world.  “Nobody  going  to  bother  you,”  the
Negro  muttered,  pushing  through  the  wall  of  honeysuckle  without  looking  back.
“That going to be your trouble.”

Tarwater closed his eyes again.

Some night bird complaining close by woke him up. It was not a screeching
noise,  only  an  intermittent hump-hump as if the bird had to recall his grievance
each time before he repeated it. Clouds were moving convulsively across a black
sky and there was a pink unsteady moon that appeared to be jerked up a foot or so
and then dropped and jerked up again. This was because, as he observed in an
instant,  the  sky  was  lowering,  coming  down  fast  to  smother  him.  The  bird
screeched and flew off in time and Tarwater lurched into the middle of the stream
bed and crouched on his hands and knees. The moon was reflected like pale fire in
the few spots of water in the sand. He sprang at the wall of honeysuckle and began
to tear through it, confusing the sweet familiar odor with the weight coming down
on him. When he stood up on the other side, the black ground swung slowly and
threw  him  down  again. A  flare  of  pink  lightning  lit  the  woods  and  he  saw  the
black shapes of trees pierce out of the ground all around him. The night bird began
to hump again from a thicket where he had settled.

Tarwater got up and started moving in the direction of the clearing, feeling his
way from tree to tree, the trunks very cold and dry to his touch. There was distant
thunder and a continuous flicker of pale lightning firing one section of woods and
then another. Finally he saw the shack, standing gaunt-black and tall in the middle
of the clearing, with the pink moon trembling directly over it. His eyes glittered
like open pits of light as he moved across the sand, dragging his crushed shadow
behind him. He didn’t turn his head to that side of the yard where he had started
the grave.

He  stopped  at  the  far  back  corner  of  the  house  and  squatted  down  on  the
ground and looked underneath at the litter there, chicken crates and barrels and old
rags and boxes. He had four matches in his pocket. He crawled under and began to
set  small  fires,  building  one  from  another  and  working  his  way  out  at  the  front
porch, leaving the fire behind him eating greedily at the dry tinder and the floor
boards of the house. He crossed the front side of the clearing and went under the
barbed-wire  fence  and  through  the  rutted  field  without  looking  back  until  he
reached the edge of the opposite woods. Then he glanced over his shoulder and
saw that the pink moon had dropped through the roof of the shack and was bursting
and he began to run, forced on through the woods by two bulging silver eyes that

grew in immense astonishment in the center of the fire behind him.

Toward  midnight  he  came  out  on  the  highway  and  caught  a  ride  with  a
salesman who was a manufacturer’s representative selling copper flues throughout
the Southeast and who gave the silent boy what he said was the best advice he
could give any young fellow setting out to find himself a place in the world. While
they sped forward on the black untwisting highway watched on either side by a
dark wall of trees, the salesman said that it had been his personal experience that
you couldn’t sell a copper flue to a man you didn’t love. He was a thin fellow
with  a  narrow  gorgelike  face  that  appeared  to  have  been  worn  down  to  the
sharpest possible depressions. He wore a broad-brimmed stiff gray hat of the kind
used by business men who would like to look like cowboys. He said love was the
only policy that worked ninety-five per cent of the time. He said when he went to
sell  a  man  a  flue,  he  asked  first  about  that  man’s  wife’s  health  and  how  his
children  were.  He  said  he  had  a  book  that  he  kept  the  names  of  his  customer’s
families in and what was wrong with them. A man’s wife had cancer, he put her
name  down  in  the  book  and  wrote cancer  after  it  and  inquired  about  her  every
time he went to that man’s hardware store until she died; then he scratched her
name  out  and  wrote dead  there  “And  I  say  thank  God  when  they’re  dead,”  the
salesman said, “that’s one less to remember.”

“You don’t owe the dead anything,” Tarwater said in a loud voice, speaking

for almost the first time since he had got in the car.

“Nor they you,” said the stranger. “And that’s the way it ought to be in this

world—nobody owing nobody nothing.”

“Look,”  Tarwater  said  suddenly,  sitting  forward,  his  face  close  to  the
windshield, “we’re headed in the wrong direction. We’re going back where we
came from. There’s the fire again. There’s the fire we left.” Ahead of them in the
sky there was a faint glow, steady and not made by lightning. “That’s the same fire
we come from!” the boy said in a high wild voice.

“Boy, you must be nuts,” the salesman said. “That’s the city we’re coming to.

That’s the glow from the city lights. I reckon this is your first trip anywhere.”

You’re turned around,” the child said. “It’s the same fire.”
The stranger twisted his rutted face sharply. “I’ve never been turned around in

my life,” he said. “And I didn’t come from any fire. I come from Mobile. And I
know where I’m going. What’s the matter with you?”

Tarwater sat staring at the glow in front of him. “I was asleep,” he muttered.

“I’m just now waking up.”

“Well you should have been listening to me,” the salesman said. “I been telling

you things you ought to know.”

Greenleaf

MRS.  MAY’S  bedroom  window  was  low  and  faced  on  the  east  and  the  bull,
silvered in the moonlight, stood under it, his head raised as if he listened—like
some patient god come down to woo her—for a stir inside the room. The window
was dark and the sound of her breathing too light to be carried outside. Clouds
crossing the moon blackened him and in the dark he began to tear at the hedge.
Presently they passed and he appeared again in the same spot, chewing steadily,
with a hedge-wreath that he had ripped loose for himself caught in the tips of his
horns. When the moon drifted into retirement again, there was nothing to mark his
place  but  the  sound  of  steady  chewing.  Then  abruptly  a  pink  glow  filled  the
window. Bars of light slid across him as the venetian blind was slit. He took  a
step backward and lowered his head as if to show the wreath across his horns.

For  almost  a  minute  there  was  no  sound  from  inside,  then  as  he  raised  his
crowned  head  again,  a  woman’s  voice,  guttural  as  if  addressed  to  a  dog,  said,
“Get away from here, Sir!” and in a second muttered, “Some nigger’s scrub bull.”
The animal pawed the ground and Mrs. May, standing bent forward behind the
blind, closed it quickly lest the light make him charge into the shrubbery. For a
second  she  waited,  still  bent  forward,  her  nightgown  hanging  loosely  from  her
narrow shoulders. Green rubber curlers sprouted neatly over her forehead and her
face beneath them was smooth as concrete with an egg-white paste that drew the
wrinkles out while she slept.

She  had  been  conscious  in  her  sleep  of  a  steady  rhythmic  chewing  as  if
something were eating one wall of the house. She had been aware that whatever it
was had been eating as long as she had had the place and had eaten everything
from the beginning of her fence line up to the house and now was eating the house
and calmly with the same steady rhythm would continue through the house, eating
her  and  the  boys,  and  then  on,  eating  everything  but  the  Greenleafs,  on  and  on,
eating  everything  until  nothing  was  left  but  the  Greenleafs  on  a  little  island  all
their own in the middle of what had been her place. When the munching reached

her elbow, she jumped up and found herself, fully awake, standing in the middle of
her room. She identified the sound at once: a cow was tearing at the shrubbery
under her window. Mr. Greenleaf had left the lane gate open and she didn’t doubt
that the entire herd was on her lawn. She turned on the dim pink table lamp and
then went to the window and slit the blind. The bull, gaunt and long-legged, was
standing about four feet from her, chewing calmly like an uncouth country suitor.

For  fifteen  years,  she  thought  as  she  squinted  at  him  fiercely,  she  had  been
having shiftless people’s hogs root up her oats, their mules wallow on her lawn,
their scrub bulls breed her cows. If this one was not put up now, he would be over
the  fence,  ruining  her  herd  before  morning—and  Mr.  Greenleaf  was  soundly
sleeping a half mile down the road in the tenant house. There was no way to get
him unless she dressed and got in her car and rode down there and woke him up.
He would come but his expression, his whole figure, his every pause, would say:
“Hit looks to me like one or both of them boys would not make their maw ride out
in the middle of the night thisaway. If hit was my boys, they would have got thet
bull up theirself.”

The bull lowered his head and shook it and the wreath slipped down to the
base of his horns where it looked like a menacing prickly crown. She had closed
the blind then; in a few seconds she heard him move off heavily.

Mr. Greenleaf would say, “If hit was my boys they would never have allowed
their maw to go after hired help in the middle of the night. They would have did it
theirself.”

Weighing  it,  she  decided  not  to  bother  Mr.  Greenleaf.  She  returned  to  bed
thinking that if the Greenleaf boys had risen in the world it was because she had
given their father employment when no one else would have him. She had had Mr.
Greenleaf fifteen years but no one else would have had him five minutes. Just the
way he approached an object was enough to tell anybody with eyes what kind of a
worker he was. He walked with a high-shouldered creep and he never appeared
to  come  directly  forward.  He  walked  on  the  perimeter  of  some  invisible  circle
and if you wanted to look him in the face, you had to move and get in front of him.
She had not fired him because she had always doubted she could do better. He
was too shiftless to go out and look for another job; he didn’t have the initiative to

steal, and after she had told him three or four times to do a thing, he did it; but he
never told her about a sick cow until it was too late to call the veterinarian and if
her barn had caught on fire, he would have called his wife to see the flames before
he began to put them out. And of the wife, she didn’t even like to think. Beside the
wife, Mr. Greenleaf was an aristocrat.

“If it had been my boys,” he would have said, “they would have cut off their

right arm before they would have allowed their maw to.…”

“If  your  boys  had  any  pride,  Mr.  Greenleaf,”  she  would  like  to  say  to  him

some day, “there are many things that they would not allow their mother to do.”

*   *   *

The next morning as soon as Mr. Greenleaf came to the back door, she told him
there was a stray bull on the place and that she wanted him penned up at once.

“Done already been here three days,” he said, addressing his right foot which
he held forward, turned slightly as if he were trying to look at the sole. He was
standing  at  the  bottom  of  the  three  back  steps  while  she  leaned  out  the  kitchen
door, a small woman with pale near-sighted eyes and gray hair that rose on top
like the crest of some disturbed bird.

“Three days!” she said in the restrained screech that had become habitual with

her.

Mr.  Greenleaf,  looking  into  the  distance  over  the  near  pasture,  removed  a
package of cigarettes from his shirt pocket and let one fall into his hand. He put
the package back and stood for a while looking at the cigarette. “I put him in the
bull pen but he torn out of there,” he said presently. “I didn’t see him none after
that.” He bent over the cigarette and lit it and then turned his head briefly in her
direction. The upper part of his face sloped gradually into the lower which was
long and narrow, shaped like a rough chalice. He had deep-set fox-colored eyes
shadowed under a gray felt hat that he wore slanted forward following the line of
his nose. His build was insignificant.

“Mr.  Greenleaf,”  she  said,  “get  that  bull  up  this  morning  before  you  do
anything else. You know he’ll ruin the breeding schedule. Get him up and keep
him up and the next time there’s a stray bull on this place, tell me at once. Do you

understand?”

“Where you want him put at?” Mr. Greenleaf asked.
“I don’t care where you put him,” she said. “You are supposed to have some

sense. Put him where he can’t get out. Whose bull is he?”

For a moment Mr. Greenleaf seemed to hesitate between silence and speech.
He studied the air to the left of him. “He must be somebody’s bull,” he said after a
while.

“Yes, he must!” she said and shut the door with a precise little slam.
She went into the dining room where the two boys were eating breakfast and
sat down on the edge of her chair at the head of the table. She never ate breakfast
but she sat with them to see that they had what they wanted. “Honestly!” she said,
and  began  to  tell  about  the  bull,  aping  Mr.  Greenleaf  saying,  “It  must  be
somebody’s bull.”

Wesley continued to read the newspaper folded beside his plate but Scofield
interrupted his eating from time to time to look at her and laugh. The  two  boys
never had the same reaction to anything. They were as different, she said, as night
and day. The only thing they did have in common was that neither of them cared
what  happened  on  the  place.  Scofield  was  a  business  type  and  Wesley  was  an
intellectual.

Wesley, the younger child, had had rheumatic fever when he was seven and
Mrs.  May  thought  that  this  was  what  had  caused  him  to  be  an  intellectual.
Scofield,  who  had  never  had  a  day’s  sickness  in  his  life,  was  an  insurance
salesman. She would not have minded his selling insurance if he had sold a nicer
kind  but  he  sold  the  kind  that  only  Negroes  buy.  He  was  what  Negroes  call  a
“policy man.” He said there was more money in nigger-insurance than any other
kind, and before company, he was very loud about it. He would shout, “Mamma
don’t  like  to  hear  me  say  it  but  I’m  the  best  nigger-insurance  salesman  in  this
county!”

Scofield was thirty-six and he had a broad pleasant smiling face but he was
not married. “Yes,” Mrs. May would say, “and if you sold decent insurance, some
nice girl would be willing to marry you. What nice girl wants to marry a nigger-
insurance man? You’ll wake up some day and it’ll be too late.”

And  at  this  Scofield  would  yodel  and  say,  “Why  Mamma,  I’m  not  going  to
marry until you’re dead and gone and then I’m going to marry me some nice fat
farm girl that can take over this place!” And once he had added,”—some nice lady
like Mrs. Greenleaf.” When he had said this, Mrs. May had risen from her chair,
her back stiff as a rake handle, and had gone to her room. There she had sat down
on the edge of her bed for some time with her small face drawn. Finally she had
whispered, “I work and slave, I struggle and sweat to keep this place for them and
soon  as  I’m  dead,  they’ll  marry  trash  and  bring  it  in  here  and  ruin  everything.
They’ll marry trash and ruin everything I’ve done,” and she had made up her mind
at that moment to change her will. The next day she had gone to her lawyer and
had  had  the  property  entailed  so  that  if  they  married,  they  could  not  leave  it  to
their wives.

The  idea  that  one  of  them  might  marry  a  woman  even  remotely  like  Mrs.
Greenleaf  was  enough  to  make  her  ill.  She  had  put  up  with  Mr.  Greenleaf  for
fifteen  years,  but  the  only  way  she  had  endured  his  wife  had  been  by  keeping
entirely out of her sight. Mrs. Greenleaf was large and loose. The yard around her
house looked like a dump and her five girls were always filthy; even the youngest
one  dipped  snuff.  Instead  of  making  a  garden  or  washing  their  clothes,  her
preoccupation was what she called “prayer healing.”

Every day she cut all the morbid stories out of the newspaper—the accounts of
women who had been raped and criminals who had escaped and children who had
been  burned  and  of  train  wrecks  and  plane  crashes  and  the  divorces  of  movie
stars. She took these to the woods and dug a hole and buried them and then she fell
on the ground over them and mumbled and groaned for an hour or so moving her
huge arms back and forth under her and out again and finally just lying down flat
and, Mrs. May suspected, going to sleep in the dirt.

She had not found out about this until the Greenleafs had been with her a few
months.  One  morning  she  had  been  out  to  inspect  a  field  that  she  had  wanted
planted in rye but that had come up in clover because Mr. Greenleaf had used the
wrong  seeds  in  the  grain  drill.  She  was  returning  through  a  wooded  path  that
separated two pastures,  muttering  to  herself  and  hitting  the  ground  methodically
with a long stick she carried in case she saw a snake. “Mr. Greenleaf,” she was

saying  in  a  low  voice,  “I  cannot  afford  to  pay  for  your  mistakes.  I  am  a  poor
woman and this place is all I have. I have two boys to educate. I cannot.…”

Out of nowhere a guttural agonized voice groaned, “Jesus! Jesus!” In a second

it came again with a terrible urgency. “Jesus! Jesus!”

Mrs.  May  stopped  still,  one  hand  lifted  to  her  throat.  The  sound  was  so
piercing  that  she  felt  as  it  some  violent  unleashed  force  had  broken  out  of  the
ground and was charging toward her. Her second thought was more reasonable:
somebody had been hurt on the place and would sue her for everything she had.
She had no insurance. She rushed forward and turning a bend in the path, she saw
Mrs. Greenleaf sprawled on her hands and knees off the side of the road, her head
down.

“Mrs. Greenleaf!” she shrilled, “what’s happened?”
Mrs. Greenleaf raised her head. Her face was a patchwork of dirt and tears
and her small eyes, the color of two field peas, were red-rimmed and swollen, but
her expression was as composed as a bulldog’s. She swayed back and forth on her
hands and knees and groaned, “Jesus, Jesus.”

Mrs.  May  winced.  She  thought  the  word,  Jesus,  should  be  kept  inside  the
church building like other words inside the bedroom. She was a good Christian
woman with a large respect for religion, though she did not, of course, believe any
of it was true. “What is the matter with you?” she asked sharply.

“You broken my healing,” Mrs. Greenleaf said, waving her aside. “I can’t talk

to you until I finish.”

Mrs.  May  stood,  bent  forward,  her  mouth  open  and  her  stick  raised  off  the

ground as if she were not sure what she wanted to strike with it.

“Oh Jesus, stab me in the heart!” Mrs. Greenleaf shrieked. “Jesus, stab me in
the  heart!”  and  she  fell  back  flat  in  the  dirt,  a  huge  human  mound,  her  legs  and
arms spread out as if she were trying to wrap them around the earth.

Mrs. May felt as furious and helpless as if she had been insulted by a child.
“Jesus,”  she  said,  drawing  herself  back,  “would  be ashamed of you. He would
tell you to get up from there this instant and go wash your children’s clothes!” and
she had turned and walked off as fast as she could.

Whenever she thought of how the Greenleaf boys had advanced in the world,

she had only to think of Mrs. Greenleaf sprawled obscenely on the ground, and say
to herself, “Well, no matter how far they go, they came from that.”

She would like to have been able to put in her will that when she died, Wesley
and Scofield were not to continue to employ Mr. Greenleaf. She was capable of
handling Mr. Greenleaf; they were not. Mr. Greenleaf had pointed out to her once
that her boys didn’t know hay from silage. She had pointed out to him that they had
other talents, that Scofield was a successful business man and Wesley a successful
intellectual. Mr. Greenleaf did not comment, but he never lost an opportunity of
letting her see by his expression or some simple gesture, that he held the two of
them  in  infinite  contempt.  As  scrub-human  as  the  Greenleafs  were,  he  never
hesitated  to  let  her  know  that  in  any  like  circumstance  in  which  his  own  boys
might have been involved, they—O. T. and E. T. Greenleaf—would have acted to
better advantage.

The Greenleaf boys were two or three years younger than the May boys. They
were twins and you never knew when you spoke to one of them whether you were
speaking to O.T. or E.T, and they never had the politeness to enlighten you. They
were  long-legged  and  raw-boned  and  red-skinned,  with  bright  grasping  fox-
colored eyes like their father’s. Mr. Greenleaf’s pride in them began with the fact
that they were twins. He acted, Mrs. May said, as if this were something smart
they  had  thought  of  themselves.  They  were  energetic  and  hard-working  and  she
would admit to anyone that they had come a long way—and that the Second World
War was responsible for it.

They had both joined the service and, disguised in their uniforms, they could
not  be  told  from  other  people’s  children. You  could  tell,  of  course,  when  they
opened  their  mouths  but  they  did  that  seldom.  The  smartest  thing  they  had  done
was to get sent overseas and there to marry French wives. They hadn’t married
French trash either. They had married nice girls who naturally couldn’t tell  that
they murdered the king’s English or that the Greenleafs were who they were.

Wesley’s  heart  condition  had  not  permitted  him  to  serve  his  country  but
Scofield had been in the army for two years. He had not cared for it and at the end
of  his  military  service,  he  was  only  a  Private  First  Class.  The  Greenleaf  boys
were both some kind of sergeants, and Mr.  Greenleaf,  in  those  days,  had  never

lost an opportunity of referring to them by their rank. They had both managed to
get  wounded  and  now  they  both  had  pensions.  Further,  as  soon  as  they  were
released  from  the  army,  they  took  advantage  of  all  the  benefits  and  went  to  the
school of agriculture at the university—the taxpayers meanwhile supporting their
French  wives.  The  two  of  them  were  living  now  about  two  miles  down  the
highway on a piece of land that the government had helped them to buy and in a
brick duplex bungalow that the government had helped to build and pay for. If the
war had made anyone, Mrs. May said, it had made the Greenleaf boys. They each
had  three  little  children  apiece,  who  spoke  Greenleaf  English  and  French,  and
who,  on  account  of  their  mothers’  background,  would  be  sent  to  the  convent
school  and  brought  up  with  manners.  “And  in  twenty  years,”  Mrs.  May  asked
Scofield and Wesley, “do you know what those people will be?

“Society,” she said blackly.
She had spent fifteen years coping with Mr. Greenleaf and, by now, handling
him had become second nature with her. His disposition on any particular day was
as much a factor in what she could and couldn’t do as the weather was, and she
had  learned  to  read  his  face  the  way  real  country  people  read  the  sunrise  and
sunset.

She was a country woman only by persuasion. The late Mr. May, a business
man, had bought the place when land was down, and when he died it was all he
had to leave her. The boys had not been happy to move to the country to a broken-
down farm, but there was nothing else for her to do. She had the timber on the
place cut and with the proceeds had set herself up in the dairy business after Mr.
Greenleaf had answered her ad. “i seen yor add and i will come have 2 boys,”
was all his letter said, but he arrived the next day in a pieced-together truck, his
wife and five daughters sitting on the floor in back, himself and the two boys in the
cab.

Over the years they had been on her place, Mr. and Mrs. Greenleaf had aged
hardly at all. They had no worries, no responsibilities. They lived like the lilies of
the field, off the fat that she struggled to put into the land. When she was dead and
gone  from  overwork  and  worry,  the  Greenleafs,  healthy  and  thriving,  would  be
just ready to begin draining Scofield and Wesley.

Wesley said the reason Mrs. Greenleaf had not aged was because she released
all her emotions in prayer healing. “You ought to start praying, Sweetheart,” he
had said in the voice that, poor boy, he could not help making deliberately nasty.

Scofield only exasperated her beyond endurance but Wesley caused her real
anxiety. He was thin and nervous and bald and being an intellectual was a terrible
strain on his disposition. She doubted if he would marry until she died but she was
certain that then the wrong woman would get him. Nice girls didn’t like Scofield
but Wesley didn’t like nice girls. He didn’t like anything. He drove twenty miles
every day to the university where he taught and twenty miles back every night, but
he said he hated the twenty-mile drive and he hated the second-rate university and
he hated the morons who attended it. He hated the country and he hated the life he
lived; he hated living with his mother and his idiot brother and he hated hearing
about the damn dairy and the damn help and the damn broken machinery. But in
spite of all he said, he never made any move to leave. He talked about Paris and
Rome but he never went even to Atlanta.

“You’d go to those places and you’d get sick,” Mrs. May would say. “Who in
Paris is going to see that you get a salt-free diet? And do you think if you married
one  of  those  odd  numbers  you  take  out  that she  would  cook  a  salt-free  diet  for
you?  No  indeed,  she  would  not!”  When  she  took  this  line,  Wesley  would  turn
himself roughly around in his chair and ignore her. Once when she had kept it up
too long, he had snarled, “Well, why don’t you do something practical, Woman?
Why don’t you pray for me like Mrs. Greenleaf would?”

“I don’t like to hear you boys make jokes about religion,” she had said. “If you

would go to church, you would meet some nice girls.”

But  it  was  impossible  to  tell  them  anything.  When  she  looked  at  the  two  of
them now, sitting on either side of the table, neither one caring the least if a stray
bull ruined her herd—which was their herd, their future—when she looked at the
two of them, one hunched over a paper and the other teetering back in his chair,
grinning at her like an idiot, she wanted to jump up and beat her fist on the table
and shout, “You’ll find out one of these days, you’ll find out what Reality is when
it’s too late!”

“Mamma,” Scofield said, “don’t you get excited now but I’ll tell you whose

bull that is.” He was looking at her wickedly. He let his chair drop forward and
he got up. Then with his shoulders bent and his hands held up to cover his head, he
tiptoed to the door. He backed into the hall and pulled the door almost to so that it
hid all of him but his face. “You want to know, Sugarpie?” he asked.

Mrs. May sat looking at him coldly.
“That’s O.T. and E.T.’s bull,” he said. “I collected from their nigger yesterday
and he told me they were missing it,” and he showed her an exaggerated expanse
of teeth and disappeared silently.

Wesley looked up and laughed.
Mrs. May turned her head forward again, her expression unaltered. “I am the
only adult  on  this  place,”  she  said.  She  leaned  across  the  table  and  pulled  the
paper from the side of his plate. “Do you see how it’s going to be when I die and
you boys have to handle him?” she began. “Do you see why he didn’t know whose
bull that was? Because it was theirs. Do you see what I have to put up with? Do
you see that if I hadn’t kept my foot on his neck all these years, you boys might be
milking cows every morning at four o’clock?”

Wesley pulled the paper back toward his plate and staring at her full in the

face, he murmured, “I wouldn’t milk a cow to save your soul from hell.”

“I  know  you  wouldn’t,”  she  said  in  a  brittle  voice.  She  sat  back  and  began
rapidly  turning  her  knife  over  at  the  side  of  her  plate.  “O.T.  and  E.T.  are  fine
boys,” she said. “They ought to have been my sons.” The thought of this was so
horrible that her vision of Wesley was blurred at once by a wall of tears. All she
saw was his dark shape, rising quickly from the table. “And you two,” she cried,
“you two should have belonged to that woman!”

He was heading for the door.
“When I die,” she said in a thin voice, “I don’t know what’s going to become

of you.”

“You’re always yapping about when-you-die,” he growled as he rushed out,

“but you look pretty healthy to me.”

For  some  time  she  sat  where  she  was,  looking  straight  ahead  through  the
window across the room into a scene of indistinct grays and greens. She stretched
her face and her neck muscles and drew in a long breath but the scene in front of

her  flowed  together  anyway  into  a  watery  gray  mass.  “They  needn’t  think  I’m
going  to  die  any  time  soon,”  she  muttered,  and  some  more  defiant  voice  in  her
added: I’ll die when I get good and ready.

She wiped her eyes with the table napkin and got up and went to the window
and gazed at the scene in front of her. The cows were grazing on two pale green
pastures across the road and behind them, fencing them in, was a black wall of
trees  with  a  sharp  sawtooth  edge  that  held  off  the  indifferent  sky.  The  pastures
were enough to calm her. When she looked out any window in her house, she saw
the  reflection  of  her  own  character.  Her  city  friends  said  she  was  the  most
remarkable  woman  they  knew,  to  go,  practically  penniless  and  with  no
experience, out to a rundown farm and make a success of it. “Everything is against
you,” she would say, “the weather is against you and the dirt is against you and the
help is against you. They’re all in league against you. There’s nothing for it but an
iron hand!”

“Look at Mamma’s iron hand!” Scofield would yell and grab her arm and hold
it up so that her delicate blue-veined little hand would dangle from her wrist like
the head of a broken lily. The company always laughed.

The  sun,  moving  over  the  black  and  white  grazing  cows,  was  just  a  little
brighter than the rest of the sky. Looking down, she saw a darker shape that might
have been its shadow cast at an angle, moving among them. She uttered a sharp cry
and turned and marched out of the house.

Mr. Greenleaf was in the trench silo, filling a wheelbarrow. She stood on the
edge and looked down at him. “I told you to get up that bull. Now he’s in with the
milk herd.”

“You can’t do two thangs at oncet,” Mr. Greenleaf remarked.
“I told you to do that first.”
He wheeled the barrow out of the open end of the trench toward the barn and
she followed close behind him. “And you needn’t think, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said,
“that I don’t know exactly whose bull that is or why you haven’t been in any hurry
to notify me he was here. I might as well feed O.T. and E.T.’s bull as long as I’m
going to have him here ruining my herd.”

Mr. Greenleaf paused with the wheelbarrow and looked behind him. “Is that

them boys’ bull?” he asked in an incredulous tone.

She did not say a word. She merely looked away with her mouth taut.
“They told me their bull was out but I never known that was him,” he said.
“I want that bull put up now,” she said, “and I’m going to drive over to O.T.
and E.T.’s and tell them they’ll have to come get him today. I ought to charge for
the time he’s been here—then it wouldn’t happen again.”

“They didn’t pay but seventy-five dollars for him,” Mr. Greenleaf offered.
“I wouldn’t have had him as a gift,” she said.
“They was just going to beef him,” Mr. Greenleaf went on, “but he got loose
and run his head into their pickup truck. He don’t like cars and trucks. They had a
time getting his horn out the fender and when they finally got him loose, he took off
and they was too tired to run after him—but I never known that was him there.”

“It wouldn’t have paid you to know, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said. “But you know

now. Get a horse and get him.”

In a half hour, from her front window she saw the bull, squirrel-colored, with
jutting hips and long light horns, ambling down the dirt road that ran in front of the
house. Mr. Greenleaf was behind him on the horse. “That’s a Greenleaf bull if I
ever  saw  one,”  she  muttered.  She  went  out  on  the  porch  and  called,  “Put  him
where he can’t get out.”

“He  likes  to  bust  loose,”  Mr.  Greenleaf  said,  looking  with  approval  at  the

bull’s rump. “This gentleman is a sport.”

“If those boys don’t come for him, he’s going to be a dead sport,” she said.

“I’m just warning you.”

He heard her but he didn’t answer.
“That’s the awfullest looking bull I ever saw,” she called but he was too far

down the road to hear.

*   *   *

It was mid-morning when she turned into O.T. and E.T.’s driveway. The house, a
new  red-brick,  low-to-the-ground  building  that  looked  like  a  warehouse  with
windows, was on top of a treeless hill. The sun was beating down directly on the
white  roof  of  it.  It  was  the  kind  of  house  that  everybody  built  now  and  nothing

marked it as belonging to Greenleafs except three dogs, part hound and part spitz,
that  rushed  out  from  behind  it  as  soon  as  she  stopped  her  car.  She  reminded
herself  that  you  could  always  tell  the  class  of  people  by  the  class  of  dog,  and
honked  her  horn.  While  she  sat  waiting  for  someone  to  come,  she  continued  to
study the house. All the windows were down and she wondered if the government
could  have  air-conditioned  the  thing.  No  one  came  and  she  honked  again.
Presently a door opened and several children appeared in it and stood looking at
her,  making  no  move  to  come  forward.  She  recognized  this  as  a  true  Greenleaf
trait—they could hang in a door, looking at you for hours.

“Can’t one of you children come here?” she called.
After a minute they all began to move forward, slowly. They had on overalls
and were barefooted but they were not as dirty as she might have expected. There
were two or three that looked distinctly like Greenleafs; the others not so much so.
The smallest child was a girl with untidy black hair. They stopped about six feet
from the automobile and stood looking at her.

“You’re mighty pretty,” Mrs. May said, addressing herself to the smallest girl.
There was no answer. They appeared to share one dispassionate expression

between them.

“Where’s your Mamma?” she asked.
There was no answer to this for some time. Then one of them said something

in French. Mrs. May did not speak French.

“Where’s your daddy?” she asked.
After a while, one of the boys said, “He ain’t hyar neither.”
“Ahhhh,”  May  said  as  if  something  had  been  proven.  “Where’s  the  colored

man?”

She waited and decided no one was going to answer. “The cat has six little
tongues,” she said. “How would you like to come home with me and let me teach
you how to talk?” She laughed and her laugh died on the silent air. She felt as if
she were on trial for her life, facing a jury of Greenleafs. “I’ll go down and see if
I can find the colored man,” she said.

“You can go if you want to,” one of the boys said.
“Well, thank you,” she murmured and drove off.

The barn was down the lane from the house. She had not seen it before but Mr.
Greenleaf had described it in detail for it had been built according to the latest
specifications.  It  was  a  milking  parlor  arrangement  where  the  cows  are  milked
from below. The milk ran in pipes from the machines to the milk house and was
never  carried  in  no  bucket,  Mr.  Greenleaf  said,  by  no  human  hand.  “When  you
gonter get you one?” he had asked.

“Mr. Greenleaf,” she had said, “I have to do for myself. I am not assisted hand
and foot by the government. It would cost me $20,000 to install a milking parlor. I
barely make ends meet as it is.”

“My boys done it,” Mr. Greenleaf had murmured, and then—“but all boys ain’t

alike.”

“No indeed!” she had said. “I thank God for that!”
“I thank Gawd for ever-thang,” Mr. Greenleaf had drawled.
You might as well, she had thought in the fierce silence that followed; you’ve

never done anything for yourself.

She  stopped  by  the  side  of  the  barn  and  honked  but  no  one  appeared.  For
several minutes she sat in the car, observing the various machines parked around,
wondering how many of them were paid for. They had a forage harvester and a
rotary hay baler. She had those too. She decided that since no one was here, she
would get out and have a look at the milking parlor and see if they kept it clean.

She  opened  the  milking  room  door  and  stuck  her  head  in  and  for  the  first
second  she  felt  as  if  she  were  going  to  lose  her  breath.  The  spotless  white
concrete room was filled with sunlight that came from a row of windows head-
high along both walls. The metal stanchions gleamed ferociously and she had to
squint to be able to look at all. She drew her head out the room quickly and closed
the door and leaned against it, frowning. The light outside was not so bright but
she was conscious that the sun was directly on top of her head, like a silver bullet
ready to drop into her brain.

A Negro carrying a yellow calf-feed bucket appeared from around the corner
of the machine shed and came toward her. He was a light yellow boy dressed in
the  cast-off  army  clothes  of  the  Greenleaf  twins.  He  stopped  at  a  respectable
distance and set the bucket on the ground.

“Where’s Mr. O.T. and Mr. E.T.?” she asked.
“Mist O.T. he in town, Mist E. T. he off yonder in the field,” the Negro said,
pointing first to the left and then to the right as as if he were naming the position of
two planets.

“Can  you  remember  a  message?”  she  asked,  looking  as  if  she  thought  this

doubtful.

“I’ll remember it if I don’t forget it,” he said with a touch of sullenness.
“Well, I’ll write it down then,” she said. She got in her car and took a stub of
pencil from her pocket book and began to write on the back of an empty envelope.
The Negro came and stood at the window. “I’m Mrs. May,” she said as she wrote.
“Their bull is on my place and I want him off today. You can tell them I’m furious
about it.”

“That bull lef here Sareday,” the Negro said, “and none of us ain’t seen him

since. We ain’t knowed where he was.”

“Well, you know now,” she said, “and you can tell Mr. O.T. and Mr. E.T. that
if they don’t come get him today, I’m going to have their daddy shoot him the first
thing in the morning. I can’t have that bull ruining my herd.” She handed him the
note.

“If I knows Mist O.T. and Mist E.T.,” he said, taking it, “they goin to say you
go ahead on and shoot him. He done busted up one of our trucks already and we
be glad to see the last of him.”

She pulled her head back and gave him a look from slightly bleared eyes. “Do
they  expect  me  to  take  my  time  and  my  worker  to  shoot  their  bull?”  she  asked.
“They don’t want him so they just let him loose and expect somebody else to kill
him? He’s eating my oats and ruining my herd and I’m expected to shoot him too?”

“I speck you is,” he said softly. “He done busted up…”
She gave him a very sharp look and said, “Well, I’m not surprised. That’s just
the way some people are,” and after a second she asked, “Which is boss, Mr. O.T.
or  Mr.  E.T.?”  She  had  always  suspected  that  they  fought  between  themselves
secretly.

“They never quarls,” the boy said. “They like one man in two skins.”
“Hmp. I expect you just never heard them quarrel.”

“Nor  nobody  else  heard  them  neither,”  he  said,  looking  away  as  if  this

insolence were addressed to someone else.

“Well,”  she  said,  “I  haven’t  put  up  with  their  father  for  fifteen  years  not  to

know a few things about Greenleafs.”

The  Negro  looked  at  her  suddenly  with  a  gleam  of  recognition.  “Is  you  my

policy man’s mother?” he asked.

“I don’t know who your policy man is,” she said sharply. “You give them that
note and tell them if they don’t come for that bull today, they’ll be making their
father shoot it tomorrow,” and she drove off.

She stayed at home all afternoon waiting for the Greenleaf twins to come for
the  bull.  They  did  not  come.  I  might  as  well  be  working  for  them,  she  thought
furiously. They are simply going to use me to the limit. At the supper table, she
went over it again for the boys’ benefit because she wanted them to see exactly
what O.T. and E.T. would do. “They don’t want that bull,” she said, “—pass the
butter—so they simply turn him loose and let somebody else worry about getting
rid of him for them. How do you like that? I’m the victim. I’ve always been the
victim.”

“Pass the butter to the victim,” Wesley said. He was in a worse humor than

usual because he had had a flat tire on the way home from the university.

Scofield handed her the butter and said, “Why Mamma, ain’t you ashamed to
shoot an old bull that ain’t done nothing but give you a little scrub strain in your
herd? I declare,” he said, “with the Mamma I got it’s a wonder I turned out to be
such a nice boy!”

“You ain’t her boy, Son,” Wesley said.
She eased back in her chair, her fingertips on the edge of the table.
“All  I  know  is,”  Scofield  said,  “I  done  mighty  well  to  be  as  nice  as  I  am

seeing what I come from.”

When they teased her they spoke Greenleaf English but Wesley made his own
particular tone come through it like a knife edge. “Well lemme tell you one thang,
Brother,” he said, leaning over the table, “that if you had half a mind you would
already know.”

“What’s that, Brother?” Scofield asked, his broad face grinning into the thin

constricted one across from him.

“That is,” Wesley said, “that neither you nor me is her boy…,” but he stopped
abruptly  as  she  gave  a  kind  of  hoarse  wheeze  like  an  old  horse  lashed
unexpectedly. She reared up and ran from the room.

“Oh, for God’s sake,” Wesley growled, “What did you start her off for?”
“I never started her off,” Scofield said. “You started her off.”
“Hah.”
“She’s not as young as she used to be and she can’t take it.”
“She can only give it out,” Wesley said. “I’m the one that takes it.”
His  brother’s  pleasant  face  had  changed  so  that  an  ugly  family  resemblance
showed between them. “Nobody feels sorry for a lousy bastard like you,” he said
and grabbed across the table for the other’s shirtfront.

From her room she heard a crash of dishes and she rushed back through the
kitchen into the dining room. The hall door was open and Scofield was going out
of  it.  Wesley  was  lying  like  a  large  bug  on  his  back  with  the  edge  of  the
overturned table cutting him across the middle and broken dishes scattered on top
of him. She pulled the table off him and caught his arm to help him rise but he
scrambled up and pushed her off with a furious charge of energy and flung himself
out of the door after his brother.

She would have collapsed but a knock on the back door stiffened her and she
swung around. Across the kitchen and back porch, she could see Mr. Greenleaf
peering eagerly through the screenwire. All her resources returned in full strength
as if she had only needed to be challenged by the devil himself to regain them. “I
heard a thump,” he called, “and I thought the plastering might have fell on you.”

If he had been wanted someone would have had to go on a horse to find him.
She crossed the kitchen and the porch and stood inside the screen and said, “No,
nothing  happened  but  the  table  turned  over.  One  of  the  legs  was  weak,”  and
without pausing, “the boys didn’t come for the bull so tomorrow you’ll have to
shoot him.”

The sky was crossed with thin red and purple bars and behind them the sun
was  moving  down  slowly  as  if  it  were  descending  a  ladder.  Mr.  Greenleaf
squatted down on the step, his back to her, the top of his hat on a level with her

feet. “Tomorrow I’ll drive him home for you,” he said.

“Oh no, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said in a mocking voice, “you drive him home
tomorrow and next week he’ll be back here. I know better than that.” Then in a
mournful tone, she said, “I’m surprised at O.T. and E.T. to treat me this way. I
thought they’d have more gratitude. Those boys spent some mighty happy days on
this place, didn’t they, Mr. Greenleaf?”
Mr. Greenleaf didn’t say anything.
“I think they did,” she said. “I think they did. But they’ve forgotten all the nice
little things I did for them now. If I recall, they wore my boys’ old clothes and
played with my boys’ old toys and hunted with my boys’ old guns. They swam in
my  pond  and  shot  my  birds  and  fished  in  my  stream  and  I  never  forgot  their
birthday and Christmas seemed to roll around very  often  if  I  remember  it  right.
And do they think of any of those things now?” she asked. “NOOOOO,” she said.
For  a  few  seconds  she  looked  at  the  disappearing  sun  and  Mr.  Greenleaf
examined the palms of his hands. Presently as if it had just occurred to her, she
asked, “Do you know the real reason they didn’t come for that bull?”

“Naw I don’t,” Mr. Greenleaf said in a surly voice.
“They didn’t come because I’m a woman,” she said. “You can get away with
anything  when  you’re  dealing  with  a  woman.  If  there  were  a  man  running  this
place…”

Quick as a snake striking Mr. Greenleaf said, “You got two boys. They know

you got two men on the place.”

The  sun  had  disappeared  behind  the  tree  line.  She  looked  down  at  the  dark
crafty face, upturned now, and at the wary eyes, bright under the shadow of the
hatbrim. She waited long enough for him to see that she was hurt and then she said,
“Some people learn gratitude too late, Mr. Greenleaf, and some never learn it at
all,” and she turned and left him sitting on the steps.

Half  the  night  in  her  sleep  she  heard  a  sound  as  if  some  large  stone  were
grinding a hole on the outside wall of her brain. She was walking on the inside,
over a succession of beautiful rolling hills, planting her stick in front of each step.
She became aware after a time that the noise was the sun trying to burn through the
tree line and she stopped to watch, safe in the knowledge that it couldn’t, that it

had to sink the way it always did outside of her property. When she first stopped it
was a swollen red ball, but as she stood watching it began to narrow and pale
until it looked like a bullet. Then suddenly it burst through the tree line and raced
down the hill toward her. She woke up with her hand over her mouth and the same
noise,  diminished  but  distinct,  in  her  ear.  It  was  the  bull  munching  under  her
window. Mr. Greenleaf had let him out.

She got up and made her way to the window in the dark and looked out through
the slit blind, but the bull had moved away from the hedge and at first she didn’t
see him. Then she saw a heavy form some distance away, paused as if observing
her. This is the last night I am going to put up with this, she said, and watched until
the iron shadow moved away in the darkness.

The next morning she waited until exactly eleven o’clock. Then she got in her
car and drove to the barn. Mr. Greenleaf was cleaning milk cans. He had seven of
them standing up outside the milk room to get the sun. She had been telling him to
do  this  for  two  weeks.  “All  right,  Mr.  Greenleaf,”  she  said,  “go  get  your  gun.
We’re going to shoot that bull.”

“I thought you wanted theseyer cans…”
“Go  get  your  gun,  Mr.  Greenleaf,”  she  said.  Her  voice  and  face  were

expressionless.

“That gentleman torn out of there last night,” he murmured in a tone of regret

and bent again to the can he had his arm in.

“Go  get  your  gun,  Mr.  Greenleaf,”  she  said  in  the  same  triumphant  toneless
voice. “The bull is in the pasture with the dry cows. I saw him from my upstairs
window. I’m going to drive you up to the field and you can run him into the empty
pasture and shoot him there.”

He detached himself from the can slowly. “Ain’t nobody ever ast me to shoot
my boys’ own bull!” he said in a high rasping voice. He removed a rag from his
back pocket and began to wipe his hands violently, then his nose.

She turned as if she had not heard this and said, “I’ll wait for you in the car.

Go get your gun.”

She sat in the car and watched him stalk off toward the harness room where he
kept a gun. After he had entered the room, there was a crash as if he had kicked

something out of his way. Presently he emerged again with the gun, circled behind
the car, opened the door violently and threw himself onto the seat beside her. He
held the gun between his knees and looked straight ahead. He’d like to shoot me
instead of the bull, she thought, and turned her face away so that he could not see
her smile.

The morning was dry and clear. She drove through the woods for a quarter of
a  mile  and  then  out  into  the  open  where  there  were  fields  on  either  side  of  the
narrow  road.  The  exhilaration  of  carrying  her  point  had  sharpened  her  senses.
Birds were screaming everywhere, the grass was almost too bright to look at, the
sky  was  an  even  piercing  blue.  “Spring  is  here!”  she  had  gaily.  Mr.  Greenleaf
lifted one muscle somewhere near his mouth as if he found this the most asinine
remark ever made. When she stopped at the second pasture gate, he flung himself
out of the car door and slammed it behind him. Then he opened the gate and she
drove  through.  He  closed  it  and  flung  himself  back  in,  silently,  and  she  drove
around the rim of the pasture until she spotted the bull, almost in the center of it,
grazing peacefully among the cows.

“The gentleman is waiting on you,” she said and gave Mr. Greenleaf’s furious
profile a sly look. “Run him into that next pasture and when you get him in, I’ll
drive in behind you and shut the gate myself.”

He flung himself out again, this time deliberately leaving the car door open so
that she had to lean across the seat and close it. She sat smiling as she watched
him  make  his  way  across  the  pasture  toward  the  opposite  gate.  He  seemed  to
throw himself forward at each step and then pull back as if he were calling on
some power to witness that he was being forced. “Well,” she said aloud as if he
were  still  in  the  car,  “it’s  your  own  boys  who  are  making  you  do  this,  Mr.
Greenleaf.” O.T. and E.T. were probably splitting their sides laughing at him now.
She could hear their identical nasal voices saying, “Made Daddy shoot our bull
for us. Daddy don’t know no better than to think that’s a fine bull he’s shooting.
Gonna kill Daddy to shoot that bull!”

“If those boys cared a thing about you, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said, “they would

have come for that bull. I’m surprised at them.”

He was circling around to open the gate first. The bull, dark among the spotted

cows, had not moved. He kept his head down, eating constantly. Mr. Greenleaf
opened the gate and then began circling back to approach him from the rear. When
he was about ten feet behind him, he flapped his arms at his sides. The bull lifted
his head indolently and then lowered it again and continued to eat. Mr. Greenleaf
stooped again and picked up something and threw it at him with a vicious swing.
She decided it was a sharp rock for the bull leapt and then began to gallop until he
disappeared over the rim of the hill. Mr. Greenleaf followed at his leisure.

“You  needn’t  think  you’re  going  to  lose  him!”  she  cried  and  started  the  car
straight across the pasture. She had to drive slowly over the terraces and when she
reached the gate, Mr. Greenleaf and the bull were nowhere in sight. This pasture
was smaller than the last, a green arena, encircled almost entirely by woods. She
got out and closed the gate and stood looking for some sign of Mr. Greenleaf but
he had disappeared completely. She knew at once that his plan was to lose the
bull  in  the  woods.  Eventually,  she  would  see  him  emerge  somewhere  from  the
circle of trees and come limping toward her and when he finally reached her, he
would say, “If you can find that gentleman in them woods, you’re better than me.”
She was going to say, “Mr. Greenleaf, if I have to walk into those woods with
you and stay all afternoon, we are going to find that bull and shoot him. You are
going to shoot him if I have to pull the trigger for you.” When he saw she meant
business he would return and shoot the bull quickly himself.

She got back into the car and drove to the center of the pasture where he would
not  have  so  far  to  walk  to  reach  her  when  he  came  out  of  the  woods. At  this
moment she could picture him sitting on a stump, marking lines in the ground with
a stick. She decided she would wait exactly ten minutes by her watch. Then she
would begin to honk. She got out of the car and walked around a little and then sat
down on the front bumper to wait and rest. She was very tired and she lay her
head back against the hood and closed her eyes. She did not understand why she
should be so tired when it was only mid-morning. Through her closed eyes, she
could feel the sun, red-hot overhead. She opened her eyes slightly but the white
light forced her to close them again.

For  some  time  she  lay  back  against  the  hood,  wondering  drowsily  why  she
was so tired. With her eyes closed, she didn’t think of time as divided into days

and  nights  but  into  past  and  future.  She  decided  she  was  tired  because  she  had
been working continuously for fifteen years. She decided she had every right to be
tired, and to rest for a few minutes before she began working again. Before any
kind  of  judgement  seat,  she  would  be  able  to  say:  I’ve  worked,  I  have  not
wallowed. At this very instant while she was  recalling  a  lifetime  of  work,  Mr.
Greenleaf was loitering in the woods and Mrs. Greenleaf was probably flat on the
ground, asleep over her holeful of clippings. The woman had got worse over the
years  and  Mrs.  May  believed  that  now  she  was  actually  demented.  “I’m  afraid
your  wife  has  let  religion  warp  her,”  she  said  once  tactfully  to  Mr.  Greenleaf.
“Everything in moderation, you know.”

“She  cured  a  man  oncet  that  half  his  gut  was  eat  out  with  worms,”  Mr.
Greenleaf said, and she had turned away, half-sickened. Poor souls, she thought
now, so simple. For a few seconds she dozed.

When she sat up and looked at her watch, more than ten minutes had passed.
She had not heard any shot. A new thought occurred to her: suppose Mr. Greenleaf
had aroused the bull chunking stones at him and the animal had turned on him and
run him up against a tree and gored him? The irony of it deepened: O.T. and E.T.
would  then  get  a  shyster  lawyer  and  sue  her.  It  would  be  the  fitting  end  to  her
fifteen years with the Greenleafs. She thought of it almost with pleasure as if she
had  hit  on  the  perfect  ending  for  a  story  she  was  telling  her  friends.  Then  she
dropped it, for Mr. Greenleaf had a gun with him and she had insurance.

She decided to honk. She got up and reached inside the car window and gave
three  sustained  honks  and  two  or  three  shorter  ones  to  let  him  know  she  was
getting impatient. Then she went back and sat down on the bumper again.

In a few minutes something emerged from the tree line, a black heavy shadow
that tossed its head several times and then bounded forward. After a second she
saw it was the bull. He was crossing the pasture toward her at a slow gallop, a
gay  almost  rocking  gait  as  if  he  were  overjoyed  to  find  her  again.  She  looked
beyond him to see if Mr. Greenleaf was coming out of the woods too but he was
not. “Here he is, Mr. Greenleaf!” she called and looked on the other side of the
pasture to see if he could be coming out there but he was not in sight. She looked
back  and  saw  that  the  bull,  his  head  lowered,  was  racing  toward  her.  She

remained perfectly still, not in fright, but in a freezing unbelief. She stared at the
violent black streak bounding toward her as if she had no sense of distance, as if
she could not decide at once what his intention was, and the bull had buried his
head in her lap, like a wild tormented lover, before her expression changed. One
of his horns sank until it pierced her heart and the other curved around her side
and held her in an unbreakable grip. She continued to stare straight ahead but the
entire  scene  in  front  of  her  had  changed—the  tree  line  was  a  dark  wound  in  a
world that was nothing but sky—and she had the look of a person whose sight has
been suddenly restored but who finds the light unbearable.

Mr. Greenleaf was running toward her from the side with his gun raised and
she  saw  him  coming  though  she  was  not  looking  in  his  direction.  She  saw  him
approaching on the outside of some invisible circle, the tree line gaping behind
him and nothing under his feet. He shot the bull four times through the eye. She did
not hear the shots but she felt the quake in the huge body as it sank, pulling her
forward on its head, so that she seemed, when Mr. Greenleaf reached her, to be
bent over whispering some last discovery into the animal’s ear.

A View of the Woods

THE  week  before,  Mary  Fortune  and  the  old  man  had  spent  every  morning
watching the machine that lifted out dirt and threw it in a pile. The construction
was going on by the new lakeside on one of the lots that the old man had sold to
somebody who was going to put up a fishing club. He and Mary Fortune drove
down  there  every  morning  about  ten  o’clock  and  he  parked  his  car,  a  battered
mulberry-colored Cadillac, on the embankment that overlooked the spot where the
work was going on. The red corrugated lake eased up to within fifty feet of the
construction and was bordered on the other side by a black line of woods which
appeared at both ends of the view to walk across the water and continue along the
edge of the fields.

He sat on the bumper and Mary Fortune straddled the hood and they watched,
sometimes  for  hours,  while  the  machine  systematically  ate  a  square  red  hole  in
what had once been a cow pasture. It happened to be the only pasture that Pitts had
succeeded in getting the bitterweed off and when the old man had sold it, Pitts had
nearly had a stroke; and as far as Mr. Fortune was concerned, he could have gone
on and had it.

“Any fool that would let a cow pasture interfere with progress is not on my
books,” he had said to Mary Fortune several times from his seat on the bumper,
but the child did not have eyes for anything but the machine. She sat on the hood,
looking down into the red pit, watching the big disembodied gullet gorge itself on
the clay, then, with the sound of a deep sustained nausea and a slow mechanical
revulsion, turn and spit it up. Her pale eyes behind her spectacles followed the
repeated  motion  of  it  again  and  again  and  her  face—a  small  replica  of  the  old
man’s—never lost its look of complete absorption.

No one  was  particularly  glad  that  Mary  Fortune  looked  like  her  grandfather
except the old man himself. He thought it added greatly to her attractiveness. He
thought she was the smartest and the prettiest child he had ever seen and he let the
rest  of  them  know  that  if,  IF  that  was,  he  left  anything  to  anybody,  it  would  be

Mary Fortune he left it to. She was now nine, short and broad like himself, with
his  very  light  blue  eyes,  his  wide  prominent  forehead,  his  steady  penetrating
scowl and his rich florid complexion; but she was like him on the inside too. She
had, to a singular degree, his intelligence, his strong will, and his push and drive.
Though  there  was  seventy  years’  difference  in  their  ages,  the  spiritual  distance
between  them  was  slight.  She  was  the  only  member  of  the  family  he  had  any
respect for.

He didn’t have any use for her mother, his third or fourth daughter (he could
never  remember  which),  though  she  considered  that  she  took  care  of  him.  She
considered—being  careful  not  to  say  it,  only  to  look  it—that  she  was  the  one
putting up with him in his old age and that she was the one he should leave the
place  to.  She  had  married  an  idiot  named  Pitts  and  had  had  seven  children,  all
likewise idiots except the youngest, Mary Fortune, who was a throwback to him.
Pitts was the kind who couldn’t keep his hands on a nickel and Mr. Fortune had
allowed them, ten years ago, to move onto his place and farm it. What Pitts made
went to Pitts but the land belonged to Fortune and he was careful to keep the fact
before them. When the well had gone dry, he had not allowed Pitts to have a deep
well drilled but had insisted that they pipe their water from the spring. He did not
intend to pay for a drilled well himself and he knew that if he let Pitts pay for it,
whenever he had occasion to say to Pitts, “It’s my land you’re sitting on,” Pitts
would be able to say to him, “Well, it’s my pump that’s pumping the water you’re
drinking.”

Being there ten years, the Pittses had got to feel as if they owned the place.
The daughter had been born and raised on it but the old man considered that when
she married Pitts she showed that she preferred Pitts to home; and when she came
back, she came back like any other tenant, though he would not allow them to pay
rent for the same reason he would not allow them to drill a well. Anyone over
sixty years of age is in an uneasy position unless he controls the greater interest
and every now and then he gave the Pittses a practical lesson by selling off a lot.
Nothing infuriated Pitts more than to see him sell off a piece of the property to an
outsider, because Pitts wanted to buy it himself.

Pitts was a thin, long-jawed, irascible, sullen, sulking individual and his wife

was  the  duty-proud  kind:  It’s  my  duty  to  stay  here  and  take  care  of  Papa.  Who
would do it if I didn’t? I do it knowing full well I’ll get no reward for it. I do it
because it’s my duty.

The old man was not taken in by this for a minute. He knew they were waiting
impatiently for the day when they could put him in a hole eight feet deep and cover
him up with dirt. Then, even if he did not leave the place to them, they figured they
would be able to buy it. Secretly he had made his will and left everything in trust
to Mary Fortune, naming his lawyer and not Pitts as executor. When he died Mary
Fortune could make the rest of them jump; and he didn’t doubt for a minute that she
would be able to do it.

Ten years ago they had announced that they were going to name the new baby
Mark Fortune Pitts, after him, if it were a boy, and he had not delayed in telling
them that if they coupled his name with the name Pitts he would put them off the
place. When the baby came, a girl, and he had seen that even at the age of one day
she bore his unmistakable likeness, he had relented and suggested himself that they
name  her  Mary  Fortune,  after  his  beloved  mother,  who  had  died  seventy  years
ago, bringing him into the world.

The Fortune place was in the country on a clay road that left the paved road
fifteen miles away and he would never have been able to sell off any lots if it had
not been for progress, which had always been his ally. He was not one of these
old people who fight improvement, who object to everything new and cringe at
every change. He wanted to see a paved highway in front of his house with plenty
of  new-model  cars  on  it,  he  wanted  to  see  a  supermarket  store  across  the  road
from him, he wanted to see a gas station, a motel, a drive-in picture-show within
easy  distance.  Progress  had  suddenly  set  all  this  in  motion.  The  electric  power
company had built a dam on the river and flooded great areas of the surrounding
country and the lake that resulted touched his land along a half-mile stretch. Every
Tom, Dick and Harry, every dog and his brother, wanted a lot on the lake. There
was talk of their getting a telephone line. There was talk of paving the road that
ran in front of the Fortune place. There was talk of an eventual town. He thought
this should be called Fortune, Georgia. He was a man of advanced vision, even if
he was seventy-nine years old.

The machine that drew up the dirt had stopped the day before and today they
were watching the hole being smoothed out by two huge yellow bulldozers. His
property had amounted to eight hundred acres before he began selling lots. He had
sold five twenty-acre lots on the back of the place and every time he sold one,
Pitts’s blood pressure had gone up twenty points. “The Pittses are the kind that
would let a cow pasture interfere with the future,” he said to Mary Fortune, “but
not  you  and  me.”  The  fact  that  Mary  Fortune  was  a  Pitts  too  was  something  he
ignored,  in  a  gentlemanly  fashion,  as  if  it  were  an  affliction  the  child  was  not
responsible for. He liked to think of her as being thoroughly of his clay. He sat on
the bumper and she sat on the hood with her bare feet on his shoulders. One of the
bulldozers had moved under them to shave the side of the embankment they were
parked  on.  If  he  had  moved  his  feet  a  few  inches  out,  the  old  man  could  have
dangled them over the edge.

“If  you  don’t  watch  him,”  Mary  Fortune  shouted  above  the  noise  of  the

machine, “he’ll cut off some of your dirt!”

“Yonder’s the stob,” the old man yelled. “He hasn’t gone beyond the stob.”
“Not YET he hasn’t,” she roared.
The  bulldozer  passed  beneath  them  and  went  on  to  the  far  side.  “Well  you
watch,” he said. “Keep your eyes open and if he knocks that stob, I’ll stop him.
The Pittses are the kind that would let a cow pasture or a mule lot or a row of
beans interfere with progress,” he continued. “The people like you and me with
heads on their shoulders know you can’t stop the marcher time for a cow.…”

“He’s shaking the stob on the other side!” she screamed and before he could
stop her, she had jumped down from the hood and was running along the edge of
the embankment, her little yellow dress billowing out behind.

“Don’t run so near the edge,” he yelled but she had already reached the stob
and  was  squatting  down  by  it  to  see  how  much  it  had  been  shaken.  She  leaned
over the embankment and shook her first at the man on the bulldozer. He waved at
her and went on about his business. More sense in her little finger than all the rest
of that tribe in their heads put together, the old man said to himself, and watched
with pride as she started back to him.

She had a head of thick, very fine, sand-colored hair—the exact kind he had

had when he had had any—that grew straight and was cut just above her eyes and
down the sides of her cheeks to the tips of her ears so that it formed a kind of door
opening onto the central part of her face. Her glasses were silver-rimmed like his
and she even walked the way he did, stomach forward, with a careful abrupt gait,
something between a rock and a shuffle. She was walking so close to the edge of
the embankment that the outside of her right foot was flush with it.

“I said don’t walk so close to the edge,” he called; “you fall off there and you
won’t live to see the day this place gets built up.” He was always very careful to
see that she avoided dangers. He would not allow her to sit in snakey places or
put her hands on bushes that might hide hornets.

She didn’t move an inch. She had a habit of his of not hearing what she didn’t
want to hear and since this was a little trick he had taught her himself, he had to
admire  the  way  she  practiced  it.  He  foresaw  that  in  her  own  old  age  it  would
serve  her  well.  She  reached  the  car  and  climbed  back  onto  the  hood  without  a
word and put her feet back on his shoulders where she had had them before, as if
he were no more than a part of the automobile. Her attention returned to the far
bulldozer.

“Remember what you won’t get if you don’t mind,” her grandfather remarked.
He was a strict disciplinarian but he had never whipped her. There were some
children,  like  the  first  six  Pittses,  whom  he  thought  should  be  whipped  once  a
week on principle, but there were other ways to control intelligent children and he
had never laid a rough hand on Mary Fortune. Furthermore, he had never allowed
her mother or her brothers and sisters so much as to slap her. The elder Pitts was
a different matter.

He was a man of a nasty temper and of ugly unreasonable resentments. Time
and again, Mr. Fortune’s heart had pounded to see him rise slowly from his place
at the table—not the head, Mr. Fortune sat there, but from his place at the side—
and abruptly, for no reason, with no explanation, jerk his head at Mary Fortune
and say, “Come with me,” and leave the room, unfastening his belt as he went. A
look that was completely foreign to the child’s face would appear on it. The old
man could not define the look but it infuriated him. It was a look that was part
terror and part respect and part something else, something very like cooperation.

This look would appear on her face and she would get up and follow Pitts out.
They  would  get  in  his  truck  and  drive  down  the  road  out  of  earshot,  where  he
would beat her.

Mr. Fortune knew for a fact that he beat her because he had followed them in
his car and had seen it happen. He had watched from behind a boulder about  a
hundred feet away while the child clung to a pine tree and Pitts, as methodically
as if he were whacking a bush with a sling blade, beat her around the ankles with
his belt. All she had done was jump up and down as if she were standing on a hot
stove and make a whimpering noise like a dog that was being peppered. Pitts had
kept at it for about three minutes and then he had turned, without a word, and got
back in his truck and left her there, and she had slid down under the tree and taken
both feet in her hands and rocked back and forth. The old man had crept forward
to catch her. Her face was contorted into a puzzle of small red lumps and her nose
and eyes were running. He sprang on her and sputtered, “Why didn’t you hit him
back? Where’s your spirit? Do you think I’d a let him beat me?”

She had jumped up and started backing away from him with her jaw stuck out.

“Nobody beat me,” she said.

“Didn’t I see it with my own eyes?” he exploded.
“Nobody is here and nobody beat me,” she said. “Nobody’s ever beat me in
my life and if anybody did, I’d kill him. You can see for yourself nobody is here.”
“Do you call me a liar or a blindman!” he shouted. “I saw him with my own
two eyes and you never did a thing but let him do it, you never did a thing but hang
onto that tree and dance up and down a little and blubber and if it had been me, I’d
a swung my fist in his face and…”

“Nobody was here and nobody beat me and if anybody did I’d kill him!” she

yelled and then turned and dashed off through the woods.

“And I’m a Poland china pig and black is white!” he had roared after her and
he had sat down on a small rock under the tree, disgusted and furious. This was
Pitts’s revenge on him. It was as if it were he that Pitts was driving down the road
to beat and it was as if he were the one submitting to it. He had thought at first that
he could stop him by saying that if he beat her, he would put them off the place but
when he had tried that, Pitts had said, “Put me off and you put her off too. Go right

ahead. She’s mine to whip and I’ll whip her every day of the year if it suits me.”

Anytime he could make Pitts feel his hand he was determined to do it and at
present he had a little scheme up his sleeve that was going to be a considerable
blow  to  Pitts.  He  was  thinking  of  it  with  relish  when  he  told  Mary  Fortune  to
remember what she wouldn’t get if she didn’t mind, and he added, without waiting
for an answer, that he might be selling another lot soon and that if he did, he might
give her a bonus but not if she gave him any sass. He had frequent little verbal tilts
with  her  but  this  was  a  sport  like  putting  a  mirror  up  in  front  of  a  rooster  and
watching him fight his reflection.

“I don’t want no bonus,” Mary Fortune said.
“I ain’t ever seen you refuse one.”
“You ain’t ever seen me ask for one neither,” she said.
“How much have you laid by?” he asked.
“Noner yer bidnis,” she said and stamped his shoulders with her feet. “Don’t

be buttin into my bidnis.”

“I bet you got it sewed up in your mattress,” he said, “just like an old nigger
woman. You ought to put it in the bank. I’m going to start you an account just as
soon as I complete this deal. Won’t anybody be able to check on it but me and
you.”

The bulldozer moved under them again and drowned out the rest of what he
wanted to say. He waited and when the noise had passed, he could hold it in no
longer. “I’m going to sell the lot right in front of the house for a gas station,” he
said. “Then we won’t have to go down the road to get the car filled up, just step
out the front door.”

The Fortune house was set back about two hundred feet from the road and it
was this two hundred feet that he intended to sell. It was the part that his daughter
airily called “the lawn” though it was nothing but a field of weeds.

“You mean,” Mary Fortune said after a minute, “the lawn?”
“Yes mam!” he said. “I mean the lawn,” and he slapped his knee.
She did not say anything and he turned and looked up at her. There in the little
rectangular  opening  of  hair  was  his  face  looking  back  at  him,  but  it  was  a
reflection  not  of  his  present  expression  but  of  the  darker  one  that  indicated  his

displeasure. “That’s where we play,” she muttered.

“Well there’s plenty of other places you can play,” he said, irked by this lack

of enthusiasm.

“We won’t be able to see the woods across the road,” she said.
The old man stared at her. “The woods across the road?” he repeated.
“We won’t be able to see the view,” she said.
“The view?” he repeated.
“The woods,” she said; “we won’t be able to see the woods from the porch.”
“The woods from the porch?” he repeated.
Then she said, “My daddy grazes his calves on that lot.”
The old man’s wrath was delayed an instant by shock. Then it exploded in a
roar. He jumped up and turned and slammed his fist on the hood of the car. “He
can graze them somewheres else!”

“You fall off that embankment and you’ll wish you hadn’t,” she said.
He moved from in front of the car around to the side, keeping his eye on her all
the time. “Do you think I care where he grazes his calves! Do you think I’ll let a
calf interfere with my bidnis? Do you think  I  give  a  damn  hoot  where  that  fool
grazes his calves?”

She  sat,  her  red  face  darker  than  her  hair,  exactly  reflecting  his  expression

now. “He who calls his brother a fool is subject to hell fire,” she said.

“Jedge not,” he shouted, “lest ye be not jedged!” The tinge of his face was a
shade more purple than hers. “You!” he said. “You let him beat you any time he
wants to and don’t do a thing but blubber a little and jump up and down!”

“He nor nobody else has ever touched me,” she said, measuring off each word
in a deadly flat tone. “Nobody’s ever put a hand on me and if anybody did, I’d kill
him.”

“And black is white,” the old man piped, “and night is day!”
The  bulldozer  passed  below  them.  With  their  faces  about  a  foot  apart,  each
held  the  same  expression  until  the  noise  had  receded.  Then  the  old  man  said,
“Walk home by yourself. I refuse to ride a Jezebel!”

“And I refuse to ride with the Whore of Babylon,” she said and slid off the

other side of the car and started off through the pasture.

“A whore is a woman!” he roared. “That’s how much you know!” But she did
not deign to turn around and answer him back, and as he watched the small robust
figure stalk across the yellow-dotted field toward the woods, his pride in her, as
if it couldn’t help itself, returned like the gentle little tide on the new lake—all
except that part of it that had to do with her refusal to stand up to Pitts; that pulled
back like an undertow. If he could have taught her to stand up to Pitts the way she
stood  up  to  him,  she  would  have  been  a  perfect  child,  as  fearless  and  sturdy-
minded as anyone could want; but it was her one failure of character. It was the
one point on which she did not resemble him. He turned and looked away over the
lake to the woods across it and told himself that in five years, instead of woods,
there  would  be  houses  and  stores  and  parking  places,  and  that  the  credit  for  it
could go largely to him.

He meant to teach the child spirit by example and since he had definitely made
up  his  mind,  he  announced  that  noon  at  the  dinner  table  that  he  was  negotiating
with a man named Tilman to sell the lot in front of the house for a gas station.

His  daughter,  sitting  with  her  worn-out  air  at  the  foot  of  the  table,  let  out  a
moan  as  if  a  dull  knife  were  being  turned  slowly  in  her  chest.  “You  mean  the
lawn!” she moaned and fell back in her chair and repeated in an almost inaudible
voice, “He means the lawn.”

The other six Pitts children began to bawl and pipe, “Where we play!” “Don’t
let him do that, Pa!” “We won’t be able to see the road!” and similar idiocies.
Mary Fortune did not say anything. She had a mulish reserved look as if she were
planning some business of her own. Pitts had stopped eating and was staring in
front of him. His plate was full but his fists sat motionless like two dark quartz
stones on either side of it. His eyes began to move from child to child around the
table as if he were hunting for one particular one of them. Finally they stopped on
Mary Fortune sitting next to her grandfather. “You done this to us,” he muttered.

“I  didn’t,”  she  said  but  there  was  no  assurance  in  her  voice.  It  was  only  a

quaver, the voice of a frightened child.

Pitts got up and said, “Come with me,” and turned and walked out, loosening
his belt as he went, and to the old man’s complete despair, she slid away from the
table  and  followed  him,  almost  ran  after  him,  out  the  door  and  into  the  truck

behind him, and they drove off.

This  cowardice  affected  Mr.  Fortune  as  if  it  were  his  own.  It  made  him
physically sick. “He beats an innocent child,” he said to his daughter, who was
apparently still prostrate at the end of the table, “and not one of you lifts a hand to
stop him.”

“You ain’t lifted yours neither,” one of the boys said in an undertone and there

was a general mutter from that chorus of frogs.

“I’m an old man with a heart condition,” he said. “I can’t stop an ox.”
“She put you up to it,” his daughter murmured in a languid listless tone, her
head  rolling  back  and  forth  on  the  rim  of  her  chair.  “She  puts  you  up  to
everything.”

“No child never put me up to nothing!” he yelled. “You’re no kind of a mother!
You’re a disgrace! That child is an angel! A saint!” he shouted in a voice so high
that it broke and he had to scurry out of the room.

The rest of the afternoon he had to lie on his bed. His heart, whenever he knew
the child had been beaten, felt as if it were slightly too large for the space that was
supposed to hold it. But now he was more determined than ever to see the filling
station go up in front of the house, and if it gave Pitts a stroke, so much the better.
If it gave him a stroke and paralyzed him, he would be served right and he would
never be able to beat her again.

Mary Fortune was never angry with him for long, or seriously, and though he
did not see her the rest of that day, when he woke up the next morning, she was
sitting astride his chest ordering him to make haste so that they would not miss the
concrete mixer.

The  workmen  were  laying  the  foundation  for  the  fishing  club  when  they
arrived and the concrete mixer was already in operation. It was about the size and
color of a circus elephant; they stood and watched it churn for a half-hour or so.
At  eleven-thirty,  the  old  man  had  an  appointment  with  Tilman  to  discuss  his
transaction and they had to leave. He did not tell Mary Fortune where they were
going but only that he had to see a man.

Tilman  operated  a  combination  country  store,  filling  station,  scrap-metal
dump,  used-car  lot  and  dance  hall  five  miles  down  the  highway  that  connected

with  the  dirt  road  that  passed  in  front  of  the  Fortune  place.  Since  the  dirt  road
would soon be paved, he wanted a good location on it for another such enterprise.
He  was  an  up-and-coming  man—the  kind,  Mr.  Fortune  thought,  who  was  never
just in line with progress but always a little ahead of it so that he could be there to
meet it when it arrived. Signs up and down the highway announced that Tilman’s
was only five miles away, only four, only three, only two, only one; “Watch out
for Tilman’s, Around this bend!” and finally, “Here it is, Friends, T ILMAN’S!” in
dazzling red letters.

Tilman’s was bordered on either side by a field of old used-car bodies, a kind
of ward for incurable automobiles. He also sold outdoor ornaments, such as stone
cranes and chickens, urns, jardinieres, whirligigs, and farther back from the road,
so  as  not  to  depress  his  dance-hall  customers,  a  line  of  tombstones  and
monuments. Most of his businesses went on out-of-doors, so that his store building
itself  had  not  involved  excessive  expense.  It  was  a  one-room  wooden  structure
onto which he had added, behind, a long tin hall equipped for dancing. This was
divided into two sections, Colored and White, each with its private nickelodeon.
He had a barbecue pit and sold barbecued sandwiches and soft drinks.

As they drove up under the shed of Tilman’s place, the old man glanced at the
child sitting with her feet drawn up on the seat and her chin resting on her knees.
He didn’t know if she would remember that it was Tilman he was going to sell the
lot to or not.

“What you going in here for?” she asked suddenly, with a sniffing look as if

she scented an enemy.

“Noner yer bidnis,” he said. “You just sit in the car and when I come out, I’ll

bring you something.”

“Don’tcher bring me nothing,” she said darkly, “because I won’t be here.”
“Haw!” he said. “Now you’re here, it’s nothing for you to do but wait,” and he
got  out  and  without  paying  her  any  further  attention,  he  entered  the  dark  store
where Tilman was waiting for him.

When he came out in half an hour, she was not in the car. Hiding, he decided.
He started walking around the store to see if she was in the back. He looked in the
doors  of  the  two  sections  of  the  dance  hall  and  walked  on  around  by  the

tombstones.  Then  his  eye  roved  over  the  field  of  sinking  automobiles  and  he
realized that she could be in or behind any one of two hundred of them. He came
back out in front of the store. A Negro boy, drinking a purple drink, was sitting on
the ground with his back against the sweating ice cooler.

“Where did that little girl go to, boy?” he asked.
“I ain’t seen nair little girl,” the boy said.
The old man irritably fished in his pocket and handed him a nickel and said,

“A pretty little girl in a yeller cotton dress.”

“If you speakin about a stout chile look lak you,” the boy said, “she gone off in

a truck with a white man.”

“What kind of a truck, what kind of a white man?” he yelled.
“It were a green pick-up truck,” the boy said smacking his lips, “and a white

man she call ‘daddy.’ They gone thataway some time ago.”

The  old  man,  trembling,  got  in  his  car  and  started  home.  His  feelings  raced
back and forth between fury and mortification. She had never left him before and
certainly  never  for  Pitts.  Pitts  had  ordered  her  to  get  in  the  truck  and  she  was
afraid not to. But when he reached this conclusion he was more furious than ever.
What was the matter with her that she couldn’t stand up to Pitts? Why was there
this one flaw in her character when he had trained her so well in everything else?
It was an ugly mystery.

When he reached the house and climbed the front steps, there she was sitting in
the swing, looking glum-faced in front of her across the field he was going to sell.
Her eyes were puffy and pink-rimmed but he didn’t see any red marks on her legs.
He  sat  down  in  the  swing  beside  her.  He  meant  to  make  his  voice  severe  but
instead it came out crushed, as if it belonged to a suitor trying to reinstate himself.

“What did you leave me for? You ain’t ever left me before,” he said.
“Because I wanted to,” she said, looking straight ahead.
“You never wanted to,” he said. “He made you.”
“I  toljer  I  was  going  and  I  went,”  she  said  in  a  slow  emphatic  voice,  not
looking at him, “and now you can go on and lemme alone.” There was something
very final, in the sound of this, a tone that had not come up before in their disputes.
She  stared  across  the  lot  where  there  was  nothing  but  a  profusion  of  pink  and

yellow and purple weeds, and on across the red road, to the sullen line of black
pine woods fringed on top with green. Behind that line was a narrow gray-blue
line  of  more  distant  woods  and  beyond  that  nothing  but  the  sky,  entirely  blank
except for one or two threadbare clouds. She looked into this scene as if it were a
person that she preferred to him.

“It’s  my  lot,  ain’t  it?”  he  asked.  “Why  are  you  so  up-in-the-air  about  me

selling my own lot?”

“Because it’s the lawn,” she said. Her nose and eyes began to run horribly but
she held her face rigid and licked the water off as soon as it was in reach of her
tongue. “We won’t be able to see across the road,” she said.

The  old  man  looked  across  the  road  to  assure  himself  again  that  there  was
nothing over there to see. “I never have seen you act in such a way before,” he
said in an incredulous voice. “There’s not a thing over there but the woods.”

“We won’t be able to see ’um,” she said, “and that’s the  lawn and my daddy

grazes his calves on it.”

At that the old man stood up. “You act more like a Pitts than a Fortune,” he
said. He had never made such an ugly remark to her before and he was sorry the
instant he had said it. It hurt him more than it did her. He turned and went in the
house and upstairs to his room.

Several times during the afternoon, he got up from his bed and looked out the
window across the “lawn” to the line of woods she said they wouldn’t be able to
see any more. Every time he saw the same thing: woods—not a mountain, not a
waterfall, not any kind of planted bush or flower, just woods. The sunlight was
woven through them at that particular time of the afternoon so that every thin pine
trunk stood out in all its nakedness. A pine trunk is a pine trunk, he said to himself,
and anybody that wants to see one don’t have to go far in this neighborhood. Every
time he got up and looked out, he was reconvinced of his wisdom in selling the
lot. The dissatisfaction it caused Pitts would be permanent, but he could make it
up to Mary Fortune by buying her something. With grown people, a road led either
to heaven or hell, but with children there were always stops along the way where
their attention could be turned with a trifle.

The third time he got up to look at the woods, it was almost six o’clock and the

gaunt  trunks  appeared  to  be  raised  in  a  pool  of  red  light  that  gushed  from  the
almost hidden sun setting behind them. The old man stared for some time, as if for
a prolonged instant he were caught up out of the rattle of everything that led to the
future and were held there in the midst of an uncomfortable mystery that he had not
apprehended before. He saw it, in his hallucination, as if someone were wounded
behind  the  woods  and  the  trees  were  bathed  in  blood. After  a  few  minutes  this
unpleasant vision was broken by the presence of Pitts’s pick-up truck grinding to a
halt below the window. He returned to his bed and shut his eyes and against the
closed lids hellish red trunks rose up in a black wood.

At the supper table nobody addressed a word to him, including Mary Fortune.
He ate quickly and returned again to his room and spent the evening pointing out to
himself the advantages for the future of having an establishment like Tilman’s so
near. They would not have to go any distance for gas. Anytime they needed a loaf
of  bread,  all  they  would  have  to  do  would  be  step  out  their  front  door  into
Tilman’s back door. They could sell milk to Tilman.  Tilman was a likable fellow.
Tilman  would  draw  other  business.  The  road  would  soon  be  paved.  Travelers
from all over the country would stop at Tilman’s. If his daughter thought she was
better  than  Tilman,  it  would  be  well  to  take  her  down  a  little.  All  men  were
created free and equal. When this phrase sounded in his head, his patriotic sense
triumphed and he realized that it was his duty to sell the lot, that he must insure the
future. He looked out the window at the moon shining over the woods across the
road  and  listened  for  a  while  to  the  hum  of  crickets  and  treefrogs,  and  beneath
their racket, he could hear the throb of the future town of Fortune.

He went to bed certain that just as usual, he would wake up in the morning
looking  into  a  little  red  mirror  framed  in  a  door  of  fine  hair.  She  would  have
forgotten all about the sale and after breakfast they would drive into town and get
the legal papers from the courthouse. On the way back he would stop at Tilman’s
and close the deal.

When he opened his eyes in the morning, he opened them on the empty ceiling.
He pulled himself up and looked around the room but she was not there. He hung
over the edge of the bed and looked beneath it but she was not there either. He got
up and dressed and went outside. She was sitting in the swing on the front porch,

exactly the way she had been yesterday, looking across the lawn into the woods.
The old man was very much irritated. Every morning since she had been able to
climb,  he  had  waked  up  to  find  her  either  on  his  bed  or  underneath  it.  It  was
apparent  that  this  morning  she  preferred  the  sight  of  the  woods.  He  decided  to
ignore her behavior for the present and then bring it up later when she was over
her pique. He sat down in the swing beside her but she continued to look at the
woods. “I thought you and me’d go into town and have us a look at the boats in the
new boat store,” he said.

She didn’t turn her head but she asked suspiciously, in a loud voice. “What

else are you going for?”

“Nothing else,” he said.
After a pause she said, “If that’s all, I’ll go,” but she did not bother to look at

him.

“Well put on your shoes,” he said. “I ain’t going to the city with a barefoot

woman.” She did not bother to laugh at this joke.

The weather was as indifferent as her disposition. The sky did not look as if it
were going to rain or as if it were not going to rain. It was an unpleasant gray and
the sun had not troubled to come out. All the way into town, she sat looking at her
feet, which stuck out in front of her, encased in heavy brown school shoes. The
old man had often sneaked up on her and found her alone in conversation with her
feet and he thought she was speaking with them silently now. Every now and then
her lips moved but she said nothing to him and let all his remarks pass as if she
had not heard them. He decided it was going to cost him considerable to buy her
good humor again and that he had better do it with a boat, since he wanted one too.
She had been talking boats ever since the water backed up onto his place. They
went first to the boat store. “Show us the yachts for po’ folks!” he shouted jovially
to the clerk as they entered.

“They’re  all  for  po’  folks!”  the  clerk  said.  “You’ll  be  po’  when  you  finish
buying one!” He was a stout youth in a yellow shirt and blue pants and he had a
ready wit. They exchanged several clever remarks in rapid-fire succession. Mr.
Fortune  looked  at  Mary  Fortune  to  see  if  her  face  had  brightened.  She  stood
staring absently over the side of an outboard motor boat at the opposite wall.

“Ain’t the lady innerested in boats?” the clerk asked.
She turned and wandered back out onto the sidewalk and got in the car again.
The old man looked after her with amazement. He could not believe that a child of
her intelligence could be acting this way over the mere sale of a field. “I think she
must be coming down with something,” he said. “We’ll come back again,” and he
returned to the car.

“Let’s go get us an ice-cream cone,” he suggested, looking at her with concern.
“I don’t want no ice-cream cone,” she said.
His  actual  destination  was  the  courthouse  but  he  did  not  want  to  make  this
apparent. “How’d you like to visit the ten-cent store while I tend to a little bidnis
of  mine?”  he  asked.  “You  can  buy  yourself  something  with  a  quarter  I  brought
along.”

“I  ain’t  got  nothing  to  do  in  no  ten-cent  store,”  she  said.  “I  don’t  want  no

quarter of yours.”

If a boat was of no interest, he should not have thought a quarter would be and
reproved  himself  for  that  stupidity.  “Well  what’s  the  matter,  sister?”  he  asked
kindly. “Don’t you feel good?”

She  turned  and  looked  him  straight  in  the  face  and  said  with  a  slow
concentrated ferocity, “It’s the lawn. My daddy grazes his calves there. We won’t
be able to see the woods any more.”

The  old  man  had  held  his  fury  in  as  long  as  he  could.  “He  beats  you!”  he

shouted. “And you worry about where he’s going to graze his calves!”

“Nobody’s ever beat me in my life,” she said, “and if anybody did, I’d kill

him.”

A man seventy-nine years of age cannot let himself be run over by a child of
nine.  His  face  set  in  a  look  that  was  just  as  determined  as  hers.  “Are  you  a
Fortune,” he said, “or are you a Pitts? Make up your mind.”

Her  voice  was  loud  and  positive  and  belligerent.  “I’m  Mary—Fortune—

Pitts,” she said.

“Well I,” he shouted, “am PURE Fortune!”
There was nothing she could say to this and she showed it. For an instant she
looked completely defeated, and the old man saw with a disturbing clearness that

this was the Pitts look. What he saw was the Pitts look, pure and simple, and he
felt personally stained by it, as if it had been found on his own face. He turned in
disgust and backed the car out and drove straight to the courthouse.

The courthouse was a red and white blaze-faced building set in the center of a
square from which most of the grass had been worn off. He parked in front of it
and said, “Stay here,” in an imperious tone and got out and slammed the car door.
It took him a half-hour to get the deed and have the sale paper drawn up and
when he returned to the car, she was sitting on the back seat in the corner. The
expression  on  that  part  of  her  face  that  he  could  see  was  foreboding  and
withdrawn. The sky had darkened also and there was a hot sluggish tide in the air,
the kind felt when a tornado is possible.

“We better get on before we get caught in a storm,” he said and emphatically,
“because I got one more place to stop at on the way home,” but he might have been
chauffeuring a small dead body for all the answer he got.

*   *   *

On the way to Tilman’s he reviewed once more the many just reasons that were
leading him to his present action and he could not locate a flaw in any of them. He
decided  that  while  this  attitude  of  hers  would  not  be  permanent,  he  was
permanently disappointed in her and that when she came around she would have to
apologize; and that there would be no boat. He was coming to realize slowly that
his trouble with her had always been that he had not shown enough firmness. He
had been too generous. He was so occupied with these thoughts that he did not
notice the signs that said how many miles to Tilman’s until the last one exploded
joyfully in his face: “Here it is, Friends, TILMAN’S!” He pulled in under the shed.

He got out without so much as looking at Mary Fortune and entered the dark
store  where  Tilman,  leaning  on  the  counter  in  front  of  a  triple  shelf  of  canned
goods, was waiting for him.

Tilman was a man of quick action and few words. He sat habitually with his
arms  folded  on  the  counter  and  his  insignificant  head  weaving  snake-fashion
above them. He had a triangular-shaped face with the point at the bottom and the
top of his skull was covered with a cap of freckles. His eyes were green and very

narrow and his tongue was always exposed in his partly opened mouth. He had his
checkbook handy and they got down to business at once. It did not take him long to
look  at  the  deed  and  sign  the  bill  of  sale.  Then  Mr.  Fortune  signed  it  and  they
grasped hands over the counter.

Mr. Fortune’s sense of relief as he grasped Tilman’s hand was extreme. What
was  done,  he  felt,  was  done  and  there  could  be  no  more  argument,  with  her  or
with himself. He felt that he had acted on principle and that the future was assured.
Just as their hands loosened, an instant’s change came over Tilman’s face and
he disappeared completely under the counter as if he had been snatched by the feet
from below. A bottle crashed against the line of tinned goods behind where he had
been. The old man whirled around. Mary Fortune was in the door, red-faced and
wild-looking, with another bottle lifted to hurl. As he ducked, it broke behind him
on the counter and she grabbed another from the crate. He sprang at her but she
tore to the other side of the store, screaming something unintelligible and throwing
everything within her reach. The old man pounced again and this time he caught
her by the tail of her dress and pulled her backward out of the store. Then he got a
better grip and lifted her, wheezing and whimpering but suddenly limp in his arms,
the  few  feet  to  the  car.  He  managed  to  get  the  door  open  and  dump  her  inside.
Then he ran around to the other side and got in himself and drove away as fast as
he could.

His heart felt as if it were the size of the car and was racing forward, carrying
him to some inevitable destination faster than he had ever been carried before. For
the first five minutes he did not think but only sped forward as if he were being
driven inside his own fury. Gradually the power of thought returned to him. Mary
Fortune, rolled into a ball in the corner of the seat, was snuffling and heaving.

He had never seen a child behave in such a way in his life. Neither his own
children nor anyone else’s had ever displayed such temper in his presence, and he
had never for an instant imagined that the child he had trained himself, the child
who had been his constant companion for nine years, would embarrass him like
this. The child he had never lifted a hand to!

Then  he  saw,  with  the  sudden  vision  that  sometimes  comes  with  delayed

recognition, that that had been his mistake.

She respected Pitts because, even with no just cause, he beat her; and if he—
with his just cause—did not beat her now, he would have nobody to blame  but
himself if she turned out a hellion. He saw that the time had come, that he could no
longer  avoid  whipping  her,  and  as  he  turned  off  the  highway  onto  the  dirt  road
leading to home, he told himself that when he finished with her, she would never
throw another bottle again.

He raced along the clay road until he came to the line where his own property
began and then he turned off onto a side path, just wide enough for the automobile
and bounced for a half a mile through the woods. He stopped the car at the exact
spot where he had seen Pitts take his belt to her. It was a place where the road
widened so that two cars could pass or one could turn around, an ugly red bald
spot surrounded by long thin pines that appeared to be gathered there to witness
anything that would take place in such a clearing. A few stones protruded from the
clay.

“Get out,” he said and reached across her and opened the door.
She got out without looking at him or asking what they were going to do and he

got out on his side and came around the front of the car.

“Now  I’m  going  to  whip  you!”  he  said  and  his  voice  was  extra  loud  and
hollow  and  had  a  vibrating  quality  that  appeared  to  be  taken  up  and  passed
through the tops of the pines. He did not want to get caught in a downpour while
he was whipping her and he said, “Hurry up and get ready against that tree,” and
began to take off his belt.

What  he  had  in  mind  to  do  appeared  to  come  very  slowly  as  if  it  had  to
penetrate  a  fog  in  her  head.  She  did  not  move  but  gradually  her  confused
expression began to clear. Where a few seconds before her face had been red and
distorted and unorganized, it drained now of every vague line until nothing was
left on it but positiveness, a look that went slowly past determination and reached
certainty. “Nobody has ever beat me,” she said, “and if anybody tries it, I’ll kill
him.”

“I  don’t  want  no  sass,”  he  said  and  started  toward  her.  His  knees  felt  very

unsteady, as if they might turn either backward or forward.

She  moved  exactly  one  step  back  and,  keeping  her  eye  on  him  steadily,

removed her glasses and dropped them behind a small rock near the tree he had
told her to get ready against. “Take off your glasses,” she said.

“Don’t give me orders!” he said in a high voice and slapped awkwardly at her

ankles with his belt.

She was on him so quickly that he could not have recalled which blow he felt
first,  whether  the  weight  of  her  whole  solid  body  or  the  jabs  of  her  feet  or  the
pummeling  of  her  fist  on  his  chest.  He  flailed  the  belt  in  the  air,  not  knowing
where to hit but trying to get her off him until he could decide where to get a grip
on her.

“Leggo!” he shouted. “Leggo I tell you!” But she seemed to be everywhere,
coming at him from all directions at once. It was as if he were being attacked not
by one child but by a pack of small demons all with stout brown school shoes and
small rocklike fists. His glasses flew to the side.

“I toljer to take them off,” she growled without pausing.
He  caught  his  knee  and  danced  on  one  foot  and  a  rain  of  blows  fell  on  his
stomach. He felt five claws in the flesh of his upper arm where she was hanging
from while her feet mechanically battered his knees and her free fist pounded him
again and again in the chest. Then with horror he saw her face rise up in front of
his,  teeth  exposed,  and  he  roared  like  a  bull  as  she  bit  the  side  of  his  jaw.  He
seemed to see his own face coming to bite him from several sides at once but he
could not attend to it for he was being kicked indiscriminately, in the stomach and
then in the crotch. Suddenly he threw himself on the ground and began to roll like
a man on fire. She was on top of him at once, rolling with him and still kicking,
and now with both fists free to batter his chest.

“I’m  an  old  man!”  he  piped.  “Leave  me  alone!”  But  she  did  not  stop.  She

began a fresh assault on his jaw.

“Stop stop!” he wheezed. “I’m your grandfather!”
She paused, her face exactly on top of his. Pale identical eye looked into pale

identical eye. “Have you had enough?” she asked.

The  old  man  looked  up  into  his  own  image.  It  was  triumphant  and  hostile.
“You been whipped,” it said, “by me,” and then it added, bearing down on each
word, “and I’m PURE Pitts.”

In the pause she loosened her grip and he got hold of her throat. With a sudden
surge of strength, he managed to roll over and reverse their positions so that he
was looking down into the face that was his own but had dared to call itself Pitts.
With his hands still tight around her neck, he lifted her head and brought it down
once hard against the rock that happened to be under it. Then he brought it down
twice  more.  Then  looking  into  the  face  in  which  the  eyes,  slowly  rolling  back,
appeared to pay him not the slightest attention, he said, “There’s not an ounce of
Pitts in me.”

He continued to stare at his conquered image until he perceived that though it
was  absolutely  silent,  there  was  no  look  of  remorse  on  it.  The  eyes  had  rolled
back down and were set in a fixed glare that did not take him in. “This ought to
teach you a good lesson,” he said in a voice that was edged with doubt.

He managed painfully to get up on his unsteady kicked legs and to take two
steps, but the enlargement of his heart which had begun in the car was still going
on.  He  turned  his  head  and  looked  behind  him  for  a  long  time  at  the  little
motionless figure with its head on the rock.

Then he fell on his back and looked up helplessly along the bare trunks into the
tops of the pines and his heart expanded once more with a convulsive motion. It
expanded so fast that the old man felt as if he were being pulled after it through the
woods, felt as if he were running as fast as he could with the ugly pines toward the
lake. He perceived that there would be a little opening there, a little place where
he could escape and leave the woods behind him. He could see it in the distance
already, a little opening where the white sky was reflected in the water. It grew as
he  ran  toward  it  until  suddenly  the  whole  lake  opened  up  before  him,  riding
majestically in little corrugated folds toward his feet. He realized suddenly that he
could not swim and that he had not bought the boat. On both sides of him he saw
that  the  gaunt  trees  had  thickened  into  mysterious  dark  files  that  were  marching
across  the  water  and  away  into  the  distance.  He  looked  around  desperately  for
someone  to  help  him  but  the  place  was  deserted  except  for  one  huge  yellow
monster which sat to the side, as stationary as he was, gorging itself on clay.

The Enduring Chill

ASBURY’S  train  stopped  so  that  he  would  get  off  exactly  where  his  mother  was
standing waiting to meet him. Her thin spectacled face below him was bright with
a wide smile that disappeared as she caught sight of him bracing himself behind
the conductor. The smile vanished so suddenly, the shocked look that replaced it
was so complete, that he realized for the first time that he must look as ill as he
was. The sky was a chill gray and a startling white-gold sun, like some strange
potentate  from  the  east,  was  rising  beyond  the  black  woods  that  surrounded
Timberboro.  It  cast  a  strange  light  over  the  single  block  of  one-story  brick  and
wooden  shacks.  Asbury  felt 
to  witness  a  majestic
transformation, that the flat of roofs might at any moment turn into the  mounting
turrets of some exotic temple for a god he didn’t know. The illusion lasted only a
moment before his attention was drawn back to his mother.

that  he  was  about 

She had given a little cry; she looked aghast. He was pleased that she should
see  death  in  his  face  at  once.  His  mother,  at  the  age  of  sixty,  was  going  to  be
introduced  to  reality  and  he  supposed  that  if  the  experience  didn’t  kill  her,  it
would assist her in the process of growing up. He stepped down and greeted her.

“You don’t look very well,” she said and gave him a long clinical stare.
“I don’t feel like talking,” he said at once. “I’ve had a bad trip.”
Mrs. Fox observed that his left eye was bloodshot. He was puffy and pale and
his hair had receded tragically for a boy of twenty-five. The thin reddish wedge of
it left on top bore down in a point that seemed to lengthen his nose and give him an
irritable expression that matched his tone of voice when he spoke to her. “It must
have been cold up there,” she said. “Why don’t you take off your coat? It’s not
cold down here.”

“You don’t have to tell me what the temperature is!” he said in a high voice.
“I’m  old  enough  to  know  when  I  want  to  take  my  coat  off!”  The  train  glided
silently away behind him, leaving a view of the twin blocks of dilapidated stores.
He gazed after the aluminum speck disappearing into the woods. It seemed to him

that  his  last  connection  with  a  larger  world  were  vanishing  forever.  Then  he
turned and faced his mother grimly, irked that he had allowed himself, even for an
instant,  to  see  an  imaginary  temple  in  this  collapsing  country  junction.  He  had
become  entirely  accustomed  to  the  thought  of  death,  but  he  had  not  become
accustomed to the thought of death here.

He had felt the end coming on for nearly four months. Alone in his freezing
flat, huddled under his two blankets and his overcoat and with three thicknesses of
the New York  Times between, he had had a chill one night, followed by a violent
sweat that left the sheets soaking and removed all doubt from his mind about his
true condition. Before this there had been a gradual slackening of his energy and
vague inconsistent aches and headaches. He had been absent so many days from
his part-time job in the bookstore that he had lost it. Since then he had been living,
or just barely so, on his savings and these, diminishing day by day, had been all he
had between him and home. Now there was nothing. He was here.

“Where’s the car?” he muttered.
“It’s  over  yonder,”  his  mother  said.  “And  your  sister  is  asleep  in  the  back
because I don’t like to come out this early by myself. There’s no need to wake her
up.”

“No,”  he  said,  “let  sleeping  dogs  lie,”  and  he  picked  up  his  two  bulging

suitcases and started across the road with them.

They were too heavy for him and by the time he reached the car, his mother
saw that he was exhausted. He had never come home with two suitcases before.
Ever since he had first gone away to college, he had come back every time with
nothing  but  the  necessities  for  a  two-week  stay  and  with  a  wooden  resigned
expression that said he was prepared to endure the visit for exactly fourteen days.
“You’ve brought more than usual,” she observed, but he did not answer.

He  opened  the  car  door  and  hoisted  the  two  bags  in  beside  his  sister’s
upturned feet, giving first the feet—in Girl Scout shoes—and then the rest of her a
revolted look of recognition. She was packed into a black suit and had a white rag
around her head with metal curlers sticking out from under the edges. Her eyes
were closed  and  her  mouth  open.  He  and  she  had  the  same  features  except  that
hers were bigger. She was eight years older than he was and was principal of the

county elementary school. He shut the door softly so she wouldn’t wake up and
then went around and got in the front seat and closed his eyes. His mother backed
the car into the road and in a few minutes he felt it swerve into the highway. Then
he  opened  his  eyes.  The  road  stretched  between  two  open  fields  of  yellow
bitterweed.

“Do  you  think  Timberboro  has  improved?”  his  mother  asked.  This  was  her

standard question, meant to be taken literally.

“It’s still there, isn’t it?” he said in an ugly voice.
“Two of the stores have new fronts,” she said. Then with a sudden ferocity,
she said, “You did well to come home where you can get a good doctor! I’ll take
you to Doctor Block this afternoon.”

“I am not,” he said, trying to keep his voice from shaking, “going to Doctor
Block. This afternoon or ever. Don’t you think if I’d wanted to go to a doctor I’d
have gone up there where they have some good ones? Don’t you know they have
better doctors in New York?”

“He would take a personal interest in you,” she said. “None of those doctors

up there would take a personal interest in you.”

“I don’t want him taking a personal interest in me.” Then after a minute, staring
out across a blurred purple-looking field, he said, “What’s wrong with me is way
beyond Block,” and his voice trailed off into a frayed sound, almost a sob.

He could not, as his friend Goetz had recommended, prepare to see it all as
illusion, either what had gone before or the few weeks that were left to him. Goetz
was certain that death was nothing at all. Goetz, whose whole face had always
been purple-splotched with a million indignations, had returned from six months
in Japan as dirty as ever but as bland as the Buddha himself. Goetz took the news
of Asbury’s approaching end with a calm indifference. Quoting something or other
he  said,  “Although  the  Bodhisattva  leads  an  infinite  number  of  creatures  into
nirvana,  in  reality  there  are  neither  any  Bodhisattvas  to  do  the  leading  nor  any
creatures to be led.” However, out of some feeling for his welfare, Goetz had put
forth $4.50 to take him to a lecture on Vedanta. It had been a waste of his money.
While  Goetz  had  listened  enthralled  to  the  dark  little  man  on  the  platform,
Asbury’s bored gaze had roved among the audience. It had passed over the heads

of several girls in saris, past a Japanese youth, a blue-black man with a fez, and
several girls who looked like secretaries. Finally, at end of the row, it had rested
on a lean spectacled figure in black, a priest. The priest’s expression was of a
polite  but  strictly  reserved  interest.  Asbury  identified  his  own  feelings
immediately in the taciturn superior expression. When the lecture was over a few
students met in Goetz’s flat, the priest among them, but he was equally reserved.
He listened with a marked politeness to the discussion of Asbury’s approaching
death, but he said little. A girl in a sari remarked that self-fulfillment was out of
the question since it meant salvation and the word was meaningless. “Salvation,”
quoted Goetz, “is the destruction of a simple prejudice, and no one is saved.”

“And  what  do  you  say  to  that?”  Asbury  asked  the  priest  and  returned  his
reserved smile over the heads of the others. The borders of this smile seemed to
touch on some icy clarity.

“There is,” the priest said, “a real probability of the New Man, assisted, of

course,” he added brittlely, “by the Third Person of the Trinity.”

“Ridiculous!” the girl in the sari said, but the priest only brushed her with his

smile, which was slightly amused now.

When he got up to leave, he silently handed Asbury a small card on which he
had  written  his  name,  Ignatius  Vogle,  S.J.,  and  an  address.  Perhaps,  Asbury
thought now, he should have used it for the priest appealed to him as a man of the
world,  someone  who  would  have  understood  the  unique  tragedy  of  his  death,  a
death whose meaning had been far beyond the twittering group around them. And
how  much  more  beyond  Block.  “What’s  wrong  with  me,”  he  repeated,  “is  way
beyond Block.”

His  mother  knew  at  once  what  he  meant:  he  meant  he  was  going  to  have  a
nervous  breakdown.  She  did  not  say  a  word.  She  did  not  say  that  this  was
precisely what she could have told him would happen. When people think they are
smart—even when they are smart—there is nothing anybody else can say to make
them see things straight, and with Asbury, the trouble was that in addition to being
smart, he had an artistic temperament. She did not know where he had got it from
because his father, who was a lawyer and businessman and farmer and politician
all rolled into one, had certainly had his feet on the ground; and she had certainly

always  had  hers  on  it.  She  had  managed  after  he  died  to  get  the  two  of  them
through college and beyond; but she had observed that the more education they got,
the less they could do. Their father had gone to a one-room schoolhouse through
the eighth grade and he could do anything.

She could have told Asbury what would help him. She could have said, “If you
would get out in the sunshine, or if you would work for a month in the dairy, you’d
be  a  different  person!”  but  she  knew  exactly  how  that  suggestion  would  be
received. He would be a nuisance in the dairy but she would let him work in there
if he wanted to. She had let him work in there last year when he had come home
and  was  writing  the  play.  He  had  been  writing  a  play  about  Negroes  (why
anybody would want to write a play about Negroes was beyond her) and he had
said he wanted to work in the dairy with them and find out what their interests
were. Their interests were in doing as little as they could get by with, as she could
have told him if anybody could have told him anything. The Negroes had put up
with him and he had learned to put the milkers on and once he had washed all the
cans and she thought that once he had mixed feed. Then a cow had kicked him and
he had not gone back to the barn again. She knew that if he would get in there now,
or get out and fix fences, or do any kind of work—real work, not writing—that he
might avoid this nervous breakdown. “Whatever happened to that play you were
writing about the Negroes?” she asked.

“I am not writing plays,” he said. “And get this through your head: I am not
working in any dairy. I am not getting out in the sunshine. I’m ill. I have fever and
chills and I’m dizzy and all I want you to do is to leave me alone.”

“Then if you are really ill, you should see Doctor Block.”
“And I am not seeing Block,” he finished and ground himself down in the seat

and stared intensely in front of him.

She  turned  into  their  driveway,  a  red  road  that  ran  for  a  quarter  of  a  mile
through the two front pastures. The dry cows were on one side and the milk herd
on the other. She slowed the car and then stopped altogether, her attention caught
by  a  cow  with  a  bad  quarter.  “They  haven’t  been  attending  to  her,”  she  said.
“Look at that bag!”

Asbury turned his head abruptly in the opposite direction, but there a small,

walleyed  Guernsey  was  watching  him  steadily  as  if  she  sensed  some  bond
between them. “Good God!” he cried in an agonized voice, “can’t we go on? It’s
six o’clock in the morning!”

“Yes yes,” his mother said and started the car quickly.
“What’s that cry of deadly pain?” his sister drawled from the back seat. “Oh
it’s  you,”  she  said.  “Well  well,  we  have  the  artist  with  us  again.  How  utterly
utterly.” She had a decidedly nasal voice.

He  didn’t  answer  her  or  turn  his  head.  He  had  learned  that  much.  Never

answer her.

“Mary George!” his mother said sharply. “Asbury is sick. Leave him alone.”
“What’s wrong with him?” Mary George asked.
“There’s the house!” his mother said as if they were all blind but her. It rose
on  the  crest  of  the  hill—a  white  two-story  farmhouse  with  a  wide  porch  and
pleasant columns. She always approached it with a feeling of pride and she had
said more than once to Asbury, “You have a home here that half those people up
there would give their eyeteeth for!”

She had been once to the terrible place he lived in New York. They had gone
up  five  flights  of  dark  stone  steps,  past  open  garbage  cans  on  every  landing,  to
arrive finally at two damp rooms and a closet with a toilet in it. “You wouldn’t
live like this at home,” she had muttered.

“No!” he’d said with an ecstatic look, “it wouldn’t be possible!”
She supposed the truth was that she simply didn’t understand how it felt to be
sensitive or how peculiar you were when you were an artist. His sister said he
was not an artist and that he had no talent and that that was the trouble with him;
but  Mary  George  was  not  a  happy  girl  herself.  Asbury  said  she  posed  as  an
intellectual but that her I.Q. couldn’t be over seventy-five, that all she was really
interested in was getting a man but that no sensible man would finish a first look at
her. She had tried to tell him that Mary George could be very attractive when she
put her mind to it and he had said that that much strain on her mind would break
her down. If she were in any way attractive, he had said, she wouldn’t now be
principal of a county elementary school, and Mary George had said that if Asbury
had had any talent, he would by now have published something. What had he ever

published, she wanted to know, and for that matter, what had he ever written?

Mrs.  Fox  had  pointed  out  that  he  was  only  twenty-five  years  old  and  Mary
George had said that the age most people published something at was twenty-one,
which made him exactly four years overdue. Mrs. Fox was not up on things like
that but she suggested that he might be writing a very long book. Very long book,
her eye, Mary George said, he would do well if he came up with so much as a
poem. Mrs. Fox hoped it wasn’t going to be just a poem.

She pulled the car into the side drive and a scattering of guineas exploded into
the air and sailed screaming around the house. “Home again, home again jiggity
jig!” she said.

“Oh God,” Asbury groaned.
“The artist arrives at the gas chamber,” Mary George said in her nasal voice.
He leaned on the door and got out, and forgetting his bags he moved toward
the front of the house as if he were in a daze. His sister got out and stood by the
car door, squinting at his bent unsteady figure. As she watched him go up the front
steps,  her  mouth  fell  slack  in  her  astonished  face.  “Why,”  she  said,  “there is
something the matter with him. He looks a hundred years old.”

“Didn’t I tell you so?” her mother hissed. “Now you keep your mouth shut and

let him alone.”

He went into the house, pausing in the hall only long enough to see his pale
broken  face  glare  at  him  for  an  instant  from  the  pier  mirror.  Holding  onto  the
banister, he pulled himself up the steep stairs, across the landing and then up the
shorter second flight and into his room, a large open airy room with a faded blue
rug and white curtains freshly put up for his arrival. He looked at nothing, but fell
face down on his own bed. It was a narrow antique bed with a high ornamental
headboard  on  which  was  carved  a  garlanded  basket  overflowing  with  wooden
fruit.

While he was still in New York, he had written a letter to his mother which
filled two notebooks. He did not mean it to be read until after his death. It was
such a letter as Kafka had addressed to his father. Asbury’s father had died twenty
years ago and Asbury considered this a great blessing. The old man, he felt sure,
had been one of the courthouse gang, a rural worthy with a dirty finger in every

pie and he knew he would not have been able to stomach him. He had read some
of his correspondence and had been appalled by its stupidity.

He knew, of course, that his mother would not understand the letter at once.
Her literal mind would require some time to discover the significance of it, but he
thought she would be able to see that he forgave her for all she had done to him.
For that matter, he supposed that she would realize what she had done to him only
through  the  letter.  He  didn’t  think  she  was  conscious  of  it  at  all.  Her  self-
satisfaction  itself  was  barely  conscious,  but  because  of  the  letter,  she  might
experience a painful realization and this would be the only thing of value he had to
leave her.

If reading it would be painful to her, writing it had sometimes been unbearable
to  him—for  in  order  to  face  her,  he  had  had  to  face  himself.  “I  came  here  to
escape  the  slave’s  atmosphere  of  home,”  he  had  written,  “to  find  freedom,  to
liberate my imagination, to take it like a hawk from its cage and set it ‘whirling off
into the widening gyre’ (Yeats) and what did I find? It was incapable of flight. It
was  some  bird  you  had  domesticated,  sitting  huffy  in  its  pen,  refusing  to  come
out!” The next words were underscored twice. “I have no imagination. I have no
talent. I can’t create. I have nothing but the desire for these things. Why didn’t you
kill that too? Woman, why did you pinion me?”

Writing this, he had reached the pit of despair and he thought that reading it,
she would at least begin to sense his tragedy and her part in it. It was not that she
had  ever  forced  her  way  on  him.  That  had  never  been  necessary.  Her  way  had
simply  been  the  air  he  breathed  and  when  at  last  he  had  found  other  air,  he
couldn’t survive in it. He felt that even if she didn’t understand at once, the letter
would leave her with an enduring chill and perhaps in time lead her to see herself
as she was.

He  had  destroyed  everything  else  he  had  ever  written—his  two  lifeless
novels, his half-dozen stationary plays, his prosy poems, his sketchy short stories
—and  kept  only  the  two  notebooks  that  contained  the  letter.  They  were  in  the
black  suitcase  that  his  sister,  huffing  and  blowing,  was  now  dragging  up  the
second  flight  of  stairs.  His  mother  was  carrying  the  smaller  bag  and  came  on
ahead. He turned over as she entered the room.

“I’ll open this and get out your things,” she said, “and you can go right to bed

and in a few minutes I’ll bring your breakfast.”

He  sat  up  and  said  in  a  fretful  voice,  “I  don’t  want  any  breakfast  and  I  can

open my own suitcase. Leave that alone.”

His sister arrived in the door, her face full of curiosity, and let the black bag
fall with a thud over the doorsill. Then she began to push it across the room with
her foot until she was close enough to get a good look at him. “If I looked as bad
as you do,” she said, “I’d go to the hospital.”

Her mother cut her eyes sharply at her and she left. Then Mrs. Fox closed the
door and came to the bed and sat down on it beside him. “Now this time I want
you to make a long visit and rest,” she said.

“This visit,” he said, “will be permanent.”
“Wonderful!” she cried. “You can have a little studio in your room and in the

mornings you can write plays and in the afternoons you can help in the dairy!”

He turned a white wooden face to her. “Close the blinds and let me sleep,” he

said.

When she was gone, he lay for some time staring at the water stains on the gray
walls. Descending from the top molding, long icicle shapes had been etched by
leaks and, directly over his bed on the ceiling, another leak had made a fierce bird
with spread wings. It had an icicle crosswise in its beak and there were smaller
icicles depending from its wings and tail. It had been there since his childhood
and had always irritated him and sometimes had frightened him. He had often had
the illusion that it was in motion and about to descend mysteriously and set the
icicle on his head. He closed his eyes and thought: I won’t have to look at it for
many more days. And presently he went to sleep.

*   *   *

When he woke up in the afternoon, there was a pink open-mouthed face hanging
over him and from two large familiar ears on either side of it the black tubes of
Block’s stethoscope extended down to his exposed chest. The doctor, seeing he
was awake, made a face like a Chinaman, rolled his eyes almost out of his head
and cried, “Say AHHHH!”

Block was  irresistible  to  children.  For  miles  around  they  vomited  and  went
into fevers to have a visit from him. Mrs. Fox was standing behind him, smiling
radiantly. “Here’s Doctor Block!” she said as if she had captured this angel on the
rooftop and brought him in for her little boy.

“Get him out of here,” Asbury  muttered.  He  looked  at  the  asinine  face  from

what seemed the bottom of a black hole.

The doctor peered closer, wiggling his ears. Block was bald and had a round
face as senseless as a baby’s. Nothing about him indicated intelligence except two
cold  clinical  nickel-colored  eyes  that  hung  with  a  motionless  curiosity  over
whatever he looked at. “You sho do look bad, Azzberry,” he murmured.  He took
the  stethoscope  off  and  dropped  it  in  his  bag.  “I  don’t  know  when  I’ve  seen
anybody your age look as sorry as you do. What you been doing to yourself?”

There was a continuous thud in the back of Asbury’s head as if his heart had

got trapped in it and was fighting to get out. “I didn’t send for you,” he said.

Block put his hand on the glaring face and pulled the eyelid down and peered
into it. “You must have been on the bum up there,” he said. He began to press his
hand in the small of Asbury’s back. “I went up there once myself,” he said, “and
saw  exactly  how  little  they  had  and  came  straight  on  back  home.  Open  your
mouth.”

Asbury opened it automatically and the drill-like gaze swung over it and bore
down.  He  snapped  it  shut  and  in  a  wheezing  breathless  voice  he  said,  “If  I’d
wanted a doctor, I’d have stayed up there where I could have got a good one!”

“Asbury!” his mother said.
“How long you been having the so’ throat?” Block asked.
“She sent for you!” Asbury said. “She can answer the questions.”
“Asbury!” his mother said.
Block leaned over his bag and pulled out a rubber tube. He pushed Asbury’s
sleeve up and tied the tube around his upper arm. Then he took out a syringe and
prepared to find the vein, humming a hymn as he pressed the needle in. Asbury lay
with  a  rigid  outraged  stare  while  the  privacy  of  his  blood  was  invaded  by  this
idiot. “Slowly Lord but sure,” Block sang in a murmuring voice, “Oh slowly Lord
but sure.” When the syringe was full, he withdrew the needle. “Blood don’t lie,”

he said. He poured it in a bottle and stopped it up and put the bottle in his bag.
“Azzbury,” he started, “how long…”

Asbury sat up and thrust his thudding head forward and said, “I didn’t send for
you. I’m not answering any questions. You’re not my doctor. What’s wrong with
me is way beyond you.”

“Most  things  are  beyond  me,”  Block  said.  “I  ain’t  found  anything  yet  that  I
thoroughly understood,” and he sighed and got up. His eyes seemed to glitter  at
Asbury as if from a great distance.

“He wouldn’t act so ugly,” Mrs. Fox explained, “if he weren’t really sick. And

I want you to come back every day until you get him well.”

Asbury’s  eyes  were  a  fierce  glaring  violet.  “What’s  wrong  with  me  is  way
beyond you,” he repeated and lay back down and closed his eyes until Block and
his mother were gone.

*   *   *

In the next few days, though he grew rapidly worse, his mind functioned with a
terrible  clarity.  On  the  point  of  death,  he  found  himself  existing  in  a  state  of
illumination that was totally out of keeping with the kind of talk he had to listen to
from his mother. This was largely about cows with names like Daisy and Bessie
Button  and  their  intimate  functions—their  mastitis  and  their  screw-worms  and
their abortions. His mother insisted that in the middle of the day he get out and sit
on the porch and “enjoy the view” and as resistance was too much of a struggle,
he  dragged  himself  out  and  sat  there  in  a  rigid  slouch,  his  feet  wrapped  in  an
afghan  and  his  hands  gripped  on  the  chair  arms  as  if  he  were  about  to  spring
forward into the glaring china blue sky. The lawn extended for a quarter of an acre
down to a barbed-wire fence that divided it from the front pasture. In the middle
of the day the dry cows rested there under a line of sweetgum trees. On the other
side of the road were two hills with a pond between and his mother could sit on
the porch and watch the herd walk across the dam to the hill on the other side. The
whole  scene  was  rimmed  by  a  wall  of  trees  which,  at  the  time  of  day  he  was
forced to sit there, was a washed-out blue that reminded him sadly of the Negroes’
faded overalls.

He listened irritably while his mother detailed the faults of the help. “Those

two are not stupid,” she said. “They know how to look out for themselves.”

“They need to,” he muttered, but there was no use to argue with her. Last year
he had been writing a play about the Negro and he had wanted to be around them
for  a  while  to  see  how  they  really  felt  about  their  condition,  but  the  two  who
worked for her had lost all their initiative over the years. They didn’t talk. The
one  called  Morgan  was  light  brown,  part  Indian;  the  other,  older  one,  Randall,
was very black and fat. When they said anything to him, it was as if they were
speaking to an invisible body located to the right or left of where he actually was,
and after two days working side by side with them, he felt he had not established
rapport. He decided to try something bolder than talk and one afternoon as he was
standing near Randall, watching him adjust a milker, he had quietly taken out his
cigarettes  and  lit  one.  The  Negro  had  stopped  what  he  was  doing  and  watched
him. He waited until Asbury had taken two draws and then he said, “She don’t
’low no smoking in here.”

The other one approached and stood there, grinning.
“I know it,” Asbury said and after a deliberate pause, he shook the package
and held it out, first to Randall, who took one, and then to Morgan, who took one.
He had then lit the cigarettes for them himself and the three of them had stood there
smoking. There were no sounds but the steady click of the two milking machines
and  the  occasional  slap  of  a  cow’s  tail  against  her  side.  It  was  one  of  those
moments of communion when the difference between black and white is absorbed
into nothing.

The next day two cans of milk had been returned from the creamery because it
had absorbed the odor of tobacco. He took the blame and told his mother that it
was he and not the Negroes who had been smoking. “If you were doing it,  they
were  doing  it,”  she  had  said.  “Don’t  you  think  I  know  those  two?”  She  was
incapable of thinking them innocent; but the experience had so exhilarated him that
he had been determined to repeat it in some other way.

The next afternoon when he and Randall were in the milk house pouring the
fresh milk into the cans, he had picked up the jelly glass the Negroes drank out of
and,  inspired,  had  poured  himself  a  glassful  of  the  warm  milk  and  drained  it

down.  Randall  had  stopped  pouring  and  had  remained,  half-bent,  over  the  can,
watching him. “She don’t ’low that,” he said. “That the thing she don’t ’low.”

Asbury poured out another glassful and handed it to him.
“She don’t ’low it,” he repeated.
“Listen,” Asbury said hoarsely, “the world is changing. There’s no reason I

shouldn’t drink after you or you after me!”

“She don’t ’low noner us to drink noner this here milk,” Randall said.
Asbury continued to hold the glass out to him. “You took the the cigarette,” he
said. “Take the milk. It’s not going to hurt my mother to lose two or three glasses
of milk a day. We’ve got to think free if we want to live free!”

The other one had come up and was standing in the door.
“Don’t want noner that milk,” Randall said.
Asbury  swung  around  and  held  the  glass  out  to  Morgan.  “Here  boy,  have  a

drink of this,” he said.

Morgan stared at him; then his face took on a decided look of cunning. “I ain’t

seen you drink none of it yourself,” he said.

Asbury  despised  milk.  The  first  warm  glassful  had  turned  his  stomach.  He
drank half of what he was holding and handed the rest to the Negro, who took it
and gazed down inside the glass as if it contained some great mystery; then he set
it on the floor by the cooler.

“Don’t you like milk?” Asbury asked.
“I likes it but I ain’t drinking noner that.”
“Why?”
“She don’t ’low it,” Morgan said.
“My God!” Asbury exploded, “she she she!” He had tried the same thing the
next day and the next and the next but he could not get them to drink the milk. A
few afternoons later when he was standing outside the milk house about to go in,
he heard Morgan ask, “Howcome you let him drink that milk every day?”

“What he do is him,” Randall said. “What I do is me.”
“Howcome he talks so ugly about his ma?”
“She ain’t whup him enough when he was little,” Randall said.
The insufferableness of life at home had overcome him and he had returned to

New York two days early. So far as he was concerned he had died there, and the
question now was how long he could stand to linger here. He could have hastened
his  end  but  suicide  would  not  have  been  a  victory.  Death  was  coming  to  him
legitimately, as a justification, as a gift from life. That was his greatest triumph.
Then too, to the fine minds of the neighborhood, a suicide son would indicate  a
mother who had been a failure, and while this was the case, he felt that it was a
public embarrassment he could spare her. What she would learn from the letter
would be a private revelation. He had sealed the notebooks in a manila envelope
and had written on it: “To be opened only after the death of Asbury Porter Fox.”
He had put the envelope in the desk drawer in his room and locked it and the key
was in his pajama pocket until he could decide on a place to leave it.

When they sat on the porch in the morning, his mother felt that some of the time
she should talk about subjects that were of interest to him. The third morning she
started in on his writing. “When you get well,” she said, “I think it would be nice
if you wrote a book about down here. We need another good book like Gone With
the Wind.”

He could feel the muscles in his stomach begin to tighten.
“Put the war in it,” she advised. “That always makes a long book.”
He  put  his  head  back  gently  as  if  he  were  afraid  it  would  crack.  After  a

moment he said, “I am not going to write any book.”

“Well,” she said, “if you don’t feel like writing a book, you could just write
poems. They’re nice.” She realized that what he needed was someone intellectual
to talk to, but Mary George was the only intellectual she knew and he would not
talk to her. She had thought of Mr. Bush, the retired Methodist minister, but she
had not brought this up. Now she decided to hazard it. “I think I’ll ask Dr. Bush to
come  to  see  you,”  she  said,  raising  Mr.  Bush’s  rank.  “You’d  enjoy  him.  He
collects rare coins.”

She was not prepared for the reaction she got. He began to shake all over and
give  loud  spasmodic  laughs.  He  seemed  about  to  choke.  After  a  minute  he
subsided into a cough. “If you think I need spiritual aid to die,” he said, “you’re
quite mistaken. And certainly not from that ass Bush. My God!”

“I  didn’t  mean  that  at  all,”  she  said.  “He  has  coins  dating  from  the  time  of

Cleopatra.”

“Well if you ask him here, I’ll  tell  him  to  go  to  hell,”  he  said.  “Bush!  That

beats all!”

“I’m glad something amuses you,” she said acidly.
For a time they sat there in silence. Then his mother looked up. He was sitting
forward again and smiling at her. His face was brightening more and more as if he
had just had an idea that was brilliant. She stared at him. “I’ll tell you who I want
to come,” he said. For the first time since he had come home, his expression was
pleasant; though there was also, she thought, a kind of crafty look about him.

“Who do you want to come?” she asked suspiciously.
“I want a priest,” he announced.
“A priest?” his mother said in an uncomprehending voice.
“Preferably a Jesuit,” he said, brightening more and more. “Yes, by all means

a Jesuit. They have them in the city. You can call up and get me one.”

“What is the matter with you?” his mother asked.
“Most of them are very well-educated,” he said, “but Jesuits are foolproof. A
Jesuit  would  be  able  to  discuss  something  besides  the  weather.”  Already,
remembering Ignatius Vogle, S.J., he could picture the priest. This one would be a
trifle  more  worldly  perhaps,  a  trifle  more  cynical.  Protected  by  their  ancient
institution, priests could afford to be cynical, to play both ends against the middle.
He  would  talk  to  a  man  of  culture  before  he  died—even  in  this  desert!
Furthermore, nothing would irritate his mother so much. He could not understand
why he had not thought of this sooner.

“You’re  not  a  member  of  that  church,”  Mrs.  Fox  said  shortly.  “It’s  twenty

miles away. They wouldn’t send one.” She hoped that this would end the matter.

He  sat  back  absorbed  in  the  idea,  determined  to  force  her  to  make  the  call
since she always did what he wanted if he kept at her. “I’m dying,” he said, “and I
haven’t asked you to do but one thing and you refuse me that.”

“You are NOT dying.”
“When you realize it,” he said, “it’ll be too late.”
There was another unpleasant silence. Presently his mother said, “Nowadays
doctors don’t let young people die. They give them some of these new medicines.”

She began shaking her foot with a nerve-rattling assurance. “People just don’t die
like they used to,” she said.

“Mother,” he said, “you ought to be prepared. I think even Block knows and
hasn’t told you yet.” Block, after the first visit, had come in grimly every time,
without his jokes and funny faces, and had taken his blood in silence, his nickel-
colored eyes unfriendly. He was, by definition, the enemy of death and he looked
now  as  if  he  knew  he  was  battling  the  real  thing.  He  had  said  he  wouldn’t
prescribe  until  he  knew  what  was  wrong  and Asbury  had  laughed  in  his  face.
“Mother,”  he  said,  “I AM  going  to  die,”  and  he  tried  to  make  each  word  like  a
hammer blow on top of her head.

She paled slightly but she did not blink. “Do you think for one minute,” she
said angrily, “that I intend to sit here and let you die?” Her eyes were as hard as
two old mountain ranges seen in the distance. He felt the first distinct stroke of
doubt.

“Do you?” she asked fiercely.
“I don’t think you have anything to do with it,” he said in a shaken voice.
“Humph,” she said and got up and left the porch as if she could not stand to be

around such stupidity an instant longer.

Forgetting  the  Jesuit,  he  went  rapidly  over  his  symptoms:  his  fever  had
increased, interspersed by chills; he barely had the energy to drag himself out on
the porch; food was abhorrent to him; and Block had not been able to give her the
least satisfaction. Even as he sat there, he felt the beginning of a new chill, as if
death were already playfully rattling his bones. He pulled the afghan off his feet
and put it around his shoulders and made his way unsteadily up the stairs to bed.

He continued to grow worse. In the next few days he became so much weaker
and  badgered  her  so  constantly  about  the  Jesuit  that  finally  in  desperation  she
decided to humor his foolishness. She made the call, explaining in a chilly voice
that her son  was  ill,  perhaps  a  little  out  of  his  head,  and  wished  to  speak  to  a
priest. While she made the call, Asbury hung over the banisters, barefooted, with
the afghan around him, and listened. When she hung up he called down to know
when the priest was coming.

“Tomorrow sometime,” his mother said irritably.

He  could  tell  by  the  fact  that  she  made  the  call  that  her  assurance  was
beginning to shatter. Whenever she let Block in or out, there was much whispering
in the downstairs hall. That evening, he heard her and Mary George talking in low
voices in the parlor. He thought he heard his name and he got up and tiptoed into
the hall and down the first three steps until he could hear the voices distinctly.

“I had to call that priest,” his mother was saying. “I’m afraid this is serious. I
thought  it  was  just  a  nervous  breakdown  but  now  I  think  it’s  something  real.
Doctor Block thinks it’s something real too and whatever it is is worse because
he’s so run-down.”

“Grow up, Mamma,” Mary George said, “I’ve told you and I tell you again:
what’s wrong with him is purely psychosomatic.” There was nothing she was not
an expert on.

“No,” his mother said, “it’s a real disease. The doctor says so.” He thought he

detected a crack in her voice.

“Block is an idiot,” Mary George said. “You’ve got to face the facts: Asbury
can’t write so he gets sick. He’s going to be an invalid instead of an artist. Do you
know what he needs?”

“No,” his mother said.
“Two or three shock treatments,” Mary George said. “Get that artist business

out of his head once and for all.”

His mother gave a little cry and he grasped the banister.
“Mark my words,” his sister continued, “all he’s going to be around here for

the next fifty years is a decoration.”

He went back to bed. In a sense she was right. He had failed his god, Art, but
he had been a faithful servant and Art was sending him Death. He had seen this
from  the  first  with  a  kind  of  mystical  clarity.  He  went  to  sleep  thinking  of  the
peaceful spot in the family burying ground where he would soon lie, and after a
while he saw that his body was being borne slowly toward it while his mother
and Mary George watched without interest from their chairs on the porch. As the
bier  was  carried  across  the  dam,  they  could  look  up  and  see  the  procession
reflected upside down in the pond. A lean dark figure in a Roman collar followed
it.  He  had  a  mysteriously  saturnine  face  in  which  there  was  a  subtle  blend  of

asceticism and corruption. Asbury was laid in a shallow grave on the hillside and
the indistinct mourners, after standing in silence for a while, spread out over the
darkening  green.  The  Jesuit  retired  to  a  spot  beneath  a  dead  tree  to  smoke  and
meditate. The moon came up and Asbury was aware of a presence bending over
him and a gentle warmth on his cold face. He knew that this was Art come to wake
him and he sat up and opened his eyes. Across the hill all the lights were on in his
mother’s house. The black pond was speckled with little nickel-colored stars. The
Jesuit had disappeared. All around him the cows were spread out grazing in the
moonlight and one large white one, violently spotted, was softly licking his head
as if it were a block of salt. He awoke with a shudder and discovered that his bed
was soaking from a night sweat and as he sat shivering in the dark, he realized that
the end was not many days distant. He gazed down into the crater of death and fell
back dizzy on his pillow.

The  next  day  his  mother  noted  something  almost  ethereal  about  his  ravaged
face. He looked like one of those dying children who must have Christmas early.
He sat up in the bed and directed the rearrangement of several chairs and had her
remove a picture of a maiden chained to a rock for he knew it would make the
Jesuit smile. He had the comfortable rocker taken away and when he finished, the
room with its severe wall stains had a certain cell-like quality. He felt it would be
attractive to the visitor.

All morning he waited, looking irritably up at the ceiling where the bird with
the icicle in its beak seemed poised and waiting too; but the priest did not arrive
until  late  in  the  afternoon.  As  soon  as  his  mother  opened  the  door,  a  loud
unintelligible  voice  began  to  boom  in  the  downstairs  hall. Asbury’s  heart  beat
wildly. In a second there was a heavy creaking on the stairs. Then almost at once
his mother, her expression constrained, came in followed by a massive old man
who plowed straight across the room, picked up a chair by the side of the bed and
put it under himself.

“I’m Father Finn—from Purrgatory,” he said in a hearty voice. He had a large
red face, a stiff brush of gray hair and was blind in one eye, but the good eye, blue
and clear, was focused sharply on Asbury. There was a grease spot on his vest.
“So you want to talk to a priest?” he said. “Very wise. None of us knows the hour

Our  Blessed  Lord  may  call  us.”  Then  he  cocked  his  good  eye  up  at Asbury’s
mother and said, “Thank you, you may leave us now.”

Mrs. Fox stiffened and did not budge.
“I’d like to talk to Father Finn alone,” Asbury said, feeling suddenly that here
he had an ally, although he had not expected a priest like this one. His mother gave
him a disgusted look and left the room. He knew she would go no farther than just
outside the door.

“It’s so nice to have you come,” Asbury said. “This place is incredibly dreary.
There’s no one here an intelligent person can talk to. I wonder what you think of
Joyce, Father?”

The priest lifted his chair and pushed closer. “You’ll have to shout,” he said.

“Blind in one eye and deaf in one ear.”

“What do you think of Joyce?” Asbury said louder.
“Joyce? Joyce who?” asked the priest.
“James Joyce,” Asbury said and laughed.
The priest brushed his huge hand in the air as if he were bothered by gnats. “I

haven’t met him,” he said. “Now. Do you say your morning and night prayers?”

Asbury  appeared  confused.  “Joyce  was  a  great  writer,”  he  murmured,

forgetting to shout.

“You don’t eh?” said the priest. “Well you will never learn to be good unless

you pray regularly. You cannot love Jesus unless you speak to Him.”

“The myth of the dying god has always fascinated me,” Asbury shouted, but the

priest did not appear to catch it.

“Do  you  have  trouble  with  purity?”  he  demanded,  and  as Asbury  paled,  he
went on without waiting for an answer. “We all do but you must pray to the Holy
Ghost for it. Mind, heart and body. Nothing is overcome without prayer. Pray with
your family. Do you pray with your family?”

“God forbid,” Asbury murmured. “My mother doesn’t have time to pray and

my sister is an atheist,” he shouted.

“A shame!” said the priest. “Then you must pray for them.”
“The artist prays by creating,” Asbury ventured.
“Not enough!” snapped the priest. “If you do not pray daily, you are neglecting

your immortal soul. Do you know your catechism?”

“Certainly not,” Asbury muttered.
“Who made you?” the priest asked in a martial tone.
“Different people believe different things about that,” Asbury said.
“God made you,” the priest said shortly. “Who is God?”
“God is an idea created by man,” Asbury said, feeling that he was getting into

stride, that two could play at this.

“God is a spirit infinitely perfect,” the priest said. “You are a very ignorant

boy. Why did God make you?”

“God didn’t.…”
“God made you to know Him, to love Him, to serve Him in this world and to
be happy with Him in the next!” the old priest said in a battering voice. “If you
don’t  apply  yourself  to  the  catechism  how  do  you  expect  to  know  how  to  save
your immortal soul?”

Asbury saw he had made a mistake and that it was time to get rid of the old

fool. “Listen,” he said, “I’m not a Roman.”

“A poor excuse for not saying your prayers!” the old man snorted.
Asbury slumped slightly in the bed. “I’m dying,” he shouted.
“But  you’re  not  dead  yet!”  said  the  priest,  “and  how  do  you  expect  to  meet
God face to face when you’ve never spoken to Him? How do you expect to get
what you don’t ask for? God does not send the Holy Ghost to those who don’t ask
for Him. Ask Him to send the Holy Ghost.”

“The Holy Ghost?” Asbury said.
“Are you so ignorant you’ve never heard of the Holy Ghost?” the priest asked.
“Certainly I’ve heard of the Holy Ghost,” Asbury said furiously, “and the Holy

Ghost is the last thing I’m looking for!”

“And  He  may  be  the  last  thing  you  get,”  the  priest  said,  his  one  fierce  eye
inflamed. “Do you want your soul to suffer eternal damnation? Do you want to be
deprived  of  God  for  all  eternity?  Do  you  want  to  suffer  the  most  terrible  pain,
greater than fire, the pain of loss? Do you want to suffer the pain of loss for all
eternity?”

Asbury moved his arms and legs helplessly as if he were pinned to the bed by

the terrible eye.

“How  can  the  Holy  Ghost  fill  your  soul  when  it’s  full  of  trash?”  the  priest
roared. “The Holy Ghost will not come until you see yourself as you are—a lazy
ignorant conceited youth!” he said, pounding his fist on the little bedside table.

Mrs. Fox burst in. “Enough of this!” she cried. “How dare you talk that way to

a poor sick boy? You’re upsetting him. You’ll have to go.”

“The  poor  lad  doesn’t  even  know  his  catechism,”  the  priest  said,  rising.  “I
should  think  you  would  have  taught  him  to  say  his  daily  prayers.  You  have
neglected your duty as his mother.” He turned back to the bed and said affably,
“I’ll give you my blessing and after this you must say your daily prayers without
fail,”  whereupon  he  put  his  hand  on  Asbury’s  head  and  rumbled  something  in
Latin. “Call me any time,” he said, “and we can have another little chat,” and then
he followed Mrs. Fox’s rigid back out. The last thing Asbury heard him say was,
“He’s a good lad at heart but very ignorant.”

When his mother had got rid of the priest she came rapidly up the steps again
to  say  that  she  had  told  him  so,  but  when  she  saw  him,  pale  and  drawn  and
ravaged, sitting up in his bed, staring in front of him with large childish shocked
eyes, she did not have the heart and went rapidly out again.

The next morning he was so weak that she made up her mind he must go to the
hospital. “I’m not going to any hospital,” he kept repeating, turning his thudding
head from side to side as if he wanted to work it loose from his body. “I’m not
going to any hospital as long as I’m conscious.” He was thinking bitterly that once
he lost consciousness, she could drag him off to the hospital and fill him full of
blood  and  prolong  his  misery  for  days.  He  was  convinced  that  the  end  was
approaching,  that  it  would  be  today,  and  he  was  tormented  now  thinking  of  his
useless life. He felt as if he were a shell that had to be filled with something but
he did not know what. He began to take note of everything in the room as if for the
last time—the ridiculous antique furniture, the pattern in the rug, the silly picture
his mother had replaced. He even looked at the fierce bird with the icicle in its
beak and felt that it was there for some purpose that he could not divine.

There  was  something  he  was  searching  for,  something  that  he  felt  he  must
have, some last significant culminating experience that he must make for himself

before  he  died—make  for  himself  out  of  his  own  intelligence.  He  had  always
relied on himself and had never been a sniveler after the ineffable.

Once when Mary George was thirteen and he was five, she had lured him with
the promise of an unnamed present into a large tent full of people and had dragged
him backwards up to the front where a man in a blue suit and red and white tie
was standing. “Here,” she said in a loud voice. “I’m already saved but you can
save him. He’s a real stinker and too big for his britches.” He had broken her grip
and shot out of there like a small cur and later when he had asked for his present,
she had said, “You would have got Salvation if you had waited for it but since you
acted the way you did, you get nothing!”

As  the  day  wore  on,  he  grew  more  and  more  frantic  for  fear  he  would  die
without  making  some  last  meaningful  experience  for  himself.  His  mother  sat
anxiously by the side of the bed. She had called Block twice and could not get
him. He thought even now she had not realized that he was going to die, much less
that the end was only hours off.

The  light  in  the  room  was  beginning  to  have  an  odd  quality,  almost  as  if  it
were  taking  on  presence.  In  a  darkened  form  it  entered  and  seemed  to  wait.
Outside it appeared to move no farther than the edge of the faded treeline, which
he could see a few inches over the sill of his window. Suddenly he thought of that
experience of communion that he had had in the dairy with the Negroes when they
had  smoked  together,  and  at  once  he  began  to  tremble  with  excitement.  They
would smoke together one last time.

After a moment, turning his head on the pillow, he said, “Mother, I want to tell

the Negroes good-bye.”

His mother paled. For an instant her face seemed about to fly apart. Then the
line of her mouth hardened; her brows drew together. “Good-bye?” she said in a
flat voice. “Where are you going?”

For a few seconds he only looked at her. Then he said, “I think you know. Get

them. I don’t have long.”

“This is absurd,” she muttered but she got up and hurried out. He heard her try
to reach Block again before she went outside. He thought her clinging to Block at
a time like this was touching and pathetic. He waited, preparing himself for the

encounter  as  a  religious  man  might  prepare  himself  for  the  last  sacrament.
Presently he heard their steps on the stair.

“Here’s  Randall  and  Morgan,”  his  mother  said,  ushering  them  in.  “They’ve

come to tell you hello.”

The  two  of  them  came  in  grinning  and  shuffled  to  the  side  of  the  bed.  They
stood there, Randall in front and Morgan behind. “You sho do look well,” Randall
said. “You looks very well.”

“You looks well,” the other one said. “Yessuh, you looks fine.”
“I ain’t ever seen you looking so well before,” Randall said.
“Yes, doesn’t he look well?” his mother said. “I think he looks just fine.”
“Yessuh,” Randall said, “I speck you ain’t even sick.”
“Mother,” Asbury said in a forced voice. “I’d like to talk to them alone.”
His  mother  stiffened;  then  she  marched  out.  She  walked  across  the  hall  and
into the room on the other side and sat down. Through the open doors he could see
her  begin  to  rock  in  little  short  jerks.  The  two  Negroes  looked  as  if  their  last
protection had dropped away.

Asbury’s head was so heavy he could not think what he had been going to do.

“I’m dying,” he said.

Both their grins became gelid. “You looks fine,” Randall said.
“I’m going to die,” Asbury repeated. Then with relief he remembered that they
were going to smoke together. He reached for the package on the table and held it
out to Randall, forgetting to shake out the cigarettes.

The Negro took the package and put it in his pocket. “I thank you,” he said. “I

certainly do prechate it.”

Asbury stared as if he had forgotten again. After a second he became aware
that the other Negro’s face had turned infinitely sad; then he realized that it was
not  sad  but  sullen.  He  fumbled  in  the  drawer  of  the  table  and  pulled  out  an
unopened package and thrust it at Morgan.

“I thanks you, Mist Asbury,” Morgan said, brightening. “You certly does look

well.”

“I’m about to die,” Asbury said irritably.
“You looks fine,” Randall said.

“You  be  up  and  around  in  a  few  days,”  Morgan  predicted.  Neither  of  them
seemed to find a suitable place to rest his gaze. Asbury looked wildly across the
hall where  his  mother  had  her  rocker  turned  so  that  her  back  faced  him.  It  was
apparent she had no intention of getting rid of them for him.

“I speck you might have a little cold,” Randall said after a time.
“I takes a little turpentine and sugar when I has a cold,” Morgan said.
“Shut your mouth,” Randall said, turning on him.
“Shut your own mouth,” Morgan said. “I know what I takes.”
“He don’t take what you take,” Randall growled.
“Mother!” Asbury called in a shaking voice.
His mother stood up. “Mister Asbury has had company long enough now,” she

called. “You all can come back tomorrow.”

“We be going,” Randall said. “You sho do look well.”
“You sho does,” Morgan said.
They  filed  out  agreeing  with  each  other  how  well  he  looked  but  Asbury’s
vision  became  blurred  before  they  reached  the  hall.  For  an  instant  he  saw  his
mother’s  form  as  if  it  were  a  shadow  in  the  door  and  then  it  disappeared  after
them  down  the  stairs.  He  heard  her  call  Block  again  but  he  heard  it  without
interest.  His  head  was  spinning.  He  knew  now  there  would  be  no  significant
experience before he died. There was nothing more to do but give her the key to
the drawer where the letter was, and wait for the end.

He sank into a heavy sleep from which he awoke about five o’clock to see her
white face, very small, at the end of a well of darkness. He took the key out of his
pajama pocket and handed it to her and mumbled that there was a letter in the desk
to be opened when he was gone, but she did not seem to understand. She put the
key down on the bedside table and left it there and he returned to his dream  in
which two large boulders were circling each other inside his head.

He awoke a little after six to hear Block’s car stop below in the driveway.
The sound was like a summons, bringing him rapidly and with a clear head out of
his  sleep.  He  had  a  sudden  terrible  foreboding  that  the  fate  awaiting  him  was
going to be more shattering than any he could have reckoned on. He lay absolutely
motionless, as still as an animal the instant before an earthquake.

Block  and  his  mother  talked  as  they  came  up  the  stairs  but  he  did  not
distinguish their words. The doctor came in making faces; his mother was smiling.
“Guess what you’ve got, Sugarpie!” she cried. Her voice broke in on him with the
force of a gunshot.

“Found theter ol’ bug, did ol’ Block,” Block said, sinking down into the chair
by the bed. He raised his hands over his head in the gesture of a victorious prize
fighter and let them collapse in his lap as if the effort had exhausted him. Then he
removed a red bandanna handkerchief that he carried to be funny with and wiped
his  face  thoroughly,  having  a  different  expression  on  it  every  time  it  appeared
from behind the rag.

“I  think  you’re  just  as  smart  as  you  can  be!”  Mrs.  Fox  said.  “Asbury,”  she
said, “you have undulant fever. It’ll keep coming back but it won’t kill you!” Her
smile was as bright and intense as a lightbulb without a shade. “I’m so relieved,”
she said.

Asbury sat up slowly, his face expressionless; then he fell back down again.
Block  leaned  over  him  and  smiled.  “You  ain’t  going  to  die,”  he  said,  with

deep satisfaction.

Nothing about Asbury stirred except his eyes. They did not appear to move on
the  surface  but  somewhere  in  their  blurred  depths  there  was  an  almost
imperceptible motion as if something were struggling feebly. Block’s gaze seemed
to reach down like a steel pin and hold whatever it was until the life was out of it.
“Undulant fever ain’t so bad, Azzberry,” he murmured. “It’s the same as Bang’s in
a cow.”

The boy gave a low moan and then was quiet.
“He must have drunk some unpasteurized milk up there,” his mother said softly
and then the two of them tiptoed out as if they thought he were about to go to sleep.
When the sound of their footsteps had faded on the stairs, Asbury sat up again.
He turned his head, almost surreptitiously, to the side where the key he had given
his mother was lying on the bedside table. His hand shot out and closed over it
and  returned  it  to  his  pocket.  He  glanced  across  the  room  into  the  small  oval-
framed dresser mirror. The eyes that stared back at him were the same that had
returned his gaze every day from that mirror but it seemed to him that they were

paler.  They  looked  shocked  clean  as  if  they  had  been  prepared  for  some  awful
vision about to come down on him. He shuddered and turned his head quickly the
other  way  and  stared  out  the  window. A  blinding  red-gold  sun  moved  serenely
from under a purple cloud. Below it the treeline was black against the crimson
sky. It formed a brittle wall, standing as if it were the frail defense he had set up in
his mind to protect him from what was coming. The boy fell back on his pillow
and stared at the ceiling. His limbs that had been racked for so many weeks by
fever and chill were numb now. The old life in him was exhausted. He awaited
the  coming  of  new.  It  was  then  that  he  felt  the  beginning  of  a  chill,  a  chill  so
peculiar, so light, that it was like a warm ripple across a deeper sea of cold. His
breath came short. The fierce bird which through the years of his childhood and
the  days  of  his  illness  had  been  poised  over  his  head,  waiting  mysteriously,
appeared all at once to be in motion. Asbury blanched and the last film of illusion
was torn as if by a whirlwind from his eyes. He saw that for the rest of his days,
frail, racked, but enduring, he would live in the face of a purifying terror. A feeble
cry, a last impossible protest escaped him. But the Holy Ghost, emblazoned in ice
instead of fire, continued, implacable, to descend.

The Comforts of Home

THOMAS withdrew to the side of the window and with his head between the wall
and the curtain he looked down on the driveway where the car had stopped. His
mother and the little slut were getting out of it. His mother emerged slowly, stolid
and awkward, and then the little slut’s long slightly bowed legs slid out, the dress
pulled above the knees. With a shriek of laughter  she  ran  to  meet  the  dog,  who
bounded,  overjoyed,  shaking  with  pleasure,  to  welcome  her.  Rage  gathered
throughout  Thomas’s  large  frame  with  a  silent  ominous  intensity,  like  a  mob
assembling.

It was now up to him to pack a suitcase, go to the hotel, and stay there until the

house should be cleared.

He  did  not  know  where  a  suitcase  was,  he  disliked  to  pack,  he  needed  his
books,  his  typewriter  was  not  portable,  he  was  used  to  an  electric  blanket,  he
could not bear to eat in restaurants. His mother, with her daredevil charity, was
about to wreck the peace of the house.

The back door slammed and the girl’s laugh shot up from the kitchen, through
the  back  hall,  up  the  stairwell  and  into  his  room,  making  for  him  like  a  bolt  of
electricity. He jumped to the side and stood glaring about him. His words of the
morning had been unequivocal: “If you bring that girl back into this house, I leave.
You can choose—her or me.”

She had made her choice. An intense pain gripped his throat. It was the first
time in his thirty-five years … He felt a sudden burning moisture behind his eyes.
Then he steadied himself, overcome by rage. On the contrary: she had not made
any choice. She was counting on his attachment to his electric blanket. She would
have to be shown.

The girl’s laughter rang upward a second time and Thomas winced. He saw
again her look of the night before. She had invaded his room. He had waked to
find his door open and her in it. There was enough light from the hall to make her
visible as she turned toward him. The face was like a comedienne’s in a musical

comedy—a pointed chin, wide apple cheeks and feline empty eyes. He had sprung
out  of  his  bed  and  snatched  a  straight  chair  and  then  he  had  backed  her  out  the
door,  holding  the  chair  in  front  of  him  like  an  animal  trainer  driving  out  a
dangerous cat. He had driven her silently down the hall, pausing when he reached
it to beat on his mother’s door. The girl, with a gasp, turned and fled into the guest
room.

In a moment his mother had opened her door and peered out apprehensively.
Her face, greasy with whatever she put on it at night, was framed in pink rubber
curlers. She looked down the hall where the girl had disappeared. Thomas stood
before her, the chair still lifted in front of him as if he were about to quell another
beast. “She tried to get in my room,” he hissed, pushing in. “I woke up and she
was trying to get in my room.” He closed the door behind him and his voice rose
in outrage. “I won’t put up with this! I won’t put up with it another day!”

His mother, backed by him to her bed, sat down on the edge of it. She had a

heavy body on which sat a thin, mysteriously gaunt and incongruous head.

“I’m  telling  you  for  the  last  time,”  Thomas  said,  “I  won’t  put  up  with  this
another day.” There was an observable tendency in all of her actions. This was,
with the best intentions in the world, to make a mockery of virtue, to pursue it with
such a mindless intensity that everyone involved was made a fool of and virtue
itself became ridiculous. “Not another day,” he repeated.

His mother shook her head emphatically, her eyes still on the door.
Thomas put the chair on the floor in front of her and sat down on it. He leaned

forward as if he were about to explain something to a defective child.

“That’s  just  another  way  she’s  unfortunate,”  his  mother  said.  “So  awful,  so
awful. She told me the name of it but I forget what it is but it’s something she can’t
help.  Something  she  was  born  with.  Thomas,”  she  said  and  put  her  hand  to  her
jaw, “suppose it were you?”

Exasperation blocked his windpipe. “Can’t I make you see,” he croaked, “that

if she can’t help herself you can’t help her?”

His mother’s eyes, intimate but untouchable, were the blue of great distances

after sunset. “Nimpermaniac,” she murmured.

“Nymphomaniac,” he said fiercely. “She doesn’t need to supply you with any

fancy names. She’s a moral moron. That’s all you need to know. Born without the
moral faculty—like somebody else would be born without a kidney or a leg. Do
you understand?”

“I  keep  thinking  it  might  be  you,”  she  said,  her  hand  still  on  her  jaw.  “If  it
were you, how do you think I’d feel if nobody took you in? What if you were a
nimpermaniac and not a brilliant smart person and you did what you couldn’t help
and…”

Thomas  felt  a  deep  unbearable  loathing  for  himself  as  if  he  were  turning

slowly into the girl.

“What did she have on?” she asked abruptly, her eyes narrowing.
“Nothing!” he roared. “Now will you get her out of here!”
“How  can  I  turn  her  out  in  the  cold?”  she  said.  “This  morning  she  was

threatening to kill herself again.”

“Send her back to jail,” Thomas said.
“I would not send you back to jail, Thomas,” she said.
He got up and snatched the chair and fled the room while he was still able to

control himself.

Thomas loved his mother. He loved her because it was his nature to do so, but
there were times when he could not endure her love for him. There were times
when it became nothing but pure idiot mystery  and  he  sensed  about  him  forces,
invisible currents entirely out of his control. She proceeded always from the tritest
the nice  thing  to  do—into  the  most  foolhardy
of  considerations—it  was 
engagements with the devil, whom, of course, she never recognized.

The  devil  for  Thomas  was  only  a  manner  of  speaking,  but  it  was  a  manner
appropriate  to  the  situations  his  mother  got  into.  Had  she  been  in  any  degree
intellectual,  he  could  have  proved  to  her  from  early  Christian  history  that  no
excess  of  virtue  is  justified,  that  a  moderation  of  good  produces  likewise  a
moderation in evil, that if Antony of Egypt had stayed at home and attended to his
sister, no devils would have plagued him.

Thomas was not cynical and so far from being opposed to virtue, he saw it as
the  principle  of  order  and  the  only  thing  that  makes  life  bearable.  His  own  life
was  made  bearable  by  the  fruits  of  his  mother’s  saner  virtues—by  the  well-

regulated house she kept and the excellent meals she served. But when virtue got
out of hand with her, as now, a sense of devils grew upon him, and these were not
mental quirks in himself or the old lady, they were denizens with personalities,
present though not visible, who might any moment be expected to shriek or rattle a
pot.

The girl had landed in the county jail a month ago on a bad check charge and
his mother had seen her picture in the paper. At the breakfast table she had gazed
at it for a long time and then had passed it over the coffee pot to him. “Imagine,”
she said, “only nineteen years old and in that filthy jail. And she doesn’t look like
a bad girl.”

Thomas glanced at the picture. It showed the face of a shrewd ragamuffin. He

observed that the average age for criminality was steadily lowering.

“She looks like a wholesome girl,” his mother said.
“Wholesome people don’t pass bad checks,” Thomas said.
“You don’t know what you’d do in a pinch.”
“I wouldn’t pass a bad check,” Thomas said.
“I think,” his mother said, “I’ll take her a little box of candy.”
If then and there he had put his foot down, nothing else would have happened.
His father, had he been living, would have put his foot down at that point. Taking
a box of candy was her favorite nice thing to do. When anyone within her social
station  moved  to  town,  she  called  and  took  a  box  of  candy;  when  any  of  her
friend’s children had babies or won a scholarship, she called and took a box of
candy; when an old person broke his hip, she was at his bedside with a box of
candy. He had been amused at the idea of her taking a box of candy to the jail.

He stood now in his room with the girl’s laugh rocketing away in his head and

cursed his amusement.

When his mother returned from the visit to the jail, she had burst into his study
without  knocking  and  had  collapsed  full-length  on  his  couch,  lifting  her  small
swollen feet up on the arm of it. After a moment, she recovered herself enough to
sit up and put a newspaper under them. Then she fell back again. “We don’t know
how the other half lives,” she said.

Thomas knew that though her conversation moved from cliché to cliché there

were real experiences behind them. He was less sorry for the girl’s being in jail
than  for  his  mother  having  to  see  her  there.  He  would  have  spared  her  all
unpleasant sights. “Well,” he said and put away his journal, “you had better forget
it now. The girl has ample reason to be in jail.”

“You  can’t  imagine  what  all  she’s  been  through,”  she  said,  sitting  up  again,
“listen.”  The  poor  girl,  Star,  had  been  brought  up  by  a  stepmother  with  three
children of her own, one an almost grown boy who had taken advantage of her in
such dreadful ways that she had been forced to run away and find her real mother.
Once found, her real mother had sent her to various boarding schools to get rid of
her. At each of these she had been forced to run away by the presence of perverts
and sadists so monstrous that their acts defied description. Thomas could tell that
his  mother  had  not  been  spared  the  details  that  she  was  sparing  him.  Now  and
again  when  she  spoke  vaguely,  her  voice  shook  and  he  could  tell  that  she  was
remembering some horror that had been put to her graphically. He had hoped that
in a few days the memory of all this would wear off, but it did not. The next day
she  returned  to  the  jail  with  Kleenex  and  cold-cream  and  a  few  days  later,  she
announced that she had consulted a lawyer.

It was at these times that Thomas truly mourned the death of his father though
he had not been able to endure him in life. The old man would have had none of
this foolishness. Untouched by useless compassion, he would (behind her back)
have pulled the necessary strings with his crony, the sheriff, and the girl would
have been packed off to the state penitentiary to serve her time. He had always
been  engaged  in  some  enraged  action  until  one  morning  when  (with  an  angry
glance at his wife as if she alone were responsible) he had dropped dead at the
breakfast table. Thomas had inherited his father’s reason without his ruthlessness
and his mother’s love of good without her tendency to pursue it. His plan for all
practical action was to wait and see what developed.

The lawyer found that the story of the repeated atrocities was for the most part
untrue, but when he explained to her that the girl was a psychopathic personality,
not  insane  enough  for  the  asylum,  not  criminal  enough  for  the  jail,  not  stable
enough for society, Thomas’s mother was more deeply affected than ever. The girl
readily  admitted  that  her  story  was  untrue  on  account  of  her  being  a  congenital

liar;  she  lied,  she  said,  because  she  was  insecure.  She  had  passed  through  the
hands of several psychiatrists who had put the finishing touches to her education.
She knew there was no hope for her. In the presence of such an affliction as this,
his mother seemed bowed down by some painful mystery that nothing would make
endurable but a redoubling of effort. To his annoyance, she appeared to look on
him with compassion, as if her hazy charity no longer made distinctions.

A few days later she burst in and said that the lawyer had got the girl paroled

—to her.

Thomas rose from his Morris chair, dropping the review he had been reading.
His large bland face contracted in anticipated pain. “You are not,” he said, “going
to bring that girl here!”

“No, no,” she said, “calm yourself, Thomas.” She had managed with difficulty
to get the girl a job in a pet shop in town and a place to board with a crotchety old
lady of her acquaintance. People were not kind. They did not put themselves in the
place of someone like Star who had everything against her.

Thomas  sat  down  again  and  retrieved  his  review.  He  seemed  just  to  have
escaped some danger which he did not care to make clear to himself. “Nobody
can tell you anything,” he said, “but in a few days that girl will have left town,
having got what she could out of you. You’ll never hear from her again.”

Two nights later he came home and opened the parlor door and was speared
by a shrill depthless laugh. His mother and the girl sat close to the fireplace where
the gas logs were lit. The girl gave the immediate impression of being physically
crooked.  Her  hair  was  cut  like  a  dog’s  or  an  elf’s  and  she  was  dressed  in  the
latest fashion. She was training on him a long familiar sparkling stare that turned
after a second into an intimate grin.

“Thomas!” his mother said, her voice firm with the injunction not to bolt, “this

is Star you’ve heard so much about. Star is going to have supper with us.”

The girl called herself Star Drake. The lawyer had found that her real name

was Sarah Ham.

Thomas neither moved nor spoke but hung in the door in what seemed a savage
perplexity. Finally he said, “How do you do, Sarah,” in a tone of such loathing
that he was shocked at the sound of it. He reddened, feeling it beneath him to show

contempt for any creature so pathetic. He advanced into the room, determined at
least on a decent politeness and sat down heavily in a straight chair.

“Thomas writes history,” his mother said with a threatening look at him. “He’s

president of the local Historical Society this year.”

The  girl  leaned  forward  and  gave  Thomas  an  even  more  pointed  attention.

“Fabulous!” she said in a throaty voice.

“Right  now  Thomas  is  writing  about  the  first  settlers  in  this  county,”  his

mother said.

“Fabulous!” the girl repeated.
Thomas by an effort of will managed to look as if he were alone in the room.
“Say, you know who he looks like?” Star asked, her head on one side, taking

him in at an angle.

“Oh, someone very distinguished!” his mother said archly.
“This cop I saw in the movie I went to last night,” Star said.
“Star,”  his  mother  said,  “I  think  you  ought  to  be  careful  about  the  kind  of
movies you go to. I think you ought to see only the best ones. I don’t think crime
stories would be good for you.”

“Oh this was a crime-does-not-pay,” Star said, “and I swear this cop looked
exactly like him. They were always putting something over on the guy. He would
look like he couldn’t stand it a minute longer or he would blow up. He was a riot.
And not bad looking,” she added with an appreciative leer at Thomas.

“Star,” his mother said, “I think it would be grand if you developed a taste for

music.”

Thomas sighed. His mother rattled on and the girl, paying no attention to her,
let her eyes play over him. The quality of her look was such that it might have
been  her  hands,  resting  now  on  his  knees,  now  on  his  neck.  Her  eyes  had  a
mocking glitter and he knew that she was well aware he could not stand the sight
of her. He needed nothing to tell him he was in the presence of the very stuff of
corruption,  but  blameless  corruption  because  there  was  no  responsible  faculty
behind it. He was looking at the most unendurable form of innocence. Absently he
asked himself what the attitude of God was to this, meaning if possible to adopt it.
His mother’s behavior throughout the meal was so idiotic that he could barely

stand to look at her and since he could less stand to look at Sarah Ham, he fixed
on the sideboard across the room a continuous gaze of disapproval and disgust.
Every remark of the girl’s his mother met as if it deserved serious attention. She
advanced several plans for the wholesome use of Star’s spare time. Sarah Ham
paid  no  more  attention  to  this  advice  than  if  it  came  from  a  parrot.  Once  when
Thomas  inadvertently  looked  in  her  direction,  she  winked.  As  soon  as  he  had
swallowed the last spoonful of dessert, he rose and muttered, “I have to go, I have
a meeting.”

“Thomas,” his mother said, “I want you to take Star home on your way. I don’t

want her riding in taxis by herself at night.”

For a moment Thomas remained furiously silent. Then he turned and left the
room. Presently he came back with a look of obscure determination on his face.
The girl was ready, meekly waiting at the parlor door. She cast up at him a great
look of admiration and confidence. Thomas did not offer his arm but she took it
anyway and moved out of the house and down the steps, attached to what might
have been a miraculously moving monument.

“Be good!” his mother called.
Sarah Ham snickered and poked him in the ribs.
While getting his coat he had decided that this would be his opportunity to tell
the girl that unless she ceased to be a parasite on his mother, he would see to it,
personally, that she was returned to jail. He would let her know that he understood
what she was up to, that he was not an innocent and that there were certain things
he would not put up with. At his desk, pen in hand, none was more articulate than
Thomas. As  soon  as  he  found  himself  shut  into  the  car  with  Sarah  Ham,  terror
seized his tongue.

She curled her feet up under her and said, “Alone at last,” and giggled.
Thomas swerved the car away from the house and drove fast toward the gate.

Once on the highway, he shot forward as if he were being pursued.

“Jesus!” Sarah Ham said, swinging her feet off the seat, “where’s the fire?”
Thomas did not answer. In a few seconds he could feel her edging closer. She
stretched,  eased  nearer,  and  finally  hung  her  hand  limply  over  his  shoulder.
“Tomsee doesn’t like me,” she said, “but I think he’s fabulously cute.”

Thomas  covered  the  three  and  a  half  miles  into  town  in  a  little  over  four
minutes.  The  light  at  the  first  intersection  was  red  but  he  ignored  it.  The  old
woman lived three blocks beyond. When the car screeched to a halt at the place,
he jumped out and ran around to the girl’s door and opened it. She did not move
from the car and Thomas was obliged to wait. After a moment one leg emerged,
then  her  small  white  crooked  face  appeared  and  stared  up  at  him.  There  was
something about the look of it that suggested blindness but it was the blindness of
those who don’t know that they cannot see. Thomas was curiously sickened. The
empty eyes moved over him. “Nobody likes me,” she said in a sullen tone. “What
if you were me and I couldn’t stand to ride you three miles?”

“My mother likes you,” he muttered.
“Her!” the girl said. “She’s just about seventy-five years behind the times!”
Breathlessly Thomas said, “If I find you bothering her again, I’ll have you put
back in jail.” There was a dull force behind his voice though it came out barely
above a whisper.

“You and who else?” she said and drew back in the car as if now she did not
intend to get out at all. Thomas reached into it, blindly grasped the front of her
coat,  pulled  her  out  by  it  and  released  her.  Then  he  lunged  back  to  the  car  and
sped off. The other door was still hanging open and her laugh, bodiless but real,
bounded up the street as if it were about to jump in the open side of the car and
ride  away  with  him.  He  reached  over  and  slammed  the  door  and  then  drove
toward  home,  too  angry  to  attend  his  meeting.  He  intended  to  make  his  mother
well-aware of his displeasure. He intended to leave  no  doubt  in  her  mind.  The
voice of his father rasped in his head.

Numbskull, the old man said, put your foot down now. Show her who’s boss

before she shows you.

But when Thomas reached home, his mother, wisely, had gone to bed.

*   *   *

The next morning he appeared at the breakfast  table,  his  brow  lowered  and  the
thrust of his jaw indicating that he was in a dangerous humor. When he intended to
be  determined,  Thomas  began  like  a  bull  that,  before  charging,  backs  with  his

head lowered and paws the ground. “All right now listen,” he began, yanking out
his chair and sitting down, “I have something to say to you about that girl and I
don’t intend to say it but once.” He drew breath. “She’s nothing but a little slut.
She makes fun of you behind your back. She means to get everything she can out of
you and you are nothing to her.”

His mother looked as if she too had spent a restless night. She did not dress in
the morning but wore her bathrobe and a gray turban around her head, which gave
her face a disconcerting omniscient look. He might have been breakfasting with a
sibyl.

“You’ll have to use canned cream this morning,” she said, pouring his coffee.

“I forgot the other.”

“All right, did you hear me?” Thomas growled.
“I’m not deaf,” his mother said and put the pot back on the trivet. “I know I’m

nothing but an old bag of wind to her.”

“Then why do you persist in this foolhardy…”
“Thomas,” she said, and put her hand to the side of her face, “it might be…”
“It is not me!” Thomas said, grasping the table leg at his knee.
She  continued  to  hold  her  face,  shaking  her  head  slightly.  “Think  of  all  you
have,”  she  began.  “All  the  comforts  of  home.  And  morals,  Thomas.  No  bad
inclinations, nothing bad you were born with.”

Thomas began to breathe like someone who feels the onset of asthma. “You

are not logical,” he said in a limp voice. “He would have put his foot down.”

The old lady stiffened. “You,” she said, “are not like him.”
Thomas opened his mouth silently.
“However,” his mother said, in a tone of such subtle accusation that she might
have been taking back the compliment, “I won’t invite her back again since you’re
so dead set against her.”

“I am not set against her,” Thomas said. “I am set against your making a fool of

yourself.”

As soon as he left the table and closed the door of his study on himself, his
father  took  up  a  squatting  position  in  his  mind.  The  old  man  had  had  the
countryman’s ability to converse squatting, though he was no countryman but had

been born and brought up in the city and only moved to a smaller place later to
exploit his talents. With steady skill he had made them think him one of them. In
the midst of a conversation on the courthouse lawn, he would squat and his two or
three companions would squat with him with no break in the surface of the talk.
By gesture he had lived his lie; he had never deigned to tell one.

Let her run over you, he said. You ain’t like me. Not enough to be a man.
Thomas began vigorously to read and presently the image faded. The girl had
caused a disturbance in the depths of his being, somewhere out of the reach of his
power of analysis. He felt as if he had seen a tornado pass a hundred yards away
and had an intimation that it would turn again and head directly for him. He did not
get his mind firmly on his work until mid-morning.

Two nights later, his mother and he were sitting in the den after their supper,
each reading a section of the evening paper, when the telephone began to ring with
the brassy intensity of a fire alarm. Thomas reached for it. As soon as the receiver
was in his hand, a shrill female voice screamed into the room, “Come get this girl!
Come get her! Drunk! Drunk in my parlor and I won’t have it! Lost her job and
come back here drunk! I won’t have it!”

His mother leapt up and snatched the receiver.
The  ghost  of  Thomas’s  father  rose  before  him.  Call  the  sheriff,  the  old  man
prompted. “Call the sheriff,” Thomas said in a loud voice. “Call the sheriff to go
there and pick her up.”

“We’ll be right there,” his mother was saying. “We’ll come and get her right

away. Tell her to get her things together.”

“She ain’t in no condition to get nothing together,” the voice screamed. “You

shouldn’t have put something like her off on me! My house is respectable!”

“Tell her to call the sheriff,” Thomas shouted.
His mother put the receiver down and looked at him. “I wouldn’t turn a dog

over to that man,” she said.

Thomas sat in the chair with his arms folded and looked fixedly at the wall.
“Think of the poor girl, Thomas,” his mother said, “with nothing. Nothing. And

we have everything.”

When  they  arrived,  Sarah  Ham  was  slumped  spraddle-legged  against  the

banister  on  the  boarding  house  front-steps.  Her  tam  was  down  on  her  forehead
where  the  old  woman  had  slammed  it  and  her  clothes  were  bulging  out  of  her
suitcase where the old woman had thrown them in. She was carrying on a drunken
conversation with herself in a low personal tone. A steak of lipstick ran up one
side of her face. She allowed herself to be guided by his mother to the car and put
in the back seat without seeming to know who the rescuer was. “Nothing to talk to
all day but a pack of goddamned parakeets,” she said in a furious whisper.

Thomas, who had not got out of the car at all, or looked at her after the first
revolted glance, said, “I’m telling you, once and for all, the place to take her is the
jail.

His mother, sitting on the back seat, holding the girl’s hand, did not answer.
“All right, take her to the hotel,” he said.
“I cannot take a drunk girl to a hotel, Thomas,” she said. “You know that.”
“Then take her to a hospital.”
“She doesn’t need a jail or a hotel or a hospital,” his mother said, “she needs a

home.”

“She does not need mine,” Thomas said.
“Only for tonight, Thomas,” the old lady sighed. “Only for tonight.”
Since then eight days had passed. The little slut was established in the guest
room. Every day his mother set out to find her a job and a place to board, and
failed, for the old woman had broadcast a warning. Thomas kept to his room or
the den. His home was to him home, workshop, church, as personal as the shell of
a turtle and as necessary. He could not believe that it could be violated  in  this
way. His flushed face had a constant look of stunned outrage.

As soon as the girl was up in the morning, her voice throbbed out in a blues
song  that  would  rise  and  waver,  then  plunge  low  with  insinuations  of  passion
about to be satisfied and Thomas, at his desk, would lunge up and begin frantically
stuffling his ears with Kleenex. Each time he started from one room to another,
one floor to another, she would be certain to appear. Each time he was halfway up
or down the stairs, she would either meet him and pass, cringing coyly, or go up
or  down  behind  him,  breathing  small  tragic  spearmint-flavored  sighs.  She
appeared to adore Thomas’s repugnance to her and to draw it out of him every

chance she got as if it added delectably to her martyrdom.

The old man—small, wasp-like, in his yellowed panama hat, his seersucker
suit, his pink carefully-soiled shirt, his small string tie—appeared to have taken
up his station in Thomas’s mind and from there, usually squatting, he shot out the
same rasping suggestion every time the boy paused from his forced studies. Put
your foot down. Go to see the sheriff.

The  sheriff  was  another  edition  of  Thomas’s  father  except  that  he  wore  a
checkered shirt and a Texas type hat and was ten years younger. He was as easily
dishonest,  and  he  had  genuinely  admired  the  old  man.  Thomas,  like  his  mother,
would have gone far out of his way to avoid his glassy pale blue gaze. He kept
hoping for another solution, for a miracle.

With Sarah Ham in the house, meals were unbearable.
“Tomsee doesn’t like me,” she said the third or fourth night at the supper table
and cast her pouting gaze across at the large rigid figure of Thomas, whose face
was set with the look of a man trapped by insufferable odors. “He doesn’t want
me here. Nobody wants me anywhere.”

“Thomas’s name is Thomas,” his mother interrupted. “Not Tomsee.”
“I made Tomsee up,” she said. “I think it’s cute. He hates me.”
“Thomas does not hate you,” his mother said. “We are not the kind of people
who hate,” she added, as if this were an imperfection that had been bred out of
them generations ago.

“Oh, I know when I’m not wanted,” Sarah Ham continued. “They didn’t even

want me in jail. If I killed myself I wonder would God want me?”

“Try it and see,” Thomas muttered.
The girl screamed with laughter. Then she stopped abruptly, her face puckered
and she began to shake. “The best thing to do,” she said, her teeth clattering, “is to
kill  myself.  Then  I’ll  be  out  of  everybody’s  way.  I’ll  go  to  hell  and  be  out  of
God’s way. And even the devil won’t want me. He’ll kick me out of hell, not even
in hell…” she wailed.

Thomas rose, picked up his plate and knife and fork and carried them to the
den to finish his supper. After that, he had not eaten another meal at the table but
had  had  his  mother  serve  him  at  his  desk.  At  these  meals,  the  old  man  was

intensely present to him. He appeared to be tipping backwards in his chair, his
thumbs beneath his galluses, while he said such things as, She never ran me away
from my own table.

A few nights later, Sarah Ham slashed her wrists with a paring knife and had
hysterics.  From  the  den  where  he  was  closeted  after  supper,  Thomas  heard  a
shriek, then a series of screams, then his mother’s scurrying footsteps through the
house. He did not move. His first instant of hope that the girl had cut her throat
faded as he realized she could not have done it and continue to scream the way she
was  doing.  He  returned  to  his  journal  and  presently  the  screams  subsided.  In  a
moment  his  mother  burst  in  with  his  coat  and  hat.  “We  have  to  take  her  to  the
hospital,” she said. “She tried to do away with herself. I have a tourniquet on her
arm. Oh Lord, Thomas,” she said, “imagine being so low you’d do a thing like
that!”

Thomas rose woodenly and put on his hat and coat. “We will take her to the

hospital,” he said, “and we will leave her there.”

“And drive her to despair again?” the old lady cried. “Thomas!”
Standing in the center of his room now, realizing that he had reached the point
where action was inevitable, that he must pack, that he must leave, that he must go,
Thomas remained immovable.

His fury was directed not at the little slut but at his mother. Even though the
doctor  had  found  that  she  had  barely  damaged  herself  and  had  raised  the  girl’s
wrath by laughing at the tourniquet and putting only a streak of iodine on the cut,
his mother could not get over the incident. Some new weight of sorrow seemed to
have been thrown across her shoulders, and not only Thomas, but Sarah Ham was
infuriated by this, for it appeared to be a general sorrow that would have found
another object no matter what good fortune came to either of them. The experience
of Sarah Ham had plunged the old lady into mourning for the world.

The morning after the attempted suicide, she had gone through the house and
collected all the knives and scissors and locked them in a drawer. She emptied a
bottle of rat poison down the toilet and took up the roach tablets from the kitchen
floor. Then she came to Thomas’s study and said in a whisper, “Where  is that gun
of his? I want you to lock it up.”

“The gun is in my drawer,” Thomas roared, “and I will not lock it up. If she

shoots herself, so much the better!”

“Thomas,” his mother said, “she’ll hear you!”
“Let her hear me!” Thomas yelled. “Don’t you know she has no intention of

killing herself? Don’t you know her kind never kill themselves? Don’t you…”

His mother slipped out the door and closed it to silence him and Sarah Ham’s
laugh, quite close in the hall, came rattling into his room. “Tomsee’ll find out. I’ll
kill myself and then he’ll be sorry he wasn’t nice to me. I’ll use his own lil gun,
his  own  lil  ol’  pearl-handled  revol-lervuh!”  she  shouted  and  let  out  a  loud
tormented-sounding laugh in imitation of a movie monster.

Thomas ground his teeth. He pulled out his desk drawer and felt for the pistol.
It was an inheritance from the old man, whose opinion it had been that every house
should contain a loaded gun. He had discharged two bullets one night into the side
of  a  prowler,  but  Thomas  had  never  shot  anything.  He  had  no  fear  that  the  girl
would use the gun on herself and he closed the drawer. Her kind clung tenaciously
to life and were able to wrest some histrionic advantage from every moment.

Several ideas for getting rid of her had entered his head but each of these had
been suggestions whose moral tone indicated that they had come from a mind akin
to his father’s, and Thomas had rejected them. He could not get the girl locked up
again until she did something illegal. The old man would have been able with no
qualms  at  all  to  get  her  drunk  and  send  her  out  on  the  highway  in  his  car,
meanwhile notifying the highway patrol of her presence on the road, but Thomas
considered  this  below  his  moral  stature.  Suggestions  continued  to  come  to  him,
each more outrageous than the last.

He had not the vaguest hope that the girl would get the gun and shoot herself,
but  that  afternoon  when  he  looked  in  the  drawer,  the  gun  was  gone.  His  study
locked from the inside, not the out. He cared nothing about the gun, but the thought
of  Sarah  Ham’s  hands  sliding  among  his  papers  infuriated  him.  Now  even  his
study was contaminated. The only place left untouched by her was his bedroom.

That night she entered it.
In  the  morning  at  breakfast,  he  did  not  eat  and  did  not  sit  down.  He  stood
beside his chair and delivered his ultimatum while his mother sipped her coffee as

if she were both alone in the room and in great pain. “I have stood this,” he said,
“for as long as I am able. Since I see plainly that you care nothing about me, about
my peace or comfort or working conditions, I am about to take the only step open
to me. I will give you one more day. If you bring the girl back into this house this
afternoon, I leave. You can choose—her or me.” He had  more to say but at that
point his voice cracked and he left.

At ten o’clock his mother and Sarah Ham left the house.
At four he heard the car wheels on the gravel and rushed to the window. As

the car stopped, the dog stood up, alert, shaking.

He seemed unable to take the first step that would set him walking to the closet
in the hall to look for the suitcase. He was like a man handed a knife and told to
operate on himself if he wished to live. His huge hands clenched helplessly. His
expression was a turmoil of indecision and outrage. His pale blue eyes seemed to
sweat in his broiling face. He closed them for a moment and on the back of his
lids,  his  father’s  image  leered  at  him.  Idiot!  the  old  man  hissed,  idiot!  The
criminal slut stole your gun! See the sheriff! See the sheriff!

It was a moment before Thomas opened his eyes. He seemed newly stunned.
He  stood  where  he  was  for  at  least  three  minutes,  then  he  turned  slowly  like  a
large vessel reversing its direction and faced the door. He stood there a moment
longer, then he left, his face set to see the ordeal through.

He did not know where he would find the sheriff. The man made his own rules
and kept his own hours. Thomas stopped first at the jail where his office was, but
he was not in it. He went to the courthouse and was told by a clerk that the sheriff
had gone to barber shop across the street. “Yonder’s the deppity,” the clerk said
and pointed out the window to the large figure of a man in a checkered shirt, who
was leaning against the side of a police car, looking into space.

“It has to be the sheriff,” Thomas said and left for the barber shop. As little as
he wanted anything to do with the sheriff, he realized that the man was  at  least
intelligent and not simply a mound of sweating flesh.

The barber said the sheriff had just left. Thomas started back to the courthouse
and  as  he  stepped  on  to  the  sidewalk  from  the  street,  he  saw  a  lean,  slightly
stooped figure gesticulating angrily at the deputy.

Thomas approached with an aggressiveness brought on by nervous agitation.
He stopped abruptly three feet away and said in an over-loud voice, “Can I have a
word with you?” without adding the sheriff’s name, which was Farebrother.

Farebrother turned his sharp creased face just enough to take Thomas in, and
the deputy did likewise, but neither spoke. The sheriff removed a very small piece
of cigarette from his lip and dropped it at his feet. “I told you what to do,” he said
to the deputy. Then he moved off with a slight nod that indicated Thomas could
follow him if he wanted to see him. The deputy slunk around the front of the police
car and got inside.

Farebrother, with Thomas following, headed across the courthouse square and
stopped beneath a tree that shaded a quarter of the front lawn. He waited, leaning
slightly forward, and lit another cigarette.

Thomas began to blurt out his business. As he had not had time to prepare his
words, he was barely coherent. By repeating the same thing over several times, he
managed at length to get out what he wanted to say. When he finished, the sheriff
was  still  leaning  slightly  forward,  at  an  angle  to  him,  his  eyes  on  nothing  in
particular. He remained that way without speaking.

Thomas began again, slower and in a lamer voice, and Fare-brother let him
continue  for  some  time  before  he  said,  “We  had  her  oncet.”  He  then  allowed
himself a slow, creased, all-knowing, quarter smile.

“I had nothing to do with that,” Thomas said. “That was my mother.”
Farebrother squatted.
“She was trying to help the girl,” Thomas said. “She didn’t know she couldn’t

be helped.”

“Bit off more than she could chew, I reckon,” the voice below him mused.
“She has nothing to do with this,” Thomas said. “She doesn’t know I’m here.

The girl is dangerous with that gun.”

“He,”  the  sheriff  said,  “never  let  anything  grow  under  his  feet.  Particularly

nothing a woman planted.”

“She might kill somebody with that gun,” Thomas said weakly, looking down

at the round top of the Texas type hat.
There was a long time of silence.

“Where’s she got it?” Farebrother asked.
“I don’t know. She sleeps in the guest room. It must be in there, in her suitcase

probably,” Thomas said.

Farebrother lapsed into silence again.
“You could come search the guest room,” Thomas said in a strained voice. “I
can go home and leave the latch off the front door and you can come in quietly and
go upstairs and search her room.”

Farebrother turned his head so that his eyes looked boldly at Thomas’s knees.

“You seem to know how it ought to be done,” he said. “Want to swap jobs?”

Thomas  said  nothing  because  he  could  not  think  of  anything  to  say,  but  he
waited  doggedly.  Farebrother  removed  the  cigarette  butt  from  his  lips  and
dropped it on the grass. Beyond him on the courthouse porch a group of loiterers
who had been leaning at the left of the door moved over to the right where a patch
of sunlight had settled. From one of the upper windows a crumpled piece of paper
blew out and drifted down.

“I’ll  come  along  about  six,”  Farebrother  said.  “Leave  the  latch  off  the  door

and keep out of my way—yourself and them two women too.”

Thomas let out a rasping sound of relief meant to be “Thanks,” and struck off
across the grass like someone released. The phrase, “them two women,” stuck like
a burr in his brain—the subtlety of the insult to his mother hurting him more than
any of Farebrother’s references to his own incompetence. As he got into his car,
his face suddenly flushed. Had he delivered his mother over to the sheriff—to be a
butt for the man’s tongue? Was he betraying her to get rid of the little slut? He saw
at once that this was not the case. He was doing what he was doing for her own
good, to rid her of a parasite that would ruin their peace. He started his car and
drove quickly home but once he had turned in the driveway, he decided it would
be better to park some distance from the house and go quietly in by the back door.
He parked on the grass and on the grass walked in a circle toward the rear of the
house. The sky was lined with mustard-colored streaks. The dog was asleep on
the back doormat. At the approach of his master’s step, he opened one yellow eye,
took him in, and closed it again.

Thomas  let  himself  into  the  kitchen.  It  was  empty  and  the  house  was  quiet

enough  for  him  to  be  aware  of  the  loud  ticking  of  the  kitchen  clock.  It  was  a
quarter to six. He tiptoed hurriedly through the hall to the front door and took the
latch off it. Then he stood for a moment listening. From behind the closed parlor
door, he heard his mother snoring softly and presumed that she had gone to sleep
while reading. On the other side of the hall, not three feet from his study, the little
slut’s  black  coat  and  red  pocketbook  were  slung  on  a  chair.  He  heard  water
running upstairs and decided she was taking a bath.

He went into his study and sat down at his desk to wait, noting with distaste
that every few moments a tremor ran through him. He sat for a minute or two doing
nothing. Then he picked up a pen and began to draw squares on the back of an
envelope that lay before him. He looked at his watch. It was eleven minutes to six.
After a moment he idly drew the center drawer of the desk out over his lap. For a
moment he stared at the gun without recognition. Then he gave a yelp and leaped
up. She had put it back!

Idiot! his father hissed, idiot! Go plant it in her pocketbook. Don’t just stand

there. Go plant it in her pocketbook!

Thomas stood staring at the drawer.
Moron!  the  old  man  fumed.  Quick  while  there’s  time!  Go  plant  it  in  her

pocketbook.

Thomas did not move.
Imbecile! his father cried.
Thomas picked up the gun.
Make haste, the old man ordered.
Thomas started forward, holding the gun away from him. He opened the door
and  looked  at  the  chair.  The  black  coat  and  red  pocketbook  were  lying  on  it
almost within reach.

Hurry up, you fool, his father said.
From behind the parlor door the almost inaudible snores of his mother rose
and  fell.  They  seemed  to  mark  an  order  of  time  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
instants left to Thomas. There was no other sound.

Quick, you imbecile, before she wakes up, the old man said.
The snores stopped and Thomas heard the sofa springs groan. He grabbed the

red pocketbook. It had a skin-like feel to his touch and as it opened, he caught an
unmistakable odor of the girl. Wincing, he thrust in the gun and then drew back.
His face burned an ugly dull red.

“What  is  Tomsee  putting  in  my  purse?”  she  called  and  her  pleased  laugh

bounced down the staircase. Thomas whirled.

She was at the top of the stair, coming down in the manner of a fashion model,
one bare leg and then the other thrusting out the front of her kimona in a definite
rhythm. “Tomsee is being naughty,” she said in a throaty voice. She reached the
bottom and cast a possessive leer at Thomas whose face was now more gray than
red. She reached out, pulled the bag open with her finger and peered at the gun.

His mother opened the parlor door and looked out.
“Tomsee put his pistol in my bag!” the girl shrieked.
“Ridiculous,” his mother said, yawning. “What would Thomas want to put his

pistol in your bag for?”

Thomas stood slightly hunched, his hands hanging helplessly at the wrists as if

he had just pulled them up out of a pool of blood.

“I don’t know what for,” the girl said, “but he sure did it,” and she proceeded
to walk around Thomas, her hands on her hips, her neck thrust forward and her
intimate grin fixed on him fiercely. All at once her expression seemed to open as
the purse had opened when Thomas touched it. She stood with her head cocked on
one side in an attitude of disbelief. “Oh boy,” she said slowly, “is he a case.”

At  that  instant  Thomas  damned  not  only  the  girl  but  the  entire  order  of  the

universe that made her possible.

“Thomas  wouldn’t  put  a  gun  in  your  bag,”  his  mother  said.  “Thomas  is  a

gentleman.”

The girl made a chortling noise. “You can see it in there,” she said and pointed

to the open purse.

You found it in her bag, you dimwit! the old man hissed.
“I  found  it  in  her  bag!”  Thomas  shouted.  “The  dirty  criminal  slut  stole  my

gun!”

His  mother  gasped  at  the  sound  of  the  other  presence  in  his  voice.  The  old

lady’s sybil-like face turned pale.

“Found  it  my  eye!”  Sarah  Ham  shrieked  and  started  for  the  pocketbook,  but
Thomas, as if his arm were guided by his father, caught it first and snatched the
gun. The girl in a frenzy lunged at Thomas’s throat and would actually have caught
him around the neck had not his mother thrown herself forward to protect her.

Fire! the old man yelled.
Thomas fired. The blast was like a sound meant to bring an end to evil in the
world. Thomas heard it as a sound that would shatter the laughter of sluts until all
shrieks were stilled and nothing was left to disturb the peace of perfect order.

The  echo  died  away  in  waves.  Before  the  last  one  had  faded,  Farebrother
opened  the  door  and  put  his  head  inside  the  hall.  His  nose  wrinkled.  His
expression for some few seconds was that of a man unwilling to admit surprise.
His eyes were clear as glass, reflecting the scene. The old lady lay on the floor
between the girl and Thomas.

The  sheriff’s  brain  worked  instantly  like  a  calculating  machine.  He  saw  the
facts as if they were already in print: the fellow had intended all along to kill his
mother and pin it on the girl. But Farebrother had been too quick for him. They
were not yet aware of his head in the door. As he scrutinized the scene, further
insights were flashed to him. Over her body, the killer and the slut were about to
collapse into each other’s arms. The sheriff knew a nasty bit when he saw it. He
was accustomed to enter upon scenes that were not as bad as he had hoped to find
them, but this one met his expectations.

Everything That Rises Must Converge

HER doctor had told Julian’s mother that she must lose twenty pounds on account
of her blood pressure, so on Wednesday nights Julian had to take her downtown
on  the  bus  for  a  reducing  class  at  the Y.  The  reducing  class  was  designed  for
working girls over fifty, who weighed from 165 to 200 pounds. His mother was
one of the slimmer ones, but she said ladies did not tell their age or weight. She
would not ride the buses by herself at night since they had been integrated, and
because the reducing class was one of her few pleasures, necessary for her health,
and free, she said Julian could at least put himself out to take her, considering all
she  did  for  him.  Julian  did  not  like  to  consider  all  she  did  for  him,  but  every
Wednesday night he braced himself and took her.

She was almost ready to go, standing before the hall mirror, putting on her hat,
while he, his hands behind him, appeared pinned to the door frame, waiting like
Saint Sebastian for the arrows to begin piercing him. The hat was new and had
cost her seven dollars and a half. She kept saying, “Maybe I shouldn’t have paid
that for it. No, I shouldn’t have. I’ll take it off and return it tomorrow. I shouldn’t
have bought it.”

Julian raised his eyes to heaven. “Yes, you should have bought it,” he said.
“Put it on and let’s go.” It was a hideous hat. A purple velvet flap came down on
one side of it and stood up on the other; the rest of it was green and looked like a
cushion  with  the  stuffing  out.  He  decided  it  was  less  comical  than  jaunty  and
pathetic. Everything that gave her pleasure was small and depressed him.

She lifted the hat one more time and set it down slowly on top of her head.
Two wings of gray hair protruded on either side of her florid face, but her eyes,
sky-blue, were as innocent and untouched by experience as they must have been
when she was ten. Were it not that she was a widow who had struggled fiercely to
feed  and  clothe  and  put  him  through  school  and  who  was  supporting  him  still,
“until he got on his feet,” she might have been a little girl that he had to take to
town.

“It’s all right, it’s all right,” he said. “Let’s go.” He opened the door himself
and started down the walk to get her going. The sky was a dying violet and the
houses  stood  out  darkly  against  it,  bulbous  liver-colored  monstrosities  of  a
uniform  ugliness  though  no  two  were  alike.  Since  this  had  been  a  fashionable
neighborhood  forty  years  ago,  his  mother  persisted  in  thinking  they  did  well  to
have an apartment in it. Each house had a narrow collar of dirt around it in which
sat, usually, a grubby child. Julian walked with his hands in his pockets, his head
down  and  thrust  forward  and  his  eyes  glazed  with  the  determination  to  make
himself completely numb during the time he would be sacrificed to her pleasure.

The  door  closed  and  he  turned  to  find  the  dumpy  figure,  surmounted  by  the
atrocious  hat,  coming  toward  him.  “Well,”  she  said,  “you  only  live  once  and
paying a little more for it, I at least won’t meet myself coming and going.”

“Some day I’ll start making money,” Julian said gloomily—he knew he never
would—“and you can have one of those jokes whenever you take the fit.” But first
they would move. He visualized a place where the nearest neighbors would be
three miles away on either side.

“I  think  you’re  doing  fine,”  she  said,  drawing  on  her  gloves.  “You’ve  only

been out of school a year. Rome wasn’t built in a day.”

She was one of the few members of the Y reducing class who arrived in hat
and gloves and who had a son who had been to college. “It takes time,” she said,
“and the world is in such a mess. This hat looked better on me than any of the
others,  though  when  she  brought  it  out  I  said,  ‘Take  that  thing  back.  I  wouldn’t
have it on my head,’ and she said, ‘Now wait till you see it on,’ and when she put
it on me, I said, ‘We-ull,’ and she said, ‘If you ask me, that hat does something for
you and you do something for the hat, and besides,’ she said, ‘with that hat, you
won’t meet yourself coming and going.’”

Julian thought he could have stood his lot better if she had been selfish, if she
had been an old hag who drank and screamed at him. He walked along, saturated
in depression, as if in the midst of his martyrdom he had lost his faith. Catching
sight  of  his  long,  hopeless,  irritated  face,  she  stopped  suddenly  with  a  grief-
stricken  look,  and  pulled  back  on  his  arm.  “Wait  on  me,”  she  said.  “I’m  going
back to the house and take this thing off and tomorrow I’m going to return it. I was

out of my head. I can pay the gas bill with the seven-fifty.”

He caught her arm in a vicious grip. “You are not going to take it back,” he

said. “I like it.”

“Well,” she said, “I don’t think I ought…”
“Shut up and enjoy it,” he muttered, more depressed than ever.
“With the world in the mess it’s in,” she said, “it’s a wonder we can enjoy

anything. I tell you, the bottom rail is on the top.”

Julian sighed.
“Of course,” she said, “if you know who you are, you can go anywhere.” She
said this every time he took her to the reducing class. “Most of them in it are not
our kind of people,” she said, “but I can be gracious to anybody. I know who I
am.”

“They  don’t  give  a  damn  for  your  graciousness,”  Julian  said  savagely.
“Knowing who you are is good for one generation only. You haven’t the foggiest
idea where you stand now or who you are.”

She stopped and allowed her eyes to flash at him. “I most certainly do know

who I am,” she said, “and if you don’t know who you are, I’m ashamed of you.”

“Oh hell,” Julian said.
“Your great-grandfather was a former governor of this state,” she said. “Your

grandfather was a prosperous landowner. Your grandmother was a Godhigh.”

“Will you look around you,” he said tensely, “and see where you are now?”
and he swept his arm jerkily out to indicate the neighborhood, which the growing
darkness at least made less dingy.

“You remain what you are,” she said. “Your great-grandfather  had a plantation

and two hundred slaves.”

“There are no more slaves,” he said irritably.
“They were better off when they were,” she said. He groaned to see that she
was off on that topic. She rolled onto it every few days like a train on an open
track. He knew every stop, every junction, every swamp along the way, and knew
the exact point at which her conclusion would roll majestically into the station:
“It’s ridiculous. It’s simply not realistic. They should rise, yes, but on their own
side of the fence.”

“Let’s skip it,” Julian said.
“The ones I feel sorry for,” she said, “are the ones that are half white. They’re

tragic.”

“Will you skip it?”
“Suppose we were half white. We would certainly have mixed feelings.”
“I have mixed feelings now,” he groaned.
“Well  let’s  talk  about  something  pleasant,”  she  said.  “I  remember  going  to
Grandpa’s when I was a little girl. Then the house had double stairways that went
up to what was really the second floor—all the cooking was done on the first. I
used to like to stay down in the kitchen on account of the way the walls smelled. I
would sit with my nose pressed against the plaster and take deep breaths. Actually
the  place  belonged  to  the  Godhighs  but  your  grandfather  Chestny  paid  the
mortgage and saved it for them. They were in reduced circumstances,” she said,
“but reduced or not, they never forgot who they were.”

“Doubtless that decayed mansion reminded them,” Julian muttered. He never
spoke of it without contempt or thought of it without longing. He had seen it once
when he was a child before it had been sold. The double stairways had rotted and
been  torn  down.  Negroes  were  living  in  it.  But  it  remained  in  his  mind  as  his
mother had known it. It appeared in his dreams regularly. He would stand on the
wide  porch,  listening  to  the  rustle  of  oak  leaves,  then  wander  through  the  high-
ceilinged hall into the parlor that opened onto it and gaze at the worn  rugs  and
faded  draperies.  It  occurred  to  him  that  it  was  he,  not  she,  who  could  have
appreciated it. He preferred its threadbare elegance to anything he could name and
it was because of it that all the neighborhoods they had lived in had been a torment
to him—whereas she had hardly known the difference. She called her insensitivity
“being adjustable.”

“And I remember the old darky who was my nurse, Caroline. There was no
better  person  in  the  world.  I’ve  always  had  a  great  respect  for  my  colored
friends,” she said. “I’d do anything in the world for them and they’d…”

“Will you for God’s sake get off that subject?” Julian said. When he got on a
bus by himself, he made it a point to sit down beside a Negro, in reparation as it
were for his mother’s sins.

“You’re mighty touchy tonight,” she said. “Do you feel all right?”
“Yes I feel all right,” he said. “Now lay off.”
She pursed her lips. “Well, you certainly are in a vile humor,” she observed.

“I just won’t speak to you at all.”

They had reached the bus stop. There was no bus in sight and Julian, his hands
still jammed in his pockets and his head thrust forward, scowled down the empty
street. The frustration of having to wait on the bus as well as ride on it began to
creep up his neck like a hot hand. The presence of his mother was borne in upon
him as she gave a pained sigh. He looked at her bleakly. She was holding herself
very erect under the preposterous hat, wearing it like a banner of her imaginary
dignity. There was in him an evil urge to break her spirit. He suddenly unloosened
his tie and pulled it off and put it in his pocket.

She stiffened. “Why must you look like that when you take me to town?” she

said. “Why must you deliberately embarrass me?”

“If you’ll never learn where you are,” he said, “you can at least learn where I

am.”

“You look like a—thug,” she said.
“Then I must be one,” he murmured.
“I’ll just go home,” she said. “I will not bother you. If you can’t do a little

thing like that for me…”

Rolling his eyes upward, he put his tie back on. “Restored to my class,” he
muttered. He thrust his face toward her and hissed, “True culture is in the mind,
the mind,” he said, and tapped his head, “the mind.”

“It’s in the heart,” she said, “and in how you do things and how you do things

is because of who you are.”

“Nobody in the damn bus cares who you are.”
“I care who I am,” she said icily.
The  lighted  bus  appeared  on  top  of  the  next  hill  and  as  it  approached,  they
moved out into the street to meet it. He put his hand under her elbow and hoisted
her up on the creaking step. She entered with a little smile, as if she were going
into a drawing room where everyone had been waiting for her. While he put in the
tokens,  she  sat  down  on  one  of  the  broad  front  seats  for  three  which  faced  the

aisle. A thin woman with protruding teeth and long yellow hair was sitting on the
end of it. His mother moved up beside her and left room for Julian beside herself.
He sat down and looked at the floor across the aisle where a pair of thin feet in
red and white canvas sandals were planted.

His mother immediately began a general conversation meant to attract anyone
who felt like talking. “Can it get any hotter?” she said and removed from her purse
a folding fan, black with a Japanese scene on it, which she began to flutter before
her.

“I  reckon  it  might  could,”  the  woman  with  the  protruding  teeth  said,  “but  I

know for a fact my apartment couldn’t get no hotter.”

“It must get the afternoon sun,” his mother said. She sat forward and looked up
and down the bus. It was half filled. Everybody was white. “I see we have the bus
to ourselves,” she said. Julian cringed.

“For  a  change,”  said  the  woman  across  the  aisle,  the  owner  of  the  red  and
white canvas sandals. “I come on one the other day and they were thick as fleas—
up front and all through.”

“The  world  is  in  a  mess  everywhere,”  his  mother  said.  “I  don’t  know  how

we’ve let it get in this fix.”

“What gets my goat is all those boys from good families stealing automobile
tires,” the woman with the protruding teeth said. “I told my boy, I said you may not
be rich but you been raised right and if I ever catch you in any such mess, they can
send you on to the reformatory. Be exactly where you belong.”

“Training tells,” his mother said. “Is your boy in high school?”
“Ninth grade,” the woman said.
“My  son  just  finished  college  last  year.  He  wants  to  write  but  he’s  selling

typewriters until he gets started,” his mother said.

The  woman  leaned  forward  and  peered  at  Julian.  He  threw  her  such  a
malevolent look that she subsided against the seat. On the floor across the aisle
there was an abandoned newspaper. He got up and got it and opened it out in front
of him. His mother discreetly continued the conversation in a lower tone but the
woman across the aisle said in a loud voice, “Well that’s nice. Selling typewriters
is close to writing. He can go right from one to the other.”

“I tell him,” his mother said, “that Rome wasn’t built in a day.”
Behind the newspaper Julian was withdrawing into the inner compartment of
his mind where he spent most of his time. This was a kind of mental bubble in
which  he  established  himself  when  he  could  not  bear  to  be  a  part  of  what  was
going on around him. From it he could see out and judge but in it he was safe from
any kind of penetration from without. It was the only place where he felt free of
the general idiocy of his fellows. His mother had never entered it but from it he
could see her with absolute clarity.

The old lady was clever enough and he thought that if she had started from any
of the right premises, more might have been expected of her. She lived according
to the laws of her own fantasy world, outside of which he had never seen her set
foot. The law of it was to sacrifice herself for him after she had first created the
necessity to do so by making a mess of things. If he had permitted her sacrifices, it
was only because her lack of foresight had made them necessary. All of her life
had been a struggle to act like a Chestny without the Chestny goods, and to give
him everything she thought a Chestny ought to have; but since, said she, it was fun
to struggle, why complain? And when you had won, as she had won, what fun to
look back on the hard times! He could not forgive her that she had  enjoyed  the
struggle and that she thought she had won.

What she meant when she said she had won was that she had brought him up
successfully and had sent him to college and that he had turned out so well—good
looking (her teeth had gone unfilled so that his could be straightened), intelligent
(he realized he was too intelligent to be a success), and with a future ahead of him
(there was of course no future ahead of him). She excused his gloominess on the
grounds that he was still growing up and his radical ideas on his lack of practical
experience. She said he didn’t yet know a thing about “life,” that he hadn’t even
entered the real world—when already he was as disenchanted with it as a man of
fifty.

The further irony of all this was that in spite of her, he had turned out so well.
In spite of going to only a third-rate college, he had, on his own initiative, come
out with a first-rate education; in spite of growing up dominated by a small mind,
he had ended up with a large one; in spite of all her foolish views, he was free of

prejudice  and  unafraid  to  face  facts.  Most  miraculous  of  all,  instead  of  being
blinded by love for her as she was for him, he had cut himself emotionally free of
her  and  could  see  her  with  complete  objectivity.  He  was  not  dominated  by  his
mother.

The  bus  stopped  with  a  sudden  jerk  and  shook  him  from  his  meditation. A
woman from the back lurched forward with little steps and barely escaped falling
in  his  newspaper  as  she  righted  herself.  She  got  off  and  a  large  Negro  got  on.
Julian kept his paper lowered to watch. It gave him a certain satisfaction to see
injustice in daily operation. It confirmed his view that with a few exceptions there
was no one worth knowing within a radius of three hundred miles. The Negro was
well dressed and carried a briefcase. He looked around and then sat down on the
other end of the seat where the woman with the red and white canvas sandals was
sitting.  He  immediately  unfolded  a  newspaper  and  obscured  himself  behind  it.
Julian’s mother’s elbow at once prodded insistently into his ribs. “Now you see
why I won’t ride on these buses by myself,” she whispered.

The woman with the red and white canvas sandals had risen at the same time
the Negro sat down and had gone further back in the bus and taken the seat of the
woman  who  had  got  off.  His  mother  leaned  forward  and  cast  her  an  approving
look.

Julian rose, crossed the aisle, and sat down in the place of the woman with the
canvas sandals. From this position, he looked serenely across at his mother. Her
face  had  turned  an  angry  red.  He  stared  at  her,  making  his  eyes  the  eyes  of  a
stranger. He felt his tension suddenly lift as if he had openly declared war on her.
He would have liked to get in conversation with the Negro and to talk with
him about art or politics or any subject that would be above the comprehension of
those around them,  but  the  man  remained  entrenched  behind  his  paper.  He  was
either ignoring the change of seating or had never noticed it. There was no way for
Julian to convey his sympathy.

His mother kept her eyes fixed reproachfully on his face. The woman with the
protruding teeth was looking at him avidly as if he were a type of monster new to
her.

“Do you have a light?” he asked the Negro.

Without  looking  away  from  his  paper,  the  man  reached  in  his  pocket  and

handed him a packet of matches.

“Thanks,”  Julian  said.  For  a  moment  he  held  the  matches  foolishly.  A  NO
SMOKING sign looked down upon him from over the door. This alone would not
have deterred him; he had no cigarettes. He had quit smoking some months before
because he could not afford it. “Sorry,” he muttered and handed back the matches.
The Negro lowered the paper and gave him an annoyed look. He took the matches
and raised the paper again.

His  mother  continued  to  gaze  at  him  but  she  did  not  take  advantage  of  his
momentary discomfort. Her eyes retained their battered look. Her face seemed to
be unnaturally red, as if her blood pressure had risen. Julian allowed no glimmer
of sympathy to show on his face. Having got the advantage, he wanted desperately
to  keep  it  and  carry  it  through.  He  would  have  liked  to  teach  her  a  lesson  that
would last her a while, but there seemed no way to continue the point. The Negro
refused to come out from behind his paper.

Julian folded his arms and looked stolidly before him, facing her but as if he
did not see her, as if he had ceased to recognize her existence. He visualized a
scene in which, the bus having reached their stop, he would remain in his seat and
when she said, “Aren’t you going to get off?” he would look at her as at a stranger
who had rashly addressed him. The corner they got off on was usually deserted,
but it was well lighted and it would not hurt her to walk by herself the four blocks
to the Y. He decided to wait until the time came and then decide whether or not  he
would let her get off by herself. He would have to be at the Y at ten to bring her
back, but he could leave her wondering if he was going to show up. There was no
reason for her to think she could always depend on him.

He  retired  again  into  the  high-ceilinged  room  sparsely  settled  with  large
pieces  of  antique  furniture.  His  soul  expanded  momentarily  but  then  he  became
aware  of  his  mother  across  from  him  and  the  vision  shriveled.  He  studied  her
coldly. Her feet in little pumps dangled like a child’s and did not quite reach the
floor.  She  was  training  on  him  an  exaggerated  look  of  reproach.  He  felt
completely  detached  from  her.  At  that  moment  he  could  with  pleasure  have
slapped  her  as  he  would  have  slapped  a  particularly  obnoxious  child  in  his

charge.

He  began  to  imagine  various  unlikely  ways  by  which  he  could  teach  her  a
lesson. He might make friends with some distinguished Negro professor or lawyer
and bring him home to spend the evening. He would be entirely justified but her
blood pressure would rise to 300. He could not push her to the extent of making
her  have  a  stroke,  and  moreover,  he  had  never  been  successful  at  making  any
Negro friends. He had tried to strike up an acquaintance on the bus with some of
the  better  types,  with  ones  that  looked  like  professors  or  ministers  or  lawyers.
One  morning  he  had  sat  down  next  to  a  distinguished-looking  dark  brown  man
who had answered his questions with a sonorous solemnity but who had turned out
to be an undertaker. Another day he had sat down beside a cigar-smoking Negro
with a diamond ring on his finger, but after a few stilted pleasantries, the Negro
had rung the buzzer and risen, slipping two lottery tickets into Julian’s hand as he
climbed over him to leave.

He imagined his mother lying desperately ill and his being able to secure only
a  Negro  doctor  for  her.  He  toyed  with  that  idea  for  a  few  minutes  and  then
dropped it for a momentary vision of himself participating as a sympathizer in a
sit-in demonstration. This was possible but he did not linger with it. Instead, he
approached the ultimate horror. He brought home a beautiful suspiciously Negroid
woman. Prepare yourself, he said. There is nothing you can do about it. This is the
woman I’ve chosen. She’s intelligent, dignified, even good, and she’s suffered and
she hasn’t thought it fun. Now persecute us, go ahead and persecute us. Drive her
out of here, but remember, you’re driving me too. His eyes were narrowed and
through  the  indignation  he  had  generated,  he  saw  his  mother  across  the  aisle,
purple-faced, shrunken to the dwarf-like proportions of her moral nature, sitting
like a mummy beneath the ridiculous banner of her hat.

He  was  tilted  out  of  his  fantasy  again  as  the  bus  stopped.  The  door  opened
with  a  sucking  hiss  and  out  of  the  dark  a  large,  gaily  dressed,  sullen-looking
colored woman got on with a little boy. The child, who might have been four, had
on a short plaid suit and a Tyrolean hat with a blue feather in it. Julian hoped that
he  would  sit  down  beside  him  and  that  the  woman  would  push  in  beside  his
mother. He could think of no better arrangement.

As  she  waited  for  her  tokens,  the  woman  was  surveying  the  seating
possibilities—he  hoped  with  the  idea  of  sitting  where  she  was  least  wanted.
There was something familiar-looking about her but Julian could not place what it
was. She was a giant of a woman. Her face was set not only to meet oppositon but
to seek it out. The downward tilt of her large lower lip was like a warning sign:
DON’T TAMPER WITH ME. Her bulging figure was encased in a green crepe dress and
her feet overflowed in red shoes. She had on a hideous hat. A purple velvet flap
came down on one side of it and stood up on the other; the rest of it was green and
looked like a cushion with the stuffing out. She carried a mammoth red pocketbook
that bulged throughout as if it were stuffed with rocks.

To Julian’s disappointment, the little boy climbed up on the empty seat beside
his  mother.  His  mother  lumped  all  children,  black  and  white,  into  the  common
category, “cute,” and she thought little Negroes were on the whole cuter than little
white children. She smiled at the little boy as he climbed on the seat.

Meanwhile the woman was bearing down upon the empty seat beside Julian.
To his annoyance, she squeezed herself into it. He saw his mother’s face change
as the woman settled herself next to him and he realized with satisfaction that this
was more objectionable to her than it was to him. Her face seemed almost gray
and  there  was  a  look  of  dull  recognition  in  her  eyes,  as  if  suddenly  she  had
sickened at some awful confrontation. Julian saw that it was because she and the
woman had, in a sense, swapped sons. Though his mother would not realize the
symbolic significance of this, she would feel it. His amusement showed plainly on
his face.

The woman next to him muttered something unintelligible to herself. He was
conscious of a kind of bristling next to him, muted growling like that of an angry
cat. He could not see anything but the red pocketbook upright on the bulging green
thighs.  He  visualized  the  woman  as  she  had  stood  waiting  for  her  tokens—the
ponderous  figure,  rising  from  the  red  shoes  upward  over  the  solid  hips,  the
mammoth bosom, the haughty face, to the green and purple hat.

His eyes widened.
The vision of the two hats, identical, broke upon him with the radiance of a
brilliant  sunrise.  His  face  was  suddenly  lit  with  joy.  He  could  not  believe  that

Fate had thrust upon his mother such a lesson. He gave a loud chuckle so that she
would look at him and see that he saw. She turned her eyes on him slowly. The
blue  in  them  seemed  to  have  turned  a  bruised  purple.  For  a  moment  he  had  an
uncomfortable sense of her innocence, but it lasted only a second before principle
rescued him. Justice entitled him to laugh. His grin hardened until it said to her as
plainly as if he were saying aloud: Your punishment exactly fits your pettiness.
This should teach you a permanent lesson.

Her eyes shifted to the woman. She seemed unable to bear looking at him and
to  find  the  woman  preferable.  He  became  conscious  again  of  the  bristling
presence at his side. The woman was rumbling like a volcano about to become
active. His mother’s mouth began to twitch slightly at one corner. With a sinking
heart, he saw incipient signs of recovery on her face and realized that this was
going to strike her suddenly as funny and was going to be no lesson at all. She kept
her eyes on the woman and an amused smile came over her face as if the woman
were a monkey that had stolen her hat. The little Negro was looking up at her with
large fascinated eyes. He had been trying to attract her attention for some time.

“Carver!” the woman said suddenly. “Come heah!”
When he saw that the spotlight was on him at last, Carver drew his feet up and

turned himself toward Julian’s mother and giggled.

“Carver!” the woman said. “You heah me? Come heah!”
Carver slid down from the seat but remained squatting with his back against
the  base  of  it,  his  head  turned  slyly  around  toward  Julian’s  mother,  who  was
smiling at him. The woman reached a hand across the aisle and snatched him to
her.  He  righted  himself  and  hung  backwards  on  her  knees,  grinning  at  Julian’s
mother.  “Isn’t  he  cute?”  Julian’s  mother  said  to  the  woman  with  the  protruding
teeth.

“I reckon he is,” the woman said without conviction.
The Negress yanked him upright but he eased out of her grip and shot across

the aisle and scrambled, giggling wildly, onto the seat beside his love.

“I think he likes me,” Julian’s mother said, and smiled at the woman. It was the
smile she used when she was being particularly gracious to an inferior. Julian saw
everything lost. The lesson had rolled off her like rain on a roof.

The  woman  stood  up  and  yanked  the  little  boy  off  the  seat  as  if  she  were
snatching  him  from  contagion.  Julian  could  feel  the  rage  in  her  at  having  no
weapon like his mother’s smile. She gave the child a sharp slap across his leg. He
howled once and then thrust his head into her stomach and kicked his feet against
her shins. “Behave,” she said vehemently.

The bus stopped and the Negro who had been reading the newspaper got off.
The woman moved over and set the little boy down with a thump between herself
and Julian. She held him firmly by the knee. In a moment he put his hands in front
of his face and peeped at Julian’s mother through his fingers.

“I see yoooooooo!” she said and put her hand in front of her face and peeped

at him.

The woman slapped his hand down. “Quit yo’ foolishness,” she said, “before I

knock the living Jesus out of you!”

Julian was thankful that the next stop was theirs. He reached up and pulled the
cord.  The  woman  reached  up  and  pulled  it  at  the  same  time.  Oh  my  God,  he
thought. He had the terrible intuition that when they got off the bus together, his
mother would open her purse and give the little boy a nickel. The gesture would
be  as  natural  to  her  as  breathing.  The  bus  stopped  and  the  woman  got  up  and
lunged to the front, dragging the child, who wished to stay on, after her. Julian and
his mother got up and followed. As they neared the door, Julian tried to relieve
her of her pocketbook.

“No,” she murmured, “I want to give the little boy a nickel.”
“No!” Julian hissed. “No!”
She smiled down at the child and opened her bag. The bus door opened and
the woman picked him up by the arm and descended with him, hanging at her hip.
Once in the street she set him down and shook him.

Julian’s mother had to close her purse while she got down the bus step but as
soon as her feet were on the ground, she opened it again and began to rummage
inside. “I can’t find but a penny,” she whispered, “but it looks like a new one.”

“Don’t do it!” Julian said fiercely between his teeth. There was a streetlight on
the  corner  and  she  hurried  to  get  under  it  so  that  she  could  better  see  into  her
pocketbook. The woman was heading off rapidly down the street with the child

still hanging backward on her hand.

“Oh little boy!” Julian’s mother called and took a few quick steps and caught
up with them just beyond the lamppost. “Here’s a bright new penny for you,” and
she held out the coin, which shone bronze in the dim light.

The huge woman turned and for a moment stood, her shoulders lifted and her
face frozen with frustrated rage, and stared at Julian’s mother. Then all at once she
seemed  to  explode  like  a  piece  of  machinery  that  had  been  given  one  ounce  of
pressure too much. Julian saw the black fist swing out with the red pocketbook.
He  shut  his  eyes  and  cringed  as  he  heard  the  woman  shout,  “He  don’t  take
nobody’s pennies!” When he opened his eyes, the woman was disappearing down
the street with the little boy staring wide-eyed over her shoulder. Julian’s mother
was sitting on the sidewalk.

“I told you not to do that,” Julian said angrily. “I told you not to do that!”
He stood over her for a minute, gritting his teeth. Her legs were stretched out
in front of her and her hat was on her lap. He squatted down and looked her in the
face. It was totally expressionless. “You got exactly what you deserved,” he said.
“Now get up.”

He picked up her pocketbook and put what had fallen out back in it. He picked
the hat up off her lap. The penny caught his eye on the sidewalk and he picked that
up and let it drop before her eyes into the purse. Then he stood up and leaned over
and held his hands out to pull her up. She remained immobile. He sighed. Rising
above them on either side were black apartment buildings, marked with irregular
rectangles of light. At the end of the block a man came out of a door and walked
off in the opposite direction. “All right,” he said, “suppose somebody happens by
and wants to know why you’re sitting on the sidewalk?”

She took the hand and, breathing hard, pulled heavily up on it and then stood
for a moment, swaying slightly as if the spots of light in the darkness were circling
around her. Her eyes, shadowed and confused, finally settled on his face. He did
not try to conceal his irritation. “I hope this teaches you a lesson,” he said. She
leaned forward and her eyes raked his face. She seemed trying to determine his
identity. Then, as if she found nothing familiar about him, she started off with a
headlong movement in the wrong direction.

“Aren’t you going on to the Y?” he asked.
“Home,” she muttered.
“Well, are we walking?”
For answer she kept going. Julian followed along, his hands behind him. He
saw  no  reason  to  let  the  lesson  she  had  had  go  without  backing  it  up  with  an
explanation  of  its  meaning.  She  might  as  well  be  made  to  understand  what  had
happened  to  her.  “Don’t  think  that  was  just  an  uppity  Negro  woman,”  he  said.
“That was the whole colored race which will no longer take your condescending
pennies. That was your black double. She can wear the same hat as you, and to be
sure,” he added gratuitously (because he thought it was funny), “it looked better on
her than it did on you. What all this means,” he said, “is that the old world is gone.
The  old  manners  are  obsolete  and  your  graciousness  is  not  worth  a  damn.”  He
thought bitterly of the house that had been lost for him. “You aren’t who you think
you are,” he said.

She continued to plow ahead, paying no attention to him. Her hair had come
undone on one side. She dropped her pocketbook and took no notice. He stooped
and picked it up and handed it to her but she did not take it.

“You  needn’t  act  as  if  the  world  had  come  to  an  end,”  he  said,  “because  it
hasn’t. From now on you’ve got to live in a new world and face a few realities for
a change. Buck up,” he said, “it won’t kill you.”

She was breathing fast.
“Let’s wait on the bus,” he said.
“Home,” she said thickly.
“I hate to see you behave like this,” he said. “Just like a child. I should be able
to expect more of you.” He decided to stop where he was and make her stop and
wait for a bus. “I’m not going any farther,” he said, stopping. “We’re going on the
bus.”

She continued to go on as if she had not heard him. He took a few steps and
caught her arm and stopped her. He looked into her face and caught his breath. He
was looking into a face he had never seen before. “Tell Grandpa to come get me,”
she said.

He stared, stricken.

“Tell Caroline to come get me,” she said.
Stunned, he let her go and she lurched forward again, walking as if one leg
were shorter than the other. A tide of darkness seemed to be sweeping her from
him. “Mother!” he cried. “Darling, sweetheart, wait!” Crumpling, she fell to the
pavement. He dashed forward and fell at her side, crying, “Mamma, Mamma!” He
turned  her  over.  Her  face  was  fiercely  distorted.  One  eye,  large  and  staring,
moved slightly to the left as if it had become unmoored. The other remained fixed
on him, raked his face again, found nothing and closed.

“Wait  here,  wait  here!”  he  cried  and  jumped  up  and  began  to  run  for  help
toward a cluster of lights he saw in the distance ahead of him. “Help, help!” he
shouted,  but  his  voice  was  thin,  scarcely  a  thread  of  sound.  The  lights  drifted
farther away the faster he ran and his feet moved numbly as if they carried him
nowhere. The tide of darkness seemed to sweep him back to her, postponing from
moment to moment his entry into the world of guilt and sorrow.

The Partridge Festival

CALHOUN  parked  his  small  pod-shaped  car  in  the  driveway  to  his  great-aunts’
house  and  got  out  cautiously,  looking  to  the  right  and  left  as  if  he  expected  the
profusion of azalea blossoms to have a lethal effect upon him. Instead of a decent
lawn,  the  old  ladies  had  three  terraces  crammed  with  red  and  white  azaleas,
beginning  at  the  sidewalk  and  running  backwards  to  the  very  edge  of  their
imposing unpainted house. The two of them were on the front porch, one sitting,
the other standing.

“Here’s our baby!” his Aunt Bessie intoned in a voice meant to reach the other
one, two feet away but deaf. It turned the head of a girl in the next yard, who sat
cross-legged  under  a  tree,  reading.  She  raised  her  spectacled  face,  stared  at
Calhoun, and then returned her attention—with what he saw plainly was a smirk—
to  the  book.  Scowling,  he  passed  stolidly  on  to  the  porch  to  get  over  the
preliminaries with his aunts. They would take his voluntary presence in Partridge
at Azalea Festival time to be a sign that his character was improving.

They were box-jawed old ladies who looked like George Washington with his
wooden teeth in. They wore black suits with large ruffled jabots and had dead-
white hair pulled back. After each had embraced him, he dropped limply into a
rocker and gave them a sheepish smile. He was here only because Singleton had
captured his imagination, but he had told his Aunt Bessie over the telephone that
he was coming to enjoy the festival.

The deaf one, Aunt Mattie, shouted, “Your great-grandfather would have been
delighted  to  see  you  taking  an  interest  in  the  festival,  Calhoun.  He  initiated  it
himself, you know.”

“Well,” the boy yelled back, “what about the little extra excitement you’ve had

this time?”

Ten days before the festival began, a man named Singleton had been tried by a
mock  court  on  the  courthouse  lawn  for  not  buying  an  Azalea  Festival  Badge.
During the trial he had been imprisoned in a pair of stocks and when convicted, he

had  been  locked  in  the  “jail”  together  with  a  goat  that  had  been  tried  and
convicted  previously  for  the  same  offense.  The  “jail”  was  an  outdoor  privy
borrowed for the occasion by the Jaycees. Ten days later, Singleton had appeared
in a side door on the courthouse porch and with a silent automatic pistol, had shot
five of the dignitaries seated there and by mistake one person in the crowd. The
innocent man received the bullet intended for the mayor who at that moment had
reached down to pull up the tongue of his shoe.

“An unfortunate incident,” his Aunt Mattie said. “It mars the festive spirit.”
He heard the girl on the other lawn slam her book. The top of her rose into
view  above  the  hedge—a  sloping-forward  neck  and  a  small  face  with  a  fierce
expression, which she trained briefly on them before she disappeared. “It doesn’t
seem to have marred anything,” he said. “As I passed through town I saw more
people than ever before and all the flags were up. Partridge,” he shouted, “will
bury  its  dead  but  will  not  lose  a  nickel.”  The  girl’s  front  door  slammed  in  the
middle of the sentence.

His Aunt  Bessie  had  gone  into  the  house  and  come  out  again  with  a  small
leather box. “You look very like Father,” she said and pulled up her chair beside
him.

Without enthusiasm Calhoun opened the box, which shed a rust-colored dust
over his knees, and removed the miniature of his great-grandfather. He was shown
this  every 
time  he  came.  The  old  man—round-faced,  bald,  altogether
unremarkable-looking—sat  with  his  hands  knotted  on  the  head  of  a  black  stick.
His  expression  was  all  innocence  and  determination.  The  master  merchant,  the
boy  thought,  and  flinched.  “And  what  would  this  stalwart  worthy  think  of
Partridge today,” he asked wryly, “with its festival in full swing after six citizens
have been shot?”

“Father was progressive,” his Aunt Bessie said, “—the most forward-looking
merchant Partridge ever had. He would either have been one of the prominent men
shot or he would have been the one to subdue the maniac.”

The boy did not know how much of this he could stand. In the paper there had
been pictures of the six “victims” and one of Singleton. Singleton’s was the only
distinctive face in the lot. It was broad but bony and bleak. One eye was more

nearly  round  than  the  other  and  in  the  more  nearly  round  one  Calhoun  had
recognized the composure of the man who knows he will and who is willing to
suffer for the right to be himself. A calculating contempt lurked in the regular eye
but in the general expression there was the tortured look of the man who becomes
maddened  finally  by  the  madness  around  him.  The  other  six  faces  were  of  the
same general stamp as his great-grandfather’s.

“As you get older, you’ll look more and more like Father,” his Aunt Mattie

prophesied. “You have his ruddy complexion and much the same expression.”

“I’m a different type entirely,” he said stiffly.
“Peaches and cream,” his Aunt Bessie guffawed. “You’re getting a little pot-
tummy too,” she said and took a lunge at his middle with her fist. “How old is our
baby now?”

“Twenty-three,” he muttered, thinking that it could not go on like this for the

whole visit, that once they had roughed him up a bit, they would leave off.

“And do you have a girl?” his Aunt Mattie asked.
“No,” he said wearily. “I take it,” he went on, “that around here Singleton is

considered nothing but a mental case?”

“Yes,” his Aunt Bessie said, “—peculiar. He never conformed. He was not

like the rest of us here.”

“A terrible drawback,” the boy said. Though his eyes were not mismatched,
the shape  of  his  face  was  broad  like  Singleton’s;  but  the  real  likeness  between
them was interior.

“Since he is insane, he is not responsible,” his Aunt Bessie said.
The  boy’s  eyes  brightened.  He  sat  forward  and  fixed  the  old  lady  with  a

narrow gaze. “And where then,” he asked, “does the real guilt lie?”

“Father’s head was as smooth as an infant’s by the time he was thirty,” she
said. “You had better hurry and get you a girl. Ha ha. What are you going to do
with yourself now?”

He reached into his pocket and withdrew his pipe and a sack of tobacco. You
could  not  ask  them  questions  in  depth.  They  were  both  good  low-church
Episcopalians but they had amoral imaginations. “I think I shall write,” he said
and began to load the bowl.

“Well,” his Aunt Bessie said, “that’s fine. Maybe you’ll be another  Margaret

Mitchell.”

“I hope you’ll do us justice,” his Aunt Mattie shouted. “Few do.”
“I’ll do you justice all right,” he said grimly. “I’m writing an expos.…” He
stopped and put the pipe in his mouth and sat back. It would be ridiculous to tell
them. He removed the pipe and said, “Well, that’s too much to go into. It wouldn’t
interest you ladies.”

His  Aunt  Bessie  inclined  her  head  significantly.  “Calhoun,”  she  said,  “we
wouldn’t want to be disappointed in you.” They eyed him as if it had just occurred
to them that the pet snake they had been fondling might after all be poisonous.

“Know the truth,” the boy said with his fiercest look, “and the truth shall make

you free.”

They appeared reassured at his quoting Scripture. “Isn’t he sweet,” his Aunt

Mattie asked, “with his little pipe?”

“Better get you a girl, boy,” his Aunt Bessie said.

*   *   *

He escaped them in a few minutes and took his bag upstairs and then came down
again, ready to go out and immerse himself in his material. His intention was to
spend  the  afternoon  interviewing  people  about  Singleton.  He  expected  to  write
something that would vindicate the madman and he expected the writing of it to
mitigate his own guilt, for his doubleness, his shadow, was cast before him more
darkly than usual in the light of Singleton’s purity.

For the three summer months of the year, he lived with his parents and sold
air-conditioners, boats, and refrigerators so that for the other nine months he could
afford  to  meet  life  naturally  and  bring  his  real  self—the  rebel-artist-mystic—to
birth.  During  these  other  months  he  lived  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  city  in  an
unheated  walk-up  with  two  other  boys  who  also  did  nothing.  But  guilt  for  the
summer pursued him into the winter; the fact was, he could have fared without the
orgy of selling he cast himself into in the summer.

When he had explained to them that he despised their values, his parents had
looked  at  each  other  with  a  gleam  of  recognition  as  if  this  were  what  they  had

been expecting from what they had read, and his father had offered to give him a
small  allowance  to  finance  the  flat.  He  had  refused  it  for  the  sake  of  his
independence,  but  in  the  depths  of  himself,  he  knew  it  was  not  for  his
independence  but  because  he enjoyed selling. In the face of a customer, he was
carried outside himself; his face began to beam and sweat and all complexity left
him; he was in the grip of a drive as strong as the drive of some men for liquor or
a woman; and he was horribly good at it. He was so good at it that the company
had given him an achievement scroll. He had put quotation marks around the word
achievement and he and his friends used the scroll as a target for darts.

As soon as he had seen Singleton’s picture in the paper, the face began to burn
in his imagination like a dark reproachful liberating star. The next morning he had
telephoned his aunts to expect him and he had driven the hundred and fifty miles to
Partridge in a little short of four hours.

On his way out of the house, his Aunt Bessie halted him and said, “Be back by

six, Baby Lamb, and we’ll have a sweet surprise for you.”
“Rice pudding?” he asked. They were terrible cooks.
“Sweeter by far!” the old lady said and rolled her eyes. He hastened away.
The girl next door had returned with her book to the lawn. He suspected that
he might be supposed to know her. When he came for visits as a child, his aunts
had always produced one of the neighbor’s freak children to play with him—once
a fat moron in a Girl Scout suit, another time a near-sighted boy who recited Bible
verses, and another an almost square girl who had blackened his eye and left. He
thanked God he was now grown and they would no longer dare to fill his time for
him. The girl did not look up as he passed and he did not speak.

Once  on  the  sidewalk,  he  was  affected  by  the  profusion  of  azaleas.  They
seemed  to  wash  in  tides  of  color  across  the  lawns  until  they  surged  against  the
white house-fronts, crests of pink and crimson, crests of white and a mysterious
shade that was not yet lavender, wild crests of yellow-red. The profusion of color
almost stopped his breath with insidious pleasure. Moss hung from the old trees.
The houses were the most picturesque types of run-down ante-bellum. The taint of
the place was expressed in his great-grandfather’s words which had survived as
the town’s motto: Beauty is Our Money Crop.

His aunts lived five blocks from the business section. He walked them quickly
and came after a few minutes to the edge of the bare commercial scene, which had
the ramshackle courthouse for its center. The sun beat down fiercely on the tops of
cars  parked  in  every  available  space.  Flags,  national,  state  and  confederate,
flapped  on  every  corner  street  light.  People  milled  about.  On  the  quiet  shaded
street where his aunts lived and the azaleas were best, he had not passed three
people,  but  here  they  all  were,  staring  avidly  at  the  pathetic  store  displays  and
moving with languid reverence past the courthouse porch, the spot where blood
had been spilled.

He wondered if any of them might think he was here for the same reason they
were. He would have liked to start, in Socratic fashion, a street discussion about
where the real guilt for the six deaths lay, but as he surveyed the scene, he saw no
one who looked capable of any genuine interest in meaning. Without set purpose,
he entered a drugstore. The place was dark and smelled of sour vanilla.

He sat down on the high stool at the counter and ordered a limeade. The boy
preparing  the  drink  had  elaborate  red  sideburns  and  wore  on  his  shirtfront  an
Azalea  Festival  Badge—the  emblem  which  Singleton  had  refused  to  buy.
Calhoun’s eye fell on it at once. “I see you’ve paid your tribute to the god,” he
said.

The boy did not seem to get the significance of this.
“The badge,” Calhoun said, “the badge.”
The boy looked down at it and then back at Calhoun. He put the drink on the
counter  and  continued  to  look  at  him  as  if  he  were  serving  someone  with  an
interesting deformity.

“Are you enjoying the festive spirit?” Calhoun asked.
“All these doings?” the boy said.
“These grand events,” Calhoun said, “commencing with, I believe, six deaths.”
“Yessir,” the boy said, “six in cold blood. And I knew four of them myself.”
“You  too  have  had  your  share  of  the  glory  then,”  Calhoun  said.  He  felt
suddenly a distinct hush fall on the street outside. He turned his eyes to the door
just in time to see a hearse pass, followed by a line of slowly moving cars.

“That’s the man that’s having his funeral to himself,” the boy said reverently.

“The five that were supposed to get shot had theirs yesterday. One big one. But he
didn’t die in time for it.”

“They have innocent as well as guilty blood on their hands,” Calhoun said and

glared at the boy.

“It  wasn’t  no they,”  the  boy  said.  “One  man  done  it  all.  A  man  named

Singleton. He was bats.”

“Singleton was only the instrument,” Calhoun said. “Partridge itself is guilty.”

He finished his drink in a gulp and put down the glass.

The boy was looking at him as if he were mad. “Patridge can’t shoot nobody,”

he said in a high exasperated voice.

Calhoun put his dime on the counter and left. The last car had turned at the end
of the block. He thought he observed less activity. People had obviously hastened
away at the sight of the hearse. Two doors from him an old man leaned out of a
hardware  store  and  glared  up  the  street  where  the  procession  had  disappeared.
Calhoun’s  need  to  communicate  was  urgent.  He  approached  diffidently.  “I
understand that was the last funeral,” he said.

The old man put a hand behind his ear.
“The funeral of the innocent man,” Calhoun shouted and nodded up the street.
The old man cleared his nostrils loudly. His expression was not affable. “The
only  bullet  that  went  right,”  he  said  in  a  rasping  voice.  “Biller  was  a  wastrel.
Drunk at the time.”

The  boy  scowled.  “I  suppose  the  other  five  were  heroes?”  he  suggested

archly.

“Fine men,” the old man said. “Perished in the line of duty. We givem a hero’s
fu’nel—all five in one big service. Biller’s folks tried to rush up the undertaker so
they could get Biller in on it but we saw to it Biller didn’t make it. Would have
been a disgrace.”

My God, the boy thought.
“The only thing Singleton ever did good was to rid us of Biller,” the old man
continued. “Now somebody ought to rid us of Singleton. There he is at Quincy,
living in the laper luxury, laying in a cool bed at no expense, eating up your taxes
and mine. They should have shot him on the spot.”

This was so appalling that Calhoun was speechless.
“Going to keep him there, they ought to charge him board,” the old man said.
With a contemptuous glance, the boy walked off. He crossed the street to the
courthouse  square,  moving  at  an  odd  angle  in  order  to  put  as  much  distance
between  himself  and  the  old  fool  as  quickly  as  possible.  Here  benches  were
scatterd beneath the trees. He found an unoccupied one and sat down. To the side
of the courthouse steps, several viewers stood admiring the “jail” where Singleton
had been locked with the goat. The pathos of his friend’s situation was borne in on
him with a rush of empathy. He felt himself flung in the privy, the padlock clicked,
he glared between the rotting planks at the fools howling and cavorting outside.
The goat made an obscene noise; he saw that he was confined with the spirit of the
community.

“Six men was shot here,” an odd muffled voice close by said.
The boy jumped.
A  small  white  girl  whose  tongue  was  curled  in  the  mouth  of  a  Coca-Cola
bottle was sitting in a patch of sand at his feet, watching him with a detached gaze.
Her eyes were the same green as the bottle. She was barefooted and had straight
white hair. She withdrew her tongue from the bottle with an explosive sound. “A
bad man did it,” she said.

The boy felt the kind of frustration that accompanies contact with the certainty

of children. “No,” he said, “he was not a bad man.”

The child put her tongue back in the bottle and withdrew it silently, her eyes

on him.

“People were not good to him,” he explained. “They were mean to him. They

were cruel. What would you do if someone were cruel to you?”

“Shoot them,” she said.
“Well, that’s what he did,” Calhoun said, frowning.
She continued to sit there and did not take her eyes off him. Her gaze might

have been the depthless gaze of Partridge itself.

“You people persecuted him and finally drove him mad,” the boy said. “He
wouldn’t  buy  a  badge.  Was  that  a  crime?  He  was  the  Outsider  here  and  you
couldn’t stand that. One of the fundamental rights of man,” he said, glaring through

the child’s transparent stare, “is the right not to behave like a fool. The right to be
different,” he said hoarsely, “My God. The right to be yourself.”

Without  taking  her  eyes  off  him,  she  lifted  one  of  her  feet  and  set  it  on  her

knee.

“He was a bad bad bad man,” she said.
Calhoun  got  up  and  walked  off,  glaring  in  front  of  him.  His  indignation
swathed  his  vision  in  a  kind  of  haze.  He  saw  none  of  the  activity  around  him
distinctly. Two high school girls in bright skirts and jackets swung into his path
and  shrilled,  “Buy  a  ticket  for  the  beauty  contest  tonight.  See  who’ll  be  Miss
Partridge Azalea!”  He  swerved  sharply  to  the  side  and  did  not  throw  them  so
much as a glance. Their giggles followed him until he was past the courthouse and
onto the block behind it. He stood there a moment, undecided what he would do
next. He faced a barber shop which looked empty and cool. After a moment  he
entered it.

The barber, alone in the shop, raised his head from behind the paper he was

reading. Calhoun asked for a haircut and sat down gratefully in the chair.

The barber was a tall emaciated fellow with eyes that might have faded from
some deeper color. He looked to be a man who had suffered himself. He put the
bib on the boy and stood staring at his round head as if it were a pumpkin he was
wondering  how  to  slice.  Then  he  twirled  the  chair  so  that  Calhoun  faced  the
mirror.  He  was  confronted  with  an  image  that  was  round-faced,  unremarkable-
looking and innocent. The boy’s expression turned fierce. “Are you eating up this
slop like the rest of them?” he asked belligerently.

“Come again?” the barber said.
“Do the tribal rites going on here improve the barber trade? All these doings,

all these doings,” he said impatiently.

“Well,” the barber said, “last year it was a thousand extra people here and this

year it looks to be more—on account,” he said, “of the tragedy.”

“The tragedy,” the boy repeated and stretched his mouth.
“The six that was shot,” the barber said.
“That tragedy,” the boy said. “And what about the other tragedy—the man who

was persecuted by these idiots until he shot six of them?”

“Oh him,” the barber said.
“Singleton,” the boy said. “Did he patronize your place?”
The barber began clipping his hair. A peculiar expression of disdain had come
over his face at the mention of the name. “Tonight it’s a beauty contest,” he said,
“tomorrow  night  it’s  a  band  concert,  Thursday  afternoon  it’s  a  big  parade  with
Miss.…”

“Did you or didn’t you know Singleton?” Calhoun interrupted.
“Known him well,” the barber said and shut his mouth.
A tremor went through the boy as he realized that Singleton had probably sat in
the  chair  he  himself  was  now  sitting  in.  He  searched  his  face  in  the  mirror
desperately for its hidden likeness to the man. Slowly he saw it appear, a secret
message brought to light by the heat of his feelings. “Did he patronize your shop?”
he asked and held his breath for the answer.

“Him and me was related by marriage,” the barber said indignantly, “but he
never  come  in  here.  He  was  too  big  a  skinflint  to  have  his  hair  cut.  He  cut  his
own.”

“An unpardonable crime,” Calhoun said in a high voice.
“His second cousin married my sister-in-law,” the barber said, “but he never
known me on the street. Pass him as close as I am to you and he’d keep going.
Kept his eye on the ground all the time like he was following a bug.”

“Preoccupied,” the boy muttered. “He doubtless didn’t know you were on the

street.”

“He known it,” the barber said and his mouth curled unpleasantly. “He known
it. I clip hair and he clipped coupons and that was that. I clip hair,” he repeated as
if  this  sentence  had  a  particularly  satisfying  ring  to  his  ears,  “and  he  clipped
coupons.”

The typical have-not psychology, Calhoun thought. “Was the Singleton family

once wealthy?” he asked.

“It  wasn’t  but  half  of  him  Singleton,”  the  barber  said,  “and  the  Singleton’s
claimed there wasn’t none of him Singleton. One of the Singleton girls gone off on
a nine-months vacation and come back with him. Then they all died off and left
him their money. It’s no telling what the other half of him is. Something foreign I

would judge.” His tone insinuated more.

“I begin to get the picture,” Calhoun said.
“He ain’t clipping no coupons now,” said the barber.
“No,”  Calhoun  said  and  his  voice  rose,  “now  he’s  suffering.  He’s  the
scapegoat. He’s laden with the sins of the community. Sacrificed for the guilt of
others.”

The barber paused, his mouth partway open. After a moment he said in a more
respectful voice, “Reverend, you got him wrong. He wasn’t a church-going man.”

The boy reddened. “I’m not a church-going man myself,” he said.
The barber seemed stopped again. He stood holding the scissors uncertainly.
“He  was  an  individualist,”  Calhoun  said.  “A  man  who  would  not  allow
himself to be pressed into the mold of his inferiors. A non-conformist. He was a
man of depth living among caricatures and they finally drove him mad, unleashed
all his violence on themselves. Observe,” he continued, “that they didn’t try him.
They simply had him committed at once to Quincy. Why? Because,” he said, “a
trial  would  have  brought  out  his  essential  innocence  and  the  real  guilt  of  the
community.”

The barber’s face lightened. “You’re a lawyer, ain’t you?” he asked.
“No,” the boy said sullenly. “I’m a writer.”
“Ohhh,” the barber murmured. “I known it must be something like that.” After

a moment he said, “What you written?”

“He never married?” Calhoun went on rudely. “He lived alone in the Singleton

place in the country?”

“What there was of it,” the barber said. “He wouldn’t have spent a nickel to
keep it from falling down and no woman wouldn’t have had him. That was the one
thing he always had to pay for,” he said and made a vulgar noise in his cheek.

“You  know  because  you  were  always  there,”  the  boy  said,  barely  able  to

control his disgust for this bigot.

“Naw,” the barber said, “it was just common knowledge. I clip hair,” he said,
“but I don’t live like a hog, I got plumbing in my house and a refrigerator that spits
ice cubes into my wife’s hand.”

“He was not a materialist,” Calhoun said. “There were things that meant more

to him than plumbing. Independence, for instance.”

“Ha,” the barber snorted. “He wasn’t so independent. Once lightning almost
struck him and those that saw it said you should have seen him run. Took off like
bees  were  swarming  in  his  pants.  They  liked  to  died  laughing,”  and  he  gave  a
hyena-like laugh himself and slapped his knee.

“Loathsome,” the boy murmured.
“Another  time,”  the  barber  continued,  “somebody  went  out  there  and  put  a
dead cat in his well. Somebody was always doing something to see if they could
make him turn loose a little money. Another time…”

Calhoun began fighting his way out of the bib as if it were a net he was caught
in. When he was free of it, he thrust his hand in his pocket and brought out a dollar
which he flung on the startled barber’s shelf. Then he made for the door, letting it
slam behind him in judgment on the place.

The walk back to his aunts’ did not calm him. The colors of the azaleas had
deepened with the approach of sundown and the trees rustled protectively over the
old houses. No one here had a thought for Singleton, who lay on a cot in a filthy
ward at Quincy. The boy felt now in a concrete way the force of his innocence,
and  he  thought  that  to  do  justice  to  all  the  man  had  suffered,  he  would  have  to
write more than a simple article. He would have to write a novel; he would have
to show, not say, how primary injustice operated. Preoccupied with this, he went
four doors past his aunts’ house and had to turn and go back.

His Aunt Bessie met him at the door and drew him into the hall. “Told you
we’d  have  a  sweet  surprise  for  you!”  she  said,  pulling  him  by  the  arm  into  the
parlor.

On  the  sofa  sat  a  rangy-looking  girl  in  a  lime-green  dress.  “You  remember
Mary  Elizabeth,”  his  Aunt  Mattie  said,  “—the  cute  little  trick  you  took  to  the
picture show once when you were here.” Through his rage he recognized the girl
who  had  been  reading  under  the  tree.  “Mary  Elizabeth  is  home  for  her  spring
holidays,”  his Aunt  Mattie  said.  “Mary  Elizabeth  is  a  real  scholar,  aren’t  you,
Mary Elizabeth?”

Mary Elizabeth scowled, indicating she was indifferent to whether she was a
real scholar or not. She gave him a look which told him plainly she expected to

enjoy this no more than he did.

His Aunt Mattie gripped the knob of her cane and began to lift herself from her
chair.  “We’re  going  to  have  supper  early,”  the  other  one  said,  “because  Mary
Elizabeth is going to take you to the beauty contest and it begins at seven.”

“Great,” the boy said in a tone that would be lost on them but he hoped not on

Mary Elizabeth.

Throughout  the  meal  he  ignored  the  girl  completely.  His  repartee  with  his
aunts was markedly cynical but they did not have sense enough to understand his
allusions  and  laughed  like  idiots  at  everything  he  said.  Twice  they  called  him
“Baby Lamb” and the girl smirked. Otherwise she did nothing to suggest she was
enjoying herself. Her round face was still childish behind her glasses. Retarded,
Calhoun thought.

When the meal was over and they were on the way to the beauty contest, they
continued  to  say  nothing  to  each  other.  The  girl,  who  was  several  inches  taller
than he, walked slightly in advance of him as if she would like to lose him on the
way, but after two blocks she stopped abruptly and began to rummage in a large
grass bag she carried. She took out a pencil and held it between her teeth while
she continued to rummage. After a minute she brought up from the bottom of the
bag  two  tickets  and  a  stenographer’s  note  pad.  With  these  out,  she  closed  the
pocketbook and walked on.

“Are you going to take notes?” Calhoun inquired in a tone heavy with irony.
The  girl  looked  around  as  if  trying  to  identify  the  speaker.  “Yes,”  she  said,

“I’m going to take notes.”

“You  appreciate  this  sort  of  thing?”  Calhoun  asked  in  the  same  tone.  “You

enjoy it?”

“It  makes  me  vomit,”  she  said,  “I’m  going  to  finish  it  off  with  one  swift

literary kick.”

The boy looked at her blankly.
“Don’t  let  me  interfere  with  your  pleasure  in  it,”  she  said,  “but  this  whole
place is false and rotten to the core.” Her voice came with a hiss of indignation.
“They prostitute azaleas!”

Calhoun  was  astounded. After  a  moment  he  recovered  himself.  “It  takes  no

great mind to come to that conclusion,” he said haughtily. “What requires insight is
finding a way to transcend it.”

“You mean a form to express it in.”
“It comes to the same thing,” he said.
They walked the next two blocks in silence but both appeared shaken. When
the courthouse was in view they crossed the street to it and Mary Elizabeth stuck
the tickets at a boy who stood beside an entrance that had been formed by roping
in the rest of the square. People were beginning to assemble on the grass inside.

“And do we stand here while you take notes?” Calhoun asked.
The girl stopped and faced him. “Look, Baby Lamb,” she said, “you can do
what you please. I’m going up to my father’s office in the building where I can
work. You can stay down here and help select Miss Partridge Azalea if you want
to.”

“I shall come,” he said, controlling himself, “I’d like to observe a great female

writer taking notes.”

“Suit yourself,” she said.
He followed her up the courthouse steps and through a side door. His irritation
was so extreme that he did not realize he had passed through the very door where
Singleton  had  stood  to  shoot.  They  walked  through  an  empty  barnlike  hall  and
silently  up  a  flight  of  tobacco-stained  steps  into  another  barnlike  hall.  Mary
Elizabeth  rooted  in  the  grass  bag  for  a  key  and  then  unlocked  the  door  to  her
father’s office. They entered a large threadbare room lined with lawbooks. As if
he were an incompetent, the girl dragged two straight chairs from one wall to a
window that overlooked the porch. Then she sat down and stared out, apparently
absorbed at once in the scene below.

Calhoun sat down in the other chair. To annoy her he began to look her over
thoroughly. For what seemed at least five minutes, he did not take his eyes off her
as she leaned with her elbows in the window. He stared at her so long that he was
afraid her image would be etched forever on his retina. Finally he could stand the
silence no longer. “What is your opinion of Singleton?” he asked abruptly.

She raised her head and appeared to look through him. “A Christ-figure,” she

said.

The boy was stunned.
“I mean as myth,” she said scowling. “I’m not a Christian.” She returned her
attention to the scene outside. Below a bugle sounded. “Sixteen girls in bathing
suits are about to appear,” she drawled. “Surely this will be of interest to you?”

“Listen,” Calhoun said fiercely, “get this through your head. I’m not interested
in  the  damn  festival  or  the  damn  azalea  queen.  I’m  here  only  because  of  my
sympathy for Singleton. I’m going to write about him. Possibly a novel.”

“I  intend  to  write  a  non-fiction  study,”  the  girl  said  in  a  tone  that  made  it

evident fiction was beneath her.

They looked at each other with open and intense dislike. Calhoun felt that if he
probed sufficiently he would expose her essential shallowness. “Since our forms
are  different,”  he  said,  again  with  his  ironical  smile,  “we  might  compare
findings.”

“It’s  quite  simple,”  the  girl  said.  “He  was  the  scapegoat.  While  Partridge
flings itself about selecting Miss Partridge Azalea, Singleton suffers at Quincy. He
expiates…’”

“I  don’t  mean  your  abstract  findings,”  the  boy  said.  “I  mean  your  concrete
findings.  Have  you  ever  seen  him?  What  did  he  look  like?  The  novelist  is  not
interested in narrow abstractions—particularly when they’re obvious. He’s…”

“How many novels have you written?” she asked.
“This will be my first,” he said coldly. “Have you ever seen him?”
“No,”  she  said,  “that  isn’t  necessary  for  me.  What  he  looks  like  makes  no

difference—whether he has brown eyes or blue—that’s nothing to a thinker.”

“You  are  probably,”  he  said,  “afraid  to  look  at  him.  The  novelist  is  never

afraid to look at the real object.”

“I would not be afraid to look at him,” the girl said angrily, “if it were at all

necessary. Whether he has brown eyes or blue is nothing to me.”

“There is more to it,” Calhoun said, “than whether he has brown eyes or blue.
You might find your theories enriched by the sight of him. And I don’t mean by
finding  out  the  color  of  his  eyes.  I  mean  your  existential  encounter  with  his
personality. The mystery of personality,” he said, “is what interests the artist. Life
does not abide in abstractions.”

“Then  what’s  keeping  you  from  going  and  having  a  look  at  him?”  she  said.

“What are you asking me what he looks like for? Go see for yourself.”

The words fell on his head like a sack of rocks. After a moment he said, “Go

see for yourself? Go see where?”

“At Quincy,” the girl said. “Where do you think?”
“They wouldn’t let me see him,” he said. The suggestion was appalling to him;
for  some  reason  he  could  not  at  the  moment  understand,  it  struck  him  as
unthinkable.

“They  would  if  you  said  you  were  kin  to  him,”  she  said.  “It’s  only  twenty

miles from here. What’s to stop you?”

He  was  about  to  say,  “I’m  not  kin  to  him,”  but  he  stopped  and  reddened

furiously on the edge of the betrayal. They were spiritual kin.

“Go  see  whether  his  eyes  are  brown  or  blue  and  have  yourself  a  little  old

exis…”

“I take it,” he said, “that if I go you would like to go along? Since you aren’t

afraid to see him.”

The girl paled. “You won’t go,” she said. “You’re not up to the old exis…”
“I will go,” he said, seeing his opportunity to shut her up. “And if you care to
go with me, you can be at my aunts’ at nine in the morning. But I doubt,” he added,
“that I’ll see you there.”

She thrust forward her long neck and glared at him. “Oh yes you will,” she

said. “You’ll see me there.”

She returned her attention to the window and Calhoun looked at nothing. Each
seemed sunk suddenly  in  some  mammoth  private  problem.  Raucus  cheers  came
intermittently from outside. Every few minutes there was music and clapping but
neither took any notice of it, or of each other. Finally the girl pulled away from the
window and said, “If you’ve got the general idea, we can leave. I prefer  to  go
home and read.”

“I had the general idea before I came,” Calhoun said.

He saw her to her door and when he had left her, his spirits lifted dizzily for an

*   *   *

instant and then collapsed. He knew that the idea of going to see Singleton would
never have occurred to him alone. It would be a torturing experience, but it might
be his salvation. The sight of Singleton in  his  misery  might  cause  him  suffering
sufficient to raise him once and for all from his commercial instincts. Selling was
the  only  thing  he  had  proved  himself  good  at;  yet  it  was  impossible  for  him  to
believe that every man was not created equally an artist if he could but suffer and
achieve it. As for the girl, he doubted if the sight of Singleton would do anything
for her. She had that particular repulsive fanaticism peculiar to smart children—
all brain and no emotion.

He spent a restless night, dreaming in snatches of Singleton. At one point he
dreamed he was driving to Quincy to sell Singleton a refrigerator. When he awoke
in the morning, a slow rain was descending indifferently. He turned his head to the
gray window pane. He could not remember what he had dreamed but he sensed it
had been unpleasant. A vision of the girl’s flat face came to him. He thought of
Quincy and saw rows and rows of low red buildings with rough heads sticking out
of barred windows. He tried to concentrate on Singleton but his mind shied from
the thought. He did not wish to go to Quincy. He remembered that it was a novel
he was going to write. His desire to write a novel had gone down overnight like a
defective tire.

While he lay in bed, the drizzle turned into a steady downpour. The rain might
keep the girl from coming, or at least she might think she could use it as an excuse.
He decided to wait until exactly nine o’clock and if she had not shown up by then
to be off. He would not go to Quincy but would go home. It would be better to see
Singleton at a later date when he would perhaps have responded to treatment. He
got up and wrote the girl a note to be left with his aunts, saying he presumed she
had decided, upon consideration, that she was not equal to the experience. It was a
very concise note and he ended it, “Cordially yours.”

She  arrived  at  five  minutes  to  nine  and  stood  dripping  in  his  aunts’  hall,  a
tubular bundle of baby-blue plastic from which nothing showed but her face. She
was holding a damp paper sack and her large mouth was twisted in an uncertain
smile. Overnight she had apparently lost some of her self-assurance.

Calhoun  was  barely  able  to  be  polite.  His  aunts,  who  thought  this  was  a

romantic  outing  in  the  rain,  kissed  him  out  the  door  and  stood  on  the  porch
idotically waving their handkerchiefs until he and Mary Elizabeth were in the car
and gone.

The  girl  was  much  too  big  for  the  small  car.  She  kept  shifting  about  and
twisting inside her raincoat. “The rain has beat the azaleas down,” she observed
in a neutral tone.

Calhoun  rudely  kept  silent.  He  was  trying  to  obliterate  her  from  his
consciousness so that he could reestablish Singleton there. He had lost Singleton
completely.  The  rain  was  coming  down  in  gray  swaths.  When  they  reached  the
highway, they could barely see across the fields to a faint line of woods. The girl
kept  leaning  forward,  squinting  into  the  opaque  windshield.  “If  a  truck  were  to
come out of that,” she said with a gawkish laugh, “that would be the end of us.”

Calhoun stopped the car. “I’ll be glad to take you back and go on by myself,”

he said.

“I have to go,” she said hoarsely, staring at him. “I have to see him.” Behind
her  spectacles,  her  eyes  appeared  larger  than  they  should  have  been  and
suspiciously liquid. “I have to face this,” she said.

Roughly, he started the car again.
“You have to prove to yourself that you can stand there and watch a man be
crucified,” she said. “You have to go through it with him. I thought about  it  all
night.”

“It may give you,” Calhoun muttered, “a more balanced view of life.”
“This is personal,” she said. “You wouldn’t understand,” and she turned her

head to the window.

Calhoun tried to concentrate on Singleton. Feature by feature, he brought the
face together in his mind and each time he had it almost constructed, it fell apart
and  he  was  left  with  nothing.  He  drove  in  silence,  at  a  reckless  speed  as  if  he
would like to hit a hole in the road and see the girl go through the windshield.
Every now and then she blew her nose weakly. After fifteen miles or so the rain
slackened and stopped. The treeline on either side of them became black and clear
and  the  fields  intensely  green.  They  would  have  an  unmistakable  view  of  the
hospital grounds as soon as these should come in sight.

“Christ only had to take it three hours,” the girl said all at once in a high voice,

“but he’ll be in this place the rest of his life!”

Calhoun cut his eyes toward her. There was a fresh wet line down the side of
her face. He turned his eyes away, awed and furious. “If you can’t stand this,” he
said, “I can still take you home and come back by myself.”

“You wouldn’t come back by yourself,” she said, “and we’re almost there.”
She blew her nose. “I want him to know that somebody takes his side. I want to
say that to him no matter what it does to me.”

Through his rage, the terrible thought occurred to the boy that he would have to
say  something  to  Singleton.  What  could  he  say  to  him  in  the  presence  of  this
woman? She had shattered the communion between them. “We’ve come to listen I
hope  you  understand,”  he  burst  out,  “I  haven’t  driven  all  this  way  to  hear  you
startle Singleton with your wisdom. I’ve come to listen to him.”

“We should have brought a tape recorder!” she cried, “then we’d have what he

says all our lives!”

“You don’t have elementary understanding,” Calhoun said, “if you think you

approach a man like this with a tape recorder.”

“Stop!” she shrieked, leaning toward the windshield, “that’s it!”
Calhoun slammed on his brakes and looked forward wildly.
A cluster of low buildings, hardly noticeable, rose like a rich growth of warts

on the hill to their right.

The boy sat helpless while the car, as if of its own volition, turned and headed
toward  the  entrance.  The  letters QUINCY  STATE  HOSPITAL   were  cut  in  a  concrete
arch which it rolled effortlessly through.

“Abandon hope all ye who enter here,” the girl murmured.
They had to stop within a hundred yards of the gate while a fat white-capped
nurse led a line of patients, straggling like elderly schoolchildren, across the road
in  front  of  them. A  snaggle-toothed  woman  in  a  candy-striped  dress  and  black
wool hat shook her fist at them, and a baldheaded man waved energetically. A few
threw  malevolent  looks  as  the  line  shuffled  off  across  the  green  to  another
building.

After  a  moment  the  car  rolled  forward  again.  “Park  in  front  of  that  center

building,” Mary Elizabeth directed.

“They won’t let us see him,” he mumbled.
“Not if you have anything to do with it,” she said. “Park and let me out. I’ll
handle this.” Her cheek had dried and her voice was businesslike. He parked and
she  got  out.  He  watched  her  disappear  into  the  building,  thinking  with  grim
satisfaction that she would soon turn into a full-grown ogre—false intellect, false
emotions, maximum efficiency, all operating to produce the dominant hair-splitting
Ph.D. Another line of patients passed in the road and several of them pointed at
the small car. Calhoun did not look but he sensed he was being watched. “Hup up
there,” he heard the nurse say.

He looked again and gave a little cry. A gentle face, wrapped around with a
green hand towel, was in his window, smiling toothlessly but with an agonizing
tenderness.

“Get a move on, sweetie,” the nurse said and the face retreated.
The boy rolled his window up rapidly but his heart was wrenched. He saw
again  the  agonized  face  in  the  stocks—the  slightly  mismatched  eyes,  the  wide
mouth parted in a stifled useless cry. The vision lasted only a moment but when it
passed, he was certain that the sight of Singleton was going to effect a change in
him, that after this visit, some strange tranquility he had not before conceived of
would  be  his.  He  sat  for  ten  minutes  with  his  eyes  closed,  knowing  that  a
revelation was near and trying to prepare himself for it.

All at once the car door opened and the girl folded herself, panting, in beside
him. Her face was pale. She held up two green permission slips and pointed to the
names written on them: Calhoun Singleton on one, Mary Elizabeth Singleton on the
other. For a moment they stared at the slips, then at each other. Both appeared to
recognize that in their common kinship with him, a kinship with each other was
unavoidable. Generously, Calhoun held out his hand. She shook it. “He’s in the
fifth building to the left,” she said.

They drove to the fifth building and parked. It was a low red brick structure
with barred windows, like all the others except that the outside of it was streaked
with  black  stains.  In  one  window  two  hands  hung  out,  palms  downward.  Mary
Elizabeth opened the paper sack she had brought and began to take out presents for

Singleton. She had brought a box of candy, a carton of cigarettes and three books
—a Modern Library Thus Spake Zarathustra, a paperback Revolt of the Masses,
and a thin decorated volume of Housman. She handed the cigarettes and the candy
to Calhoun and got out of the car with the books herself. She started forward, but
halfway to the door she stopped and put her hand to her mouth. “I can’t take it,”
she murmured.

“Now now,” Calhoun said kindly. He put his hand on her back and gave her a

slight push and she began to move forward again.

They entered a stained linoleum-covered hall where a peculiar odor met them
at once like an invisible official. There was a desk facing the door, behind which
sat a frail harrassed-looking nurse whose eyes darted to right and left as if she
expected  ultimately  to  be  hit  from  behind.  Mary  Elizabeth  handed  her  the  two
green permits. The woman looked at them and groaned. “Go in yonder and wait,”
she  said  in  a  weary  insult-bearing  voice.  “He’ll  have  to  be  got  ready.  They
shouldn’t  have  give  you  these  slips  over  there.  What  do  they  know  about  what
goes on over here over there and what do them doctors care anyhow? If it was up
to me the ones that don’t cooperate wouldn’t see nobody.”

“We’re his kin,” Calhoun said. “We have every right to see him.”
The nurse threw her head back in a soundless laugh and went off muttering.
Calhoun put his hand on the girl’s back again and guided her into the waiting
room where they sat down close together on a mammoth black leather sofa which
faced an identical piece of furniture five feet away. There was nothing else in the
room but a rickety table in one corner with an empty white vase on it. A barred
window  cast  squares  of  damp  light  on  the  floor  at  their  feet.  There  seemed  an
intense stillness about them although the place was anything but quiet. From one
end of the building came a continuous mourning sound as delicate as the fluttering
wail  of  owls;  at  the  other  end  they  heard  rocketing  peals  of  laughter.  Closer  at
hand, a steady montonous cursing broke the silence around it with a machine-like
regularity. Each noise seemed to exist isolated from every other.

The two sat together as if they were waiting for some momentous event in their
lives—a  marriage  or  instantaneous  deaths.  They  seemed  already  joined  in  a
predestined convergence. At the same instant each made an involuntary motion as

if  to  run  but  it  was  too  late.  Heavy  footsteps  were  almost  at  the  door  and  the
machine-like curses were bearing down.

Two  burly  attendants  entered  with  Singleton  spider-like  between  them.  He
was holding his feet high up off the floor so that the atendants had to carry him. It
was from him the curses were coming. He had on a hospital gown of the type that
opens and ties up the back and his feet were stuck in black shoes from which the
laces had been removed. On his head was a black hat, not the kind countrymen
wear, but a black derby hat such as might be worn by a gunman in the movies. The
two  attendants  came  up  to  the  empty  sofa  from  behind  and  swung  him  over  the
back of it, then still holding him, each passed around the sofa arms and sat down
beside him, grinning. They might have been twins for though one was blond and
the other bald, they had identical looks of good-natured stupidity.

As for Singleton, he fixed Calhoun with his green slightly mismatched eyes.
“Whadaya  want  with  me?”  he  shrilled.  “Speak  up!  My  time  is  valuable.”  They
were almost exactly the eyes that Calhoun had seen in the paper, except that the
penetrating gleam in them had a slight reptilian quality.

The boy sat mesmerized.
After a moment, Mary Elizabeth said in a slow, hoarse, barely audible voice,

“We came to say we understand.”

The  old  man’s  glare  shifted  to  her  and  for  one  instant  his  eyes  remained
absolutely  still  like  the  eyes  of  a  treetoad  that  has  sighted  its  prey.  His  throat
appeared  to  swell.  “Ahhh,”  he  said  as  if  he  had  just  swallowed  something
pleasant, “eeeee.”

“Mind out now, dad,” one of the attendants said.
“Lemme  sit  with  her,”  Singleton  said  and  jerked  his  arm  away  from  the

attendant, who caught it again at once. “She knows what she wants.”
“Let him sit with her,” the blond attendant said, “she’s his niece.”
“No,” the bald one said, “keep aholt to him. He’s liable to pull off his frock.

You know him.”

But the other one had already let one of his wrists loose and Singleton was
leaning  outward  toward  Mary  Elizabeth,  straining  away  from  the  attendant  who
held  him.  The  girl’s  eyes  were  glazed  The  old  man  began  to  make  suggestive

noises through his teeth.

“Now now, dad,” the idle attendant said.
“It’s not every girl gets a chance at me,” Singleton said. “Listen here, sister,
I’m well-fixed. There’s nobody in Partridge I can’t skin. I own the place—as well
as this hotel.” His hand grasped toward her knee.

The girl gave a small stifled cry.
“And I got others elsewhere,” he panted. “You and me are two of a kind. We
ain’t in their class. You’re a queen. I’ll put you on a float!” and at that moment he
got  his  wrist  free  and  lunged  toward  her  but  both  attendants  sprang  after  him
instantly.  As  Mary  Elizabeth  crouched  against  Calhoun,  the  old  man  jumped
nimbly over the sofa and began to speed around the room. The attendants, their
arms and legs held wide apart to catch him, tried to close in on him from either
side. They almost had him when he kicked off his shoes and leaped between them
onto  the  table,  sending  the  empty  vase  shattering  to  the  floor.  “Look  girl!”  he
shrilled and began to pull the hospital gown over his head.

Mary Elizabeth was already dashing out the room and Calhoun ran behind her
and  thrust  open  the  door  just  in  time  to  prevent  her  crashing  into  it.  They
scrambled into the car and the boy drove it away as if his heart were the motor
and would never go fast enough. The sky was bone-white and the slick highway
stretched before them like a piece of the earth’s exposed nerve. After five miles
Calhoun pulled the car to the side of the road and stopped from exhaustion. They
sat silently, looking at nothing until finally they turned and looked at each other.
There each saw at once the likeness of their kinsman and flinched. They looked
away  and  then  back,  as  if  with  concentration  they  might  find  a  more  tolerable
image. To Calhoun, the girl’s face seemed to mirror the nakedness of the sky. In
despair he leaned closer until he was stopped by a miniature visage which rose
incorrigibly  in  her  spectacles  and  fixed  him  where  he  was.  Round,  innocent,
undistinguished  as  an  iron  link,  it  was  the  face  whose  gift  of  life  had  pushed
straight  forward  to  the  future  to  raise  festival  after  festival.  Like  a  master
salesman, it seemed to have been waiting there from all time to claim him.

The Lame Shall Enter First

SHEPPARD sat on a stool at the bar that divided the kitchen in half, eating his cereal
out of the individual pasteboard box it came in. He ate mechanically, his eyes on
the  child,  who  was  wandering  from  cabinet  to  cabinet  in  the  panelled  kitchen,
collecting  the  ingredients  for  his  breakfast.  He  was  a  stocky  blond  boy  of  ten.
Sheppard kept his intense blue eyes fixed on him. The boy’s future was written in
his  face.  He  would  be  a  banker.  No,  worse.  He  would  operate  a  small  loan
company.  All  he  wanted  for  the  child  was  that  he  be  good  and  unselfish  and
neither seemed likely. Sheppard was a young man whose hair was already white.
It stood up like a narrow brush halo over his pink sensitive face.

The boy approached the bar with the jar of peanut butter under his arm, a plate
with a quarter of a small chocolate cake on it in one hand and the ketchup bottle in
the other. He did not appear to notice his father. He climbed up on the stool and
began  to  spread  peanut  butter  on  the  cake.  He  had  very  large  round  ears  that
leaned away from his head and seemed to pull his eyes slightly too far apart. His
shirt was green but so faded that the cowboy charging across the front of it was
only a shadow.

“Norton,” Sheppard said, “I saw Rufus Johnson yesterday. Do you know what

he was doing?”

The child looked at him with a kind of half attention, his eyes forward but not
yet engaged. They were a paler blue than his father’s as if they might have faded
like the shirt; one of them listed, almost imperceptibly, toward the outer rim.

“He was in an alley,” Sheppard said, “and he had his hand in a garbage can.
He was trying to get something to eat out of it.” He paused to let this soak in. “He
was hungry,” he finished, and tried to pierce the child’s conscience with his gaze.
The boy picked up the piece of chocolate cake and began to gnaw it from one

corner.

“Norton,” Sheppard said, “do you have any idea what it means to share?”
A flicker of attention. “Some of it’s yours,” Norton said

“Some of it’s his,” Sheppard said heavily. It was hopeless. Almost any fault
would have been preferable to selfishness—a violent temper, even a tendency to
lie.

The  child  turned  the  bottle  of  ketchup  upside  down  and  began  thumping

ketchup onto the cake.

Sheppard’s  look  of  pain  increased.  “You  are  ten  and  Rufus  Johnson  is
fourteen,” he said. “Yet I’m sure your shirts would fit Rufus.” Rufus Johnson was
a boy he had been trying to help at the reformatory for the past year. He had been
released  two  months  ago.  “When  he  was  in  the  reformatory,  he  looked  pretty
good, but when I saw him yesterday, he was skin and bones. He hasn’t been eating
cake with peanut butter on it for breakfast.”

The child paused. “It’s stale,” he said. “That’s why I have to put stuff on it.”
Sheppard turned his face to the window at the end of the bar. The side lawn,
green and even, sloped fifty feet or so down to a small suburban wood. When his
wife was living, they had often eaten outside, even breakfast, on the grass. He had
never noticed then that the child was selfish. “Listen to me,” he said, turning back
to him, “look at me and listen.”

The boy looked at him. At least his eyes were forward.
“I gave Rufus a key to this house when he left the reformatory—to show my
confidence  in  him  and  so  he  would  have  a  place  he  could  come  to  and  feel
welcome any time. He didn’t use it, but I think he’ll use it now because he’s seen
me and he’s hungry. And if he doesn’t use it, I’m going out and find him and bring
him here. I can’t see a child eating out of garbage cans.”

The  boy  frowned.  It  was  dawning  upon  him  that  something  of  his  was

threatened.

Sheppard’s  mouth  stretched  in  disgust.  “Rufus’s  father  died  before  he  was
born,”  he  said.  “His  mother  is  in  the  state  penitentiary.  He  was  raised  by  his
grandfather in a shack without water or electricity and the old man beat him every
day. How would you like to belong to a family like that?”

“I don’t know,” the child said lamely.
“Well, you might think about it sometime,” Sheppard said.
Sheppard  was  City  Recreational  Director.  On  Saturdays  he  worked  at  the

reformatory as a counselor, receiving nothing for it but the satisfaction of knowing
he was helping boys no one else cared about. Johnson was the most intelligent boy
he had worked with and the most deprived.

Norton turned what was left of the cake over as if he no longer wanted it.
“Maybe he won’t come,” the child said and his eyes brightened slightly.
“Think of everything you have that he doesn’t!” Sheppard said. “Suppose you
had to root in garbage cans for food? Suppose you had a huge swollen foot and
one side of you dropped lower than the other when you walked?”

The boy looked blank, obviously unable to imagine such a thing.
“You have a healthy body,” Sheppard said, “a good home. You’ve never been
taught anything but the truth. Your daddy gives you everything you need and want.
You don’t have a grandfather who beats you. And your mother is not in the state
penitentiary.”

The child pushed his plate away. Sheppard groaned aloud.
A knot of flesh appeared below the boy’s suddenly distorted mouth. His face
became a mass of lumps with slits for eyes. “If she was in the penitentiary,” he
began in a kind of racking bellow, “I could go to seeeeee her.” Tears rolled down
his face and the ketchup dribbled on his chin. He looked as if he had been hit in
the mouth. He abandoned himself and howled.

Sheppard  sat  helpless  and  miserable,  like  a  man  lashed  by  some  elemental
force of nature. This was not a normal grief. It was all part of his selfishness. She
had been dead for over a year and a child’s grief should not last so long. “You’re
going on eleven years old,” he said reproachfully.

The child began an agonizing high-pitched heaving noise.
“If you stop thinking about yourself and think what you can do for somebody

else,” Sheppard said, “then you’ll stop missing your mother.”

The  boy  was  silent  but  his  shoulders  continued  to  shake.  Then  his  face

collapsed and he began to howl again.

“Don’t you think I’m lonely without her too?” Sheppard said. “Don’t you think
I miss her at all? I do, but I’m not sitting around moping. I’m busy helping other
people. When do you see me just sitting around thinking about my troubles?”
The boy slumped as if he were exhausted but fresh tears streaked his face.

“What  are  you  going  to  do  today?”  Sheppard  asked,  to  get  his  mind  on

something else.

The child ran his arm across his eyes. “Sell seeds,” he mumbled.
Always selling something. He had four quart jars full of nickels and dimes he
had saved and he took them out of his closet every few days and counted them.
“What are you selling seeds for?”

“To win a prize.”
“What’s the prize?”
“A thousand dollars.”
“And what would you do if you had a thousand dollars?”
“Keep it,” the child said and wiped his nose on his shoulder.
“I  feel  sure  you  would,”  Sheppard  said.  “Listen,”  he  said  and  lowered  his
voice  to  an  almost  pleading  tone,  “suppose  by  some  chance  you  did  win  a
thousand  dollars.  Wouldn’t  you  like  to  spend  it  on  children  less  fortunate  than
yourself? Wouldn’t you like to give some swings and trapezes to the orphanage?
Wouldn’t you like to buy poor Rufus Johnson a new shoe?”

The boy began to back away from the bar. Then suddenly he leaned forward
and hung with his mouth open over his plate. Sheppard groaned again. Everything
came up, the cake, the peanut butter, the ketchup—a limp sweet batter. He hung
over it gagging, more came, and he waited with his mouth open over the plate as if
he expected his heart to come up next.

“It’s all right,” Sheppard said, “it’s all right. You couldn’t help it. Wipe your

mouth and go lie down.”

The  child  hung  there  a  moment  longer.  Then  he  raised  his  face  and  looked

blindly at his father.

“Go on,” Sheppard said. “Go on and lie down.”
The boy pulled up the end of his t-shirt and smeared his mouth with it. Then he

climbed down off the stool and wandered out of the kitchen.

Sheppard sat there staring at the puddle of half-digested food. The sour odor
reached him and he drew back. His gorge rose. He got up and carried the plate to
the sink and turned the water on it and watched grimly as the mess ran down the
drain.  Johnson’s  sad  thin  hand  rooted  in  garbage’  cans  for  food  while  his  own

child, selfish, unresponsive, greedy, had so much that he threw it up. He cut off the
faucet with a thrust of his fist. Johnson had a capacity for real response and had
been deprived of everything from birth; Norton was average or below and had had
every advantage.

He went back to the bar to finish his breakfast. The cereal was soggy in the
cardboard box but he paid no attention to what he was eating. Johnson was worth
any amount of effort because he had the potential. He had seen it from the time the
boy had limped in for his first interview.

Sheppard’s office at the reformatory was a narrow closet with one window
and a small table and two chairs in it. He had never been inside a confessional but
he  thought  it  must  be  the  same  kind  of  operation  he  had  here,  except  that  he
explained, he did not absolve. His credentials were less dubious than a priest’s;
he had been trained for what he was doing.

When Johnson came in for his first interview, he had been reading over the
boy’s record—senseless destruction, windows smashed, city trash boxes set afire,
tires  slashed—the  kind  of  thing  he  found  where  boys  had  been  transplanted
abruptly from the county to the city as this one had. He came to Johnson’s I. Q.
score. It was 140. He raised his eyes eagerly.

The boy sat slumped on the edge of his chair, his arms hanging between his
thighs.  The  light  from  the  window  fell  on  his  face.  His  eyes,  steel-colored  and
very  still,  were  trained  narrowly  forward.  His  thin  dark  hair  hung  in  a  flat
forelock acoss the side of his forehead, not carelessly like a boy’s, but fiercely
like an old man’s. A kind of fanatic intelligence was palpable in his face.

Sheppard smiled to diminish the distance between them.
The boy’s expression did not soften. He leaned back in his chair and lifted a
monstrous club foot to his knee. The foot was in a heavy black battered shoe with
a sole four or five inches thick. The leather parted from it in one place and the end
of an empty sock protruded like a gray tongue from a severed head. The case was
clear to Sheppard instantly. His mischief was compensation for the foot.

“Well Rufus,” he said, “I see by the record here that you don’t have but a year

to serve. What do you plan to do when you get out?”

“I  don’t  make  no  plans,”  the  boy  said.  His  eyes  shifted  indifferently  to

something outside the window behind Sheppard in the far distance.

“Maybe you ought to,” Sheppard said and smiled.
Johnson continued to gaze beyond him.
“I  want  to  see  you  make  the  most  of  your  intelligence,”  Sheppard  said.
“What’s  most  important  to  you?  Let’s  talk  about  what’s  important  to  you.”  His
eyes dropped involuntarily to the foot.

“Study it and git your fill,” the boy drawled.
Sheppard  reddened.  The  black  deformed  mass  swelled  before  his  eyes.  He
ignored the remark and the leer the boy was giving him. “Rufus,” he said, “you’ve
got  into  a  lot  of  senseless  trouble  but  I  think  when  you  understand  why  you  do
these  things,  you’ll  be  less  inclined  to  do  them.”  He  smiled.  They  had  so  few
friends, saw so few pleasant faces, that half his effectiveness came from nothing
more than smiling at them. “There are a lot of things about yourself that I think I
can explain to you,” he said.

Johnson looked at him stonily. “I ain’t asked for no explanation,” he said. “I

already know why I do what I do.”

“Well good!” Sheppard said. “Suppose you tell me what’s made you do the

things you’ve done?”

A black sheen appeared in the boy’s eyes. “Satan,” he said. “He has me in his

power.”

Sheppard looked at him steadily. There was no indication on the boy’s face
that he had said this to be funny. The line of his thin mouth was set with pride.
Sheppard’s eyes hardened. He felt a momentary dull despair as if he were faced
with  some  elemental  warping  of  nature  that  had  happened  too  long  ago  to  be
corrected now. This boy’s questions about life had been answered by signs nailed
on the pine trees: DOES SATAN HAVE YOU IN HIS POWER? REPENT OR BURN IN HELL.
JESUS  SAVES.  He  would  know  the  Bible  with  or  without  reading  it.  His  despair
gave  way  to  outrage.  “Rubbish!”  he  snorted.  “We’re  living  in  the  space  age!
You’re too smart to give me an answer like that.”

Johnson’s  mouth  twisted  slightly.  His  look  was  contemptuous  but  amused.

There was a glint of challenge in his eyes.

Sheppard  scrutinized  his  face.  Where  there  was  intelligence  anything  was

possible. He smiled again, a smile that was like an invitation to the boy to come
into a school room with all its windows thrown open to the light. “Rufus,” he said,
“I’m going to arrange for you to have a conference with me once a week. Maybe
there’s  an  explanation  for  your  explanation.  Maybe  I  can  explain  your  devil  to
you.”

After that he had talked to Johnson every Saturday for the rest of the year. He
talked  at  random,  the  kind  of  talk  the  boy  would  never  have  heard  before.  He
talked  a  little  above  him  to  give  him  something  to  reach  for.  He  roamed  from
simple psychology and the dodges of the human mind to astronomy and the space
capsules that were whirling around the earth faster than the speed of sound and
would  soon  encircle  the  stars.  Instinctively  he  concentrated  on  the  stars.  He
wanted to give the boy something to reach for besides his neighbor’s goods. He
wanted to stretch his horizons. He wanted him to see the universe, to see that the
darkest parts of it could be penetrated. He would have given anything to be able to
put a telescope in Johnson’s hands.

Johnson  said  little  and  what  he  did  say,  for  the  sake  of  his  pride,  was  in
dissent or senseless contradiction, with the clubfoot raised always to his knee like
a weapon ready for use, but Sheppard was not deceived. He watched his eyes and
every  week  he  saw  something  in  them  crumble.  From  the  boy’s  face,  hard  but
shocked, braced against the light that was ravaging him, he could see that he was
hitting dead center.

Johnson  was  free  now  to  live  out  of  garbage  cans  and  rediscover  his  old
ignorance.  The  injustice  of  it  was  infuriating.  He  had  been  sent  back  to  the
grandfather; the old man’s imbecility could only be imagined. Perhaps the boy had
by now run away from him. The idea of getting custody of Johnson had occurred to
Sheppard  before,  but  the  fact  of  the  grandfather  had  stood  in  the  way.  Nothing
excited him so much as thinking what he could do for such a boy. First he would
have him fitted for a new orthopedic shoe. His back was thrown out of line every
time he took a step. Then he would encourage him in some particular intellectual
interest. He thought of the telescope. He could  buy  a  second-hand  one  and  they
could set it up in the attic window. He sat for almost ten minutes thinking what he
could  do  if  he  had  Johnson  here  with  him.  What  was  wasted  on  Norton  would

cause Johnson to flourish. Yesterday when he had seen him with his hand in the
garbage can, he had waved and started forward. Johnson had seen him, paused a
spilt-second, then vanished with the swiftness of a rat, but not before Sheppard
had seen his expression change. Something had kindled in the boy’s eyes, he was
sure of it, some memory of the lost light.

He got up and threw the cereal box in the garbage. Before he left the house, he
looked into Norton’s room to be sure he was not still sick. The child was sitting
cross-legged on his bed. He had emptied the quart jars of change into one large
pile in front of him, and was sorting it out by nickels and dimes and quarters.

*   *   *

That afternoon Norton was alone in the house, squatting on the floor of his room
arranging packages of flower seeds in rows around himself. Rain slashed against
the window panes and rattled in the gutters. The room had grown dark but every
few minutes it was lit by silent lightning and the seed packages showed up gaily
on  the  floor.  He  squatted  motionless  like  a  large  pale  frog  in  the  midst  of  this
potential garden. All at once his eyes became alert. Without warning the rain had
stopped. The silence was heavy as if the downpour had been hushed by violence.
He remained motionless, only his eyes turning.

Into the silence came the distinct click of a key turning in the front door lock.
The sound was a very deliberate one. It drew attention to itself and held it as if it
were controlled more by a mind than by a hand. The child leapt up and got into the
closet.

The footsteps began to move in the hall. They were deliberate and irregular, a
light and  then  a  heavy  one,  then  a  silence  as  if  the  visitor  had  paused  to  listen
himself  or  to  examine  something.  In  a  minute  the  kitchen  door  screeked.  The
footsteps crossed the kitchen to the refrigerator. The closet wall and the kitchen
wall were the same. Norton stood with his ear pressed against it. The refrigerator
door opened. There was a prolonged silence.

He took off his shoes and then tiptoed out of the closet and stepped over the
seed packages. In the middle of the room, he stopped and remained where he was,
rigid. A  thin  bony-face  boy  in  a  wet  black  suit  stood  in  his  door,  blocking  his

escape. His hair was flattened to his skull by the rain. He stood there like an irate
drenched  crow.  His  look  went  through  the  child  like  a  pin  and  paralyzed  him.
Then his eyes began to move over everything in the room—the unmade bed, the
dirty  curtains  on  the  one  large  window,  a  photograph  of  a  wide-faced  young
woman that stood up in the clutter on top of the dresser.

The child’s tongue suddenly went wild. “He’s been expecting you, he’s going
to give you a new shoe because you have to eat out of garbage cans!” he said in a
kind of mouse-like shriek.

“I eat out of garbage cans,” the boy said slowly with a beady stare, “because I

like to eat out of garbage cans. See?”

The child nodded.
“And I got ways of getting my own shoe. See?”
The child nodded, mesmerized.
The boy limped in and sat down on the bed. He arranged a pillow behind him
and stretched his short leg out so that the big black shoe rested conspicuously on a
fold of the sheet.

Norton’s gaze settled on it and remained immobile. The sole was as thick as a

brick.

Johnson wiggled it slightly and smiled. “If I kick somebody once with this,” he

said, “it learns them not to mess with me.”

The child nodded.
“Go in the kitchen,” Johnson said, “and make me a sandwich with some of that

rye bread and ham and bring me a glass of milk.”

Norton went off like a mechanical toy, pushed in the right direction. He made a
large greasy sandwich with ham hanging out the sides of it and poured out a glass
of milk. Then he returned to the room with the glass of milk in one hand and the
sandwich in the other.

Johnson was leaning back regally against the pillow. “Thanks, waiter,” he said

and took the sandwich.

Norton stood by the side of the bed, holding the glass.
The boy tore into the sandwich and ate steadily until he finished it. Then he
took  the  glass  of  milk.  He  held  it  with  both  hands  like  a  child  and  when  he

lowered it for breath, there was a rim of milk around his mouth. He handed Norton
the  empty  glass.  “Go  get  me  one  of  them  oranges  in  there,  waiter,”  he  said
hoarsely.

Norton  went  to  the  kitchen  and  returned  with  the  orange.  Johnson  peeled  it
with his fingers and let the peeling drop in the bed. He ate it slowly, spitting the
seeds out in front of him. When he finished, he wiped his hands on the sheet and
gave Norton a long appraising stare. He appeared to have been softened by the
service. “You’re his kid all right,” he said. “You got the same stupid face.”

The child stood there stolidly as if he had not heard.
“He  don’t  know  his  left  hand  from  his  right,”  Johnson  said  with  a  hoarse

pleasure in his voice.

The child cast his eyes a little to the side of the boy’s face and looked fixedly

at the wall.

“Yaketty yaketty yak,” Johnson said, “and never says a thing.”
The child’s upper lip lifted slightly but he didn’t say anything.
“Gas,” Johnson said. “Gas.”
The child’s face began to have a wary look of belligerence. He backed away
slightly as if he were prepared to retreat instantly. “He’s good,” he mumbled. “He
helps people.”

“Good!” Johnson said savagely. He thrust his head forward. “Listen here,” he

hissed, “I don’t care if he’s good or not. He ain’t right!”

Norton looked stunned.
The  screen  door  in  the  kitchen  banged  and  someone  entered.  Johnson  sat

forward instantly. “Is that him?” he said.

“It’s the cook,” Norton said. “She comes in the afternoon.”
Johnson  got  up  and  limped  into  the  hall  and  stood  in  the  kitchen  door  and

Norton followed him.

The colored girl was at the closet taking off a bright red raincoat. She was a
tall light-yellow girl with a mouth like a large rose that had darkened and wilted.
Her hair was dressed in tiers on top of her head and leaned to the side like the
Tower of Pisa.

Johnson made a noise through his teeth. “Well look at Aunt Jemima,” he said.

The girl paused and trained an insolent gaze on them. They might have been

dust on the floor.

“Come on,” Johnson said, “let’s see what all you got besides a nigger.” He
opened the first door to his right in the hall and looked into a pink-tiled bathroom.
“A pink can!” he murmured.

He turned a comical face to the child. “Does he sit on that?”
“It’s for company,” Norton said, “but he sits on it sometimes.”
“He ought to empty his head in it,” Johnson said.
The door was open to the next room. It was the room Sheppard had slept in
since his wife died. An ascetic-looking iron bed stood on the bare floor. A heap
of Little League baseball uniforms was piled in one corner. Papers were scattered
over a large roll-top desk and held down in various places by his pipes. Johnson
stood looking into the room silently. He wrinkled his nose. “Guess who?” he said.
The  door  to  the  next  room  was  closed  but  Johnson  opened  it  and  thrust  his
head into the semi-darkness within. The shades were down and the air was close
with a faint scent of perfume in it. There was a wide antique bed and a mammoth
dresser whose mirror glinted in the half light. Johnson snapped the light switch by
the door and crossed the room to the mirror and peered into it. A silver comb and
brush lay on the linen runner. He picked up the comb and began to run it through
his hair. He combed it straight down on his forehead. Then he swept it to the side,
Hitler fashion.

“Leave  her  comb  alone!”  the  child  said.  He  stood  in  the  door,  pale  and

breathing heavily as if he were watching sacrilege in a holy place.

Johnson put the comb down and picked up the brush and gave his hair a swipe

with it.

“She’s dead,” the child said.
“I  ain’t  afraid  of  dead  people’s  things,”  Johnson  said.  He  opened  the  top

drawer and slid his hand in.

“Take  your  big  fat  dirty  hands  off  my  mother’s  clothes!”  the  child  said  in  a

high suffocated voice.

“Keep your shirt on, sweetheart,” Johnson murmured. He pulled up a wrinkled
red polka dot blouse and dropped it back. Then he pulled out a green silk kerchief

and whirled it over his head and let it float to the floor. His hand continued to
plow  deep  into  the  drawer. After  a  moment  it  came  up  gripping  a  faded  corset
with four dangling metal supporters. “Thisyer must be her saddle,” he observed.

He  lifted  it  gingerly  and  shook  it.  Then  he  fastened  it  around  his  waist  and
jumped up and down, making the metal supporters dance. He began to snap his
fingers and turn his hips from side to side. “Gonter rock, rattle and roll,” he sang.
“Gonter rock, rattle and roll. Can’t please that woman, to save my doggone soul.”
He began to move around, stamping the good foot down and slinging the heavy one
to  the  side.  He  danced  out  the  door,  past  the  stricken  child  and  down  the  hall
toward the kitchen.

*   *   *

A half hour later Sheppard came home. He dropped his raincoat on a chair in the
hall  and  came  as  far  as  the  parlor  door  and  stopped.  His  face  was  suddenly
transformed. It shone with pleasure. Johnson sat, a dark figure, in a high-backed
pink upholstered chair. The wall behind him was lined with books from floor to
ceiling. He was reading one. Sheppard’s eyes narrowed. It was a volume of the
Encyclopedia  Britannica.  He  was  so  engrossed  in  it  that  he  did  not  look  up.
Sheppard held his breath. This was the perfect setting for the boy. He had to keep
him here. He had to manage it somehow.

“Rufus!” he said, “it’s good to see you boy!” and he bounded forward with his

arm oustretched.

Johnson looked up, his face blank. “Oh hello,” he said. He ignored the hand as
long as he was able but when Sheppard did not withdraw it, he grudgingly shook
it.

Sheppard  was  prepared  for  this  kind  of  reaction.  It  was  part  of  Johnson’s

make-up never to show enthusiasm.

“How  are  things?”  he  said.  “How’s  your  grandfather  treating  you?”  He  sat

down on the edge of the sofa.

“He dropped dead,” the boy said indifferently.
“You don’t mean it!” Sheppard cried. He got up and sat down on the coffee

table nearer the boy.

“Naw,” Johnson said, “he ain’t dropped dead. I wisht he had.”
“Well where is he?” Sheppard muttered.
“He’s gone with a remnant to the hills,” Johnson said. “Him and some others.
They’re going to bury some Bibles in a cave and take two of different kinds of
animals  and  all  like  that.  Like  Noah.  Only  this  time  it’s  going  to  be  fire,  not
flood.”

Sheppard’s  mouth  stretched  wryly.  “I  see,”  he  said.  Then  he  said,  “In  other

words the old fool has abandoned you?”

“He ain’t no fool,” the boy said in an indignant tone.
“Has he abandoned you or not?” Sheppard asked impatiently.
The boy shrugged.
“Where’s your probation officer?”
“I ain’t supposed to keep up with him,” Johnson said. “He’s supposed to keep

up with me.”

Sheppard laughed. “Wait a minute,” he said. He got up and went into the hall
and got his raincoat off the chair and took it to the hall closet to hang it up. He had
to give himself time to think, to decide how he could ask the boy so that he would
stay.  He  couldn’t  force  him  to  stay.  It  would  have  to  be  voluntary.  Johnson
pretended not to like him. That was only to uphold his pride, but he would have to
ask him in such a way that his pride could still be upheld. He opened the closet
door and took out a hanger. An old gray winter coat of his wife’s still hung there.
He pushed it aside but it didn’t move. He pulled it open roughly and winced as if
he had seen the larva inside a cocoon. Norton stood in it, his face swollen and
pale, with a drugged look of misery on it. Sheppard stared at him. Suddenly  he
was confronted with a possibility. “Get out of there,” he said. He caught him by
the shoulder and propelled him firmly into the parlor and over to the pink chair
where Johnson was sitting with the encyclopedia in his lap. He was going to risk
everything in one blow.

“Rufus,” he said, “I’ve got a problem. I need your help.”
Johnson looked up suspiciously.
“Listen,”  Sheppard  said,  “we  need  another  boy  in  the  house.”  There  was  a
genuine desperation in his voice. “Norton here has never had to divide anything in

his life. He doesn’t know what it means to share. And I need somebody to teach
him. How about helping me out? Stay here for a while with us, Rufus. I need your
help.” The excitement in his voice made it thin.

The child suddenly came to life. His face swelled with fury. “He went in her
room and used her comb!” he screamed, yanking Sheppard’s arm. “He put on her
corset and danced with Leola, he…”

“Stop this!” Sheppard said sharply. “Is tattling all you’re capable of? I’m not
asking you for a report on Rufus’s conduct. I’m asking you to make him welcome
here. Do you understand?

“You see how it is?” he asked, turning to Johnson.
Norton  kicked  the  leg  of  the  pink  chair  viciously,  just  missing  Johnson’s

swollen foot. Sheppard yanked him back.

“He said you weren’t nothing but gas!” the child shrieked.
A sly look of pleasure crossed Johnson’s face.
Sheppard  was  not  put  back.  These  insults  were  part  of  the  boy’s  defensive
mechanism. “What about it, Rufus?” he said. “Will you stay with us for a while?”
Johnson  looked  straight  in  front  of  him  and  said  nothing.  He  smiled  slightly

and appeared to gaze upon some vision of the future that pleased him.

“I  don’t  care,”  he  said  and  turned  a  page  of  the  encyclopedia.  “I  can  stand

anywhere.”

“Wonderful.” Sheppard said. “Wonderful.”
“He said,” the child said in a throaty whisper, “you didn’t know your left hand

from your right.”

There was a silence.
Johnson wet his finger and turned another page of the encyclopedia.
“I  have  something  to  say  to  both  of  you,”  Sheppard  said  in  a  voice  without
inflection. His eyes moved from one to the other of them and he spoke slowly as if
what he was saying he would say only once and it behooved them to listen. “If it
made any difference to me what Rufus thinks of me,” he said, “then I wouldn’t be
asking him here. Rufus is going to help me out and I’m going to help him out and
we’re both going to help you out. I’d simply be selfish if I let what Rufus thinks of
me interfere with what I can do for Rufus. If I can help a person, all I want is to do

it. I’m above and beyond simple pettiness.”

Neither  of  them  made  a  sound.  Norton  stared  at  the  chair  cushion.  Johnson
peered closer at some fine print in the encyclopedia. Sheppard was looking at the
tops of their heads. He smiled. After all, he had won. The boy was staying. He
reached out and ruffled Norton’s hair and slapped Johnson on the shoulder. “Now
you  fellows  sit  here  and  get  acquainted,”  he  said  gaily  and  started  toward  the
door. “I’m going to see what Leola left us for supper.”

When he was gone, Johnson raised his head and looked at Norton. The child
looked back at him bleakly. “God, kid,” Johnson said in a cracked voice, “how do
you stand it?” His face was stiff with outrage. “He thinks he’s Jesus Christ!”

II
Sheppard’s attic was a large unfinished room with exposed beams and no electric
light. They had set the telescope up on a tripod in one of the dormer windows. It
pointed  now  toward  the  dark  sky  where  a  sliver  of  moon,  as  fragile  as  an  egg
shell, had just emerged from behind a cloud with a brilliant silver edge. Inside, a
kerosene  lantern  set  on  a  trunk  cast  their  shadows  upward  and  tangled  them,
wavering slightly, in the joints overhead. Sheppard was sitting on a packing box,
looking through the telescope, and Johnson was at his elbow, waiting to get at it.
Sheppard had bought it for fifteen dollars two days before at a pawn shop.

“Quit hoggin it,” Johnson said.
Sheppard  got  up  and  Johnson  slid  onto  the  box  and  put  his  eye  to  the

instrument.

Sheppard sat down on a straight chair a few feet away. His face was flushed
with pleasure. This much of his dream was a reality. Within a week he had made
it possible for this boy’s vision to pass through a slender channel to the stars. He
looked at Johnson’s bent back with complete satisfaction. The boy had on one of
Norton’s plaid shirts and some new khaki trousers he had bought him. The shoe
would be ready next week. He had taken him to the brace shop the day after he
came and had him fitted for a new shoe. Johnson was as touchy about the foot as if
it were a sacred object. His face had been glum while the clerk, a young man with
a bright pink bald head, measured the foot with his profane hands. The shoe was

going  to  make  the  greatest  difference  in  the  boy’s  attitude.  Even  a  child  with
normal feet was in love with the world after he had got a new pair of shoes. When
Norton got a new pair, he walked around for days with his eyes on his feet.

Sheppard  glanced  across  the  room  at  the  child.  He  was  sitting  on  the  floor
against a trunk, trussed up in a rope he had found and wound around his legs from
his ankles to his knees. He appeared so far away that Sheppard might have been
looking at him through the wrong end of the telescope. He had had to whip him
only  once  since  Johnson  had  been  with  them—the  first  night  when  Norton  had
realized that Johnson was going to sleep in his mother’s bed. He did not believe in
whipping children, particularly in anger. In this case, he had done both and with
good results. He had had no more trouble with Norton.

The child hadn’t shown any positive generosity toward Johnson but what he
couldn’t help, he appeared to be resigned to. In the mornings Sheppard sent the
two of them to the Y swimming pool, gave them money to get their lunch at the
cafeteria and instructed them to meet him in the park in the afternoon to watch his
Little  League  baseball  practice.  Every  afternoon  they  had  arrived  at  the  park,
shambling, silent, their faces closed each on his own thoughts as if neither were
aware of the other’s existence. At least he could be thankful there were no fights.

Norton showed no interest in the telescope. “Don’t you want to get up and look
through the telescope, Norton?” he said. It irritated him that the child showed no
intellectual curiosity whatsoever. “Rufus is going to be way ahead of you.”

Norton leaned forward absently and looked at Johnson’s back.
Johnson  turned  around  from  the  instrument.  His  face  had  begun  to  fill  out
again. The look of outrage had retreated from his hollow cheeks and was shored
up now in the caves of his eyes, like a fugitive from Sheppard’s kindness. “Don’t
waste your valuable time, kid,” he said. “You seen the moon once, you seen it.”

Sheppard was amused by these sudden turns of perversity. The boy resisted
whatever he suspected was meant for his improvement and contrived when he was
vitally  interested  in  something  to  leave  the  impression  he  was  bored.  Sheppard
was not deceived. Secretly Johnson was learning what he wanted him to learn—
that his benefactor was impervious to insult and that there were no cracks in his
armor of kindness and patience where a successful shaft could be driven. “Some

day you may go to the moon,” he said. “In ten years men will probably be making
round trips there on schedule. Why you boys may be spacemen. Astronauts!”

“Astro-nuts,” Johnson said.
“Nuts  or  nauts,”  Sheppard  said,  “it’s  perfectly  possible  that  you,  Rufus

Johnson, will go to the moon.”

Something in the depths of Johnson’s eyes stirred. All day his humor had been
glum. “I ain’t going to the moon and get there alive,” he said, “and when I die I’m
going to hell.”

“It’s at least possible to get to the moon,” Sheppard said dryly. The best way
to handle this kind of thing was with gentle ridicule. “We can see it. We know it’s
there. Nobody has given any reliable evidence there’s a hell.”

“The Bible has give the evidence,” Johnson said darkly, “and if you die and go

there you burn forever.”

The child leaned forward.
“Whoever says it ain’t a hell,” Johnson said, “is contradicting Jesus. The dead
are  judged  and  the  wicked  are  damned.  They  weep  and  gnash  their  teeth  while
they burn,” he continued, “and it’s everlasting darkness.”

The child’s mouth opened. His eyes appeared to grow hollow.
“Satan runs it,” Johnson said.
Norton lurched up and took a hobbled step toward Sheppard. “Is she there?”
he said in a loud voice. “Is she there burning up?” He kicked the rope off his feet.
“Is she on fire?”

“Oh  my  God,”  Sheppard  muttered.  “No  no,”  he  said,  “of  course  she  isn’t.
Rufus is mistaken. Your mother isn’t anywhere. She’s not unhappy. She just isn’t.”
His lot would have been easier if when his wife died he had told Norton she had
gone to heaven and that some day he would see her again, but he could not allow
himself to bring him up on a lie.

Norton’s face began to twist. A knot formed in his chin.
“Listen,” Sheppard said quickly and pulled the child to him, “your mother’s
spirit lives on in other people and it’ll live on in you if you’re good and generous
like she was.”

The child’s pale eyes hardened in disbelief.

Sheppard’s pity turned to revulsion. The boy would rather she be in hell than
nowhere. “Do you understand?” he said. “She doesn’t exist.” He put his hand on
the  child’s  shoulder.  “That’s  all  I  have  to  give  you,”  he  said  in  a  softer,
exasperated tone, “the truth.”

Instead of howling, the boy wrenched himself away and caught Johnson by the

sleeve. “Is she there, Rufus?” he said “Is she there, burning up?”

Johnson’s eyes glittered. “Well,” he said, “she is if she was evil. Was she a

whore?”

“Your mother was not a whore,” Sheppard said sharply. He had the sensation
of driving a car without brakes. “Now let’s have no more of this foolishness. We
were talking about the moon.”

“Did she believe in Jesus?” Johnson asked.
Norton looked blank. After a second he said, “Yes,” as if he saw that this was

necessary. “She did,” he said. “All the time.”

“She did not,” Sheppard muttered.
“She did all the time,” Norton said. “I heard her say she did all the time.”
“She’s saved,” Johnson said.
The child still looked puzzled. “Where?” he said. “Where is she at?”
“On high,” Johnson said.
“Where’s that?” Norton gasped.
“It’s in the sky somewhere,” Johnson said, “but you got to be dead to get there.
You can’t go in no space ship.” There was a narrow gleam in his eyes now like a
beam holding steady on its target.

“Man’s going to the moon,” Sheppard said grimly, “is very much like the first
fish  crawling  out  of  the  water  onto  land  billions  and  billions  of  years  ago.  He
didn’t have an earth suit. He had to grow his adjustments inside. He developed
lungs.”

“When I’m dead will I go to hell or where she is?” Norton asked.
“Right now you’d go where she is,” Johnson said, “but if you live long enough,

you’ll go to hell.”

Sheppard rose abruptly and picked up the lantern. “Close the window, Rufus,”

he said. “It’s time we went to bed.”

On  the  way  down  the  attic  stairs  he  heard  Johnson  say  in  a  loud  whisper
behind him, “I’ll tell you all about  it  tomorrow,  kid,  when  Himself  has  cleared
out.”

*   *   *

The next day when the boys came to the ball park, he watched them as they came
from behind the bleachers and around the edge of the field. Johnson’s hand was on
Norton’s shoulder, his head bent toward the younger boy’s ear, and on the child’s
face  there  was  a  look  of  complete  confidence,  of  dawning  light.  Sheppard’s
grimace hardened. This would be Johnson’s way of trying to annoy him. But he
would  not  be  annoyed.  Norton  was  not  bright  enough  to  be  damaged  much.  He
gazed  at  the  child’s  dull  absorbed  little  face.  Why  try  to  make  him  superior?
Heaven and hell were for the mediocre, and he was that if he was anything.

The two boys came into the bleachers and sat down about ten feet away, facing
him, but neither gave him any sign  of  recognition.  He  cast  a  glance  behind  him
where  the  Little  Leaguers  were  spread  out  in  the  field.  Then  he  started  for  the
bleachers. The hiss of Johnson’s voice stopped as he approached.
“What have you fellows been doing today?” he asked genially.
“He’s been telling me…” Norton started.
Johnson  pushed  the  child  in  the  ribs  with  his  elbow.  “We  ain’t  been  doing
nothing,” he said. His face appeared to be covered with a blank glaze but through
it a look of complicity was blazoned forth insolently.

Sheppard  felt  his  face  grow  warm,  but  he  said  nothing. A  child  in  a  Little
League uniform had followed him and was nudging him in the back of the leg with
a bat. He turned and put his arm around the boy’s neck and went with him back to
the game.

That night when he went to the attic to join the boys at the telescope, he found
Norton  there  alone.  He  was  sitting  on  the  packing  box,  hunched  over,  looking
intently through the instrument. Johnson was not there.

“Where’s Rufus?” Sheppard asked.
“I said where’s Rufus?” he said louder.
“Gone somewhere,” the child said without turning around.

“Gone where?” Sheppard asked.
“He  just  said  he  was  going  somewhere.  He  said  he  was  fed  up  looking  at

stars.”

“I see,” Sheppard said glumly. He turned and went back down the stairs. He
searched the house without finding Johnson. Then he went to the living room and
sat down. Yesterday he had been convinced of his success with the boy. Today he
faced the possibility that he was failing with him. He had been over-lenient, too
concerned to have Johnson like him. He felt a twinge of guilt. What difference did
it make if Johnson liked him or not? What was that to him? When the boy came in,
they would have a few things understood. As long as you stay here there’ll be no
going out at night by yourself, do you understand?

I don’t have to stay here. It ain’t nothing to me staying here.
Oh my God, he thought. He could not bring it to that. He would have to be firm
but not make an issue of it. He picked up the evening paper. Kindness and patience
were always called for but he had not been firm enough. He sat holding the paper
but not reading it. The boy would not respect him unless he showed firmness. The
doorbell rang and he went to answer it. He opened it and stepped back, with a
pained disappointed face.

A large dour policeman stood on the stoop, holding Johnson by the elbow. At
the  curb  a  patrol  car  waited.  Johnson  looked  very  white.  His  jaw  was  thrust
forward as if to keep from trembling.

“We brought him here first because he raised such a fit,” the policeman said,
“but now that you’ve seen him, we’re going to take him to the station and ask him
a few questions.”

“What happened?” Sheppard muttered.
“A  house  around  the  corner  from  here,”  the  policeman  said.  “A  real  smash

job, dishes broken all over the floor, furniture turned upside down…”

“I  didn’t  have  a  thing  to  do  with  it!”  Johnson  said.  “I  was  walking  along

minding my own bidnis when this cop came up and grabbed me.”

Sheppard looked at the boy grimly. He made no effort to soften his expression.
Johnson  flushed.  “I  was  just  walking  along,”  he  muttered,  but  with  no

conviction in his voice.

“Come on, bud,” the policeman said.
“You ain’t going to let him take me, are you?” Johnson said. “You believe me,
don’t you?” There was an appeal in his voice that Sheppard had not heard there
before.

This was crucial. The boy would have to learn that he could not be protected

when he was guilty. “You’ll have to go with him, Rufus,” he said.

“You’re going to let him take me and I tell you I ain’t done a thing?” Johnson

said shrilly.

Sheppard’s  face  became  harder  as  his  sense  of  injury  grew.  The  boy  had
failed him even before he had had a chance to give him the shoe. They were to
have got it tomorrow. All his regret turned suddenly on the shoe; his irritation at
the sight of Johnson doubled.

“You made out like you had all this confidence in me,” the boy mumbled.
“I did have,” Sheppard said. His face was wooden.
Johnson turned away with the policeman but before he moved, a gleam of pure

hatred flashed toward Sheppard from the pits of his eyes.

Sheppard stood in the door and watched them get into the patrol car and drive
away. He summoned his compassion. He would go to the station tomorrow and
see what he could do about getting him out of trouble. The night in jail would not
hurt him and the experience would teach him that he could not treat with impunity
someone  who  had  shown  him  nothing  but  kindness.  Then  they  would  go  get  the
shoe and perhaps after a night in jail it would mean even more to the boy.

*   *   *

The next morning at eight o’clock the police sergeant called and told him he could
come pick Johnson up. “We booked a nigger on that charge,” he said. “Your  boy
didn’t have nothing to do with it.”

Sheppard was at the station in ten minutes, his face hot with shame. Johnson
sat slouched on a bench in a drab outer office, reading a police magazine. There
was  no  one  else  in  the  room.  Sheppard  sat  down  beside  him  and  put  his  hand
tentatively on his shoulder.

The boy glanced up—his lip curled—and back to the magazine.

Sheppard felt physically sick. The ugliness of what he had done bore in upon
him  with  a  sudden  dull  intensity.  He  had  failed  him  at  just  the  point  where  he
might have turned him once and for all in the right direction. “Rufus,” he said, “I
apologize. I was wrong and you were right. I misjudged you.”

The boy continued to read.
“I’m sorry.”
The boy wet his finger and turned a page.
Sheppard braced himself. “I was a fool, Rufus,” he said.
Johnson’s mouth slid slightly to the side. He shrugged without raising his head

from the magazine.

“Will you forget it, this time?” Sheppard said. “It won’t happen again.”
The  boy  looked  up.  His  eyes  were  bright  and  unfriendly.  “I’ll  forget  it,”  he
said, “but you better remember it.” He got up and stalked toward the door. In the
middle  of  the  room  he  turned  and  jerked  his  arm  at  Sheppard  and  Sheppard
jumped up and followed him as if the boy had yanked an invisible leash.

“Your shoe,” he said eagerly, “today is the day to get your shoe!” Thank God

for the shoe!

But when they went to the brace shop, they found that the shoe had been made
two  sizes  too  small  and  a  new  one  would  not  be  ready  for  another  ten  days.
Johnson’s temper improved at once. The clerk had obviously made a mistake in
the measurements but the boy insisted the foot had grown. He left the shop with a
pleased expression, as if, in expanding, the foot had acted on some inspiration of
its own. Sheppard’s face was haggard.

After  this  he  redoubled  his  efforts.  Since  Johnson  had  lost  interest  in  the
telescope,  he  bought  a  microscope  and  a  box  of  prepared  slides.  If  he  couldn’t
impress  the  boy  with  immensity,  he  would  try  the  infinitesimal.  For  two  nights
Johnson appeared absorbed in the new instrument, then he abruptly lost interest in
it,  but  he  seemed  content  to  sit  in  the  living  room  in  the  evening  and  read  the
encyclopedia. He devoured the encyclopedia as he devoured his dinner, steadily
and  without  dint  to  his  appetite.  Each  subject  appeared  to  enter  his  head,  be
ravaged,  and  thrown  out.  Nothing  pleased  Sheppard  more  than  to  see  the  boy
slouched on the sofa, his mouth shut, reading. After they had spent two or three

evenings  like  this,  he  began  to  recover  his  vision.  His  confidence  returned.  He
knew that some day he would be proud of Johnson.

On Thursday night Sheppard attended a city council meeting. He dropped the
boys off at a movie on his way and picked them up on his way back. When they
reached  home,  an  automobile  with  a  single  red  eye  above  its  windshield  was
waiting  in  front  of  the  house.  Sheppard’s  lights  as  he  turned  into  the  driveway
illuminated two dour faces in the car.

“The cops!” Johnson said. “Some nigger has broke in somewhere and they’ve

come for me again.”

“We’ll see about that,” Sheppard muttered. He stopped the car in the driveway
and switched off the lights. “You boys go in the house and go to bed,” he said.
“I’ll handle this.”

He got out and strode toward the squad car. He thrust his head in the window.
The  two  policemen  were  looking  at  him  with  silent  knowledgeable  faces.  “A
house on the corner of Shelton and Mills,” the one in the driver’s seat said. “It
looks like a train run through it.”

“He was in the picture show downtown,” Sheppard said. “My boy was with
him. He had nothing to do with the other one and he had nothing to do with this
one. I’ll be responsible.”

“If I was you,” the one nearest him said, “I wouldn’t be responsible for any

little bastard like him.”

“I said I’d be responsible,” Sheppard repeated coldly. “You people made a

mistake the last time. Don’t make another.”

The  policemen  looked  at  each  other.  “It  ain’t  our  funeral,”  the  one  in  the

driver’s seat said, and turned the key in the ignition.

Sheppard went in the house and sat down in the living room in the dark. He
did not suspect Johnson and he did not want the boy to think he did. If Johnson
thought he suspected him again, he would lose everything. But he wanted to know
if his alibi was airtight. He thought of going to Norton’s room and asking him if
Johnson had left the movie. But that would be worse. Johnson would know what
he  was  doing  and  would  be  incensed.  He  decided  to  ask  Johnson  himself.  He
would be direct. He went over in his mind what he was going to say and then he

got up and went to the boy’s door.

It was open as if he had been expected but Johnson was in bed. Just enough
light came in from the hall for Sheppard to see his shape under the sheet. He came
in and stood at the foot of the bed. “They’ve gone,” he said. “I told them you had
nothing to do with it and that I’d be responsible.”

There was a muttered “Yeah,” from the pillow.
Sheppard hesitated. “Rufus,” he said, “you didn’t leave the movie for anything

at all, did you?”

“You  make  out  like  you  got  all  this  confidence  in  me!”  a  sudden  outraged
voice cried, “and you ain’t got any! You don’t trust me no more now than you did
then!” The voice, disembodied, seemed to come more surely from the depths of
Johnson than when his face was visible. It was a cry of reproach, edged slightly
with contempt.

“I  do  have  confidence  in  you,”  Sheppard  said  intensely.  “I  have  every

confidence in you. I believe in you and I trust you completely.”

“You got your eye on me all the time,” the voice said sullenly. “When you get
through  asking  me  a  bunch  of  questions,  you’re  going  across  the  hall  and  ask
Norton a bunch of them.”

“I have no intention of asking Norton anything and never did,” Sheppard said
gently. “And I don’t suspect you at all. You could hardly have got from the picture
show downtown and out here to break in a house and back to the picture show in
the time you had.”

“That’s why you believe me!” the boy cried, “—because you think I couldn’t

have done it.”

“No,  no!”  Sheppard  said.  “I  believe  you  because  I  believe  you’ve  got  the
brains and the guts not to get in trouble again. I believe you know yourself well
enough now to know that you don’t have to do such things. I believe that you can
make anything of yourself that you set your mind to.”

Johnson sat up. A faint light shone on his forehead but the rest of his face was
invisible. “And I could have broke in there if I’d wanted to in the time I had,” he
said.

“But I know you didn’t,” Sheppard said. “There’s not the least trace of doubt

in my mind.”

There was a silence. Johnson lay back down. Then the voice, low and hoarse,
as if it were being forced out with difficulty, said, “You don’t want to steal and
smash up things when you’ve got everything you want already.”

Sheppard caught his breath. The boy was thanking him! He was thanking him!
There was gratitude in his voice. There was appreciation. He stood there, smiling
foolishly  in  the  dark,  trying  to  hold  the  moment  in  suspension.  Involuntarily  he
took a step toward the pillow and stretched out his hand and touched Johnson’s
forehead. It was cold and dry like rusty iron.

“I understand. Good night, son,” he said and turned quickly and left the room.

He closed the door behind him and stood there, overcome with emotion.

Across the hall Norton’s door was open. The child lay on the bed on his side,

looking into the light from the hall.

After this, the road with Johnson would be smooth.
Norton sat up and beckoned to him.
He saw the child but after the first instant, he did not let his eyes focus directly
on him. He could not go in and talk to Norton without breaking Johnson’s trust. He
hesitated, but remained where he was a moment as if he saw nothing. Tomorrow
was the day they were to go back for the shoe. It would be a climax to the good
feeling between them. He turned quickly and went back into his own room.

The  child  sat  for  some  time  looking  at  the  spot  where  his  father  had  stood.

Finally his gaze became aimless and he lay back down.

The next day Johnson was glum and silent as if he were ashamed that he had
revealed himself. His eyes had a hooded look. He seemed to have retired within
himself  and  there  to  be  going  through  some  crisis  of  determination.  Sheppard
could not get to the brace shop quickly enough. He left Norton at home because he
did  not  want  his  attention  divided.  He  wanted  to  be  free  to  observe  Johnson’s
reaction minutely. The boy did not seem pleased or even interested in the prospect
of the shoe, but when it became an actuality, certainly then he would be moved.

The brace shop was a small concrete warehouse lined and stacked with the
equipment of affliction. Wheel chairs and walkers covered most of the floor. The
walls  were  hung  with  every  kind  of  crutch  and  brace.  Artificial  limbs  were

stacked  on  the  shelves,  legs  and  arms  and  hands,  claws  and  hooks,  straps  and
human  harnesses  and  unidentifiable  instruments  for  unnamed  deformities.  In  a
small  clearing  in  the  middle  of  the  room  there  was  a  row  of  yellow  plastic-
cushioned chairs  and  a  shoe-fitting  stool.  Johnson  slouched  down  in  one  of  the
chairs and set his foot up on the stool and sat with his eyes on it moodily. What
was roughly the toe had broken open again and he had patched it with a piece of
canvas; another place he had patched with what appeared to be the tongue of the
original shoe. The two sides were laced with twine.

There  was  an  excited  flush  on  Sheppard’s  face;  his  heart  was  beating

unnaturally fast.

The clerk appeared from the back of the shop with the new shoe under his arm.
“Got her right this time!” he said. He straddled the shoe-fitting stool and held the
shoe up, smiling as if he had produced it by magic.

It was a black slick shapeless object, shining hideously. It looked like a blunt

weapon, highly polished.

Johnson gazed at it darkly.
“With this shoe,” the clerk said, “you won’t know you’re walking. You’ll think
you’re riding!” He bent his bright pink bald head and began gingerly to unlace the
twine. He removed the old shoe as if he were skinning an animal still half alive.
His expression was strained. The unsheathed mass of foot in the dirty sock made
Sheppard feel queasy. He turned his eyes away until the new shoe was on.  The
clerk laced it up rapidly. “Now stand up and walk around,” he said, “and see if
that ain’t power glide.” He winked at Sheppard. “In that shoe,” he said, “he won’t
know he don’t have a normal foot.”

Sheppard’s face was bright with pleasure.
Johnson stood up and walked a few yards away. He walked stiffly with almost

no dip in his short side. He stood for a moment, rigid, with his back to them.

“Wonderful!” Sheppard said. “Wonderful.” It was as if he had given the boy a

new spine.

Johnson turned around. His mouth was set in a thin icy line. He came back to
the seat and removed the shoe. He put his foot in the old one and began lacing it
up.

“You want to take it home and see if it suits you first?” the clerk murmured.
“No,” Johnson said. “I ain’t going to wear it at all.”
“What’s wrong with it?” Sheppard said, his voice rising.
“I  don’t  need  no  new  shoe,”  Johnson  said.  “And  when  I  do,  I  got  ways  of

getting my own.” His face was stony but there was a glint of triumph in his eyes.

“Boy,” the clerk said, “is your trouble in your foot or in your head?”
“Go soak your skull,” Johnson said. “Your brains are on fire.”
The clerk rose glumly but with dignity and asked Sheppard  what  he  wanted

done with the shoe, which he dangled dispiritedly by the lace.

Sheppard’s face was a dark angry red. He was staring straight in front of him

at a leather corset with an artificial arm attached.

The clerk asked him again.
“Wrap  it  up,”  Sheppard  muttered.  He  turned  his  eyes  to  Johnson.  “He’s  not

mature enough for it yet,” he said. “I had thought he was less of a child.”

The boy leered. “You been wrong before,” he said.

*   *   *

That  night  they  sat  in  the  living  room  and  read  as  usual.  Sheppard  kept  himself
glumly entrenched behind the Sunday New York  Times. He wanted to recover his
good humor, but every time he thought of the rejected shoe, he felt a new charge of
irritation. He did not trust himself even to look at Johnson. He realized that the
boy had refused the shoe because he was insecure. Johnson had been frightened by
his own gratitude. He didn’t know what to make of the new self he was becoming
conscious  of.  He  understood  that  something  he  had  been  was  threatened  and  he
was facing himself and his possibilities for the first time. He was questioning his
identity. Grudgingly, Sheppard felt a slight return of sympathy for the boy. In a few
minutes, he lowered his paper and looked at him.

Johnson was sitting on the sofa, gazing over the top of the encyclopedia. His
expression was trancelike. He might have been listening to something far away.
Sheppard watched him intently but the boy continued to listen, and did not turn his
head. The poor kid is lost, Sheppard thought. Here he had sat all evening, sullenly
reading the paper, and had not said a word to break the tension. “Rufus,” he said.

Johnson continued to sit, stock-still, listening.
“Rufus,” Sheppard said in a slow hypnotic voice, “you can be anything in the
world  you  want  to  be. You  can  be  a  scientist  or  an  architect  or  an  engineer  or
whatever you set your mind to, and whatever you set your mind to be, you can be
the  best  of  its  kind.”  He  imagined  his  voice  penetrating  to  the  boy  in  the  black
caverns of his psyche. Johnson leaned forward but his eyes did not turn. On the
street a car door closed. There was a silence. Then a sudden blast from the door
bell.

Sheppard jumped up and went to the door and opened it. The same policeman

who had come before stood there. The patrol car waited at the curb.

“Lemme see that boy,” he said.
Sheppard scowled and stood aside. “He’s been here all evening,” he said. “I

can vouch for it.”

The  policeman  walked  into  the  living  room.  Johnson  appeared  engrossed  in
his book. After a second he looked up with an annoyed expression, like a great
man interrupted at his work.

“What was that you were looking at in that kitchen window over on Winter

Avenue about a half hour ago, bud?” the policeman asked.

“Stop  persecuting  this  boy!”  Sheppard  said.  “I’ll  vouch  for  the  fact  he  was

here. I was here with him.”

“You heard him,” Johnson said. “I been here all the time.”
“It ain’t everybody makes tracks like you,” the policeman said and eyed the

clubfoot.

“They couldn’t be his tracks,” Sheppard growled, infuriated. “He’s been here
all the time. You’re wasting your own time and you’re wasting ours.” His felt the
ours seal his solidarity with the boy. “I’m sick of this,” he said. “You people are
too damn lazy to go out and find whoever is doing these things. You come here
automatically.”

The policeman ignored this and continued looking through Johnson. His eyes
were small and alert in his fleshy face. Finally he turned toward the door. “We’ll
get him sooner or later,” he said, “with his head in a window and his tail out.”

Sheppard  followed  him  to  the  door  and  slammed  it  behind  him.  His  spirits

were  soaring.  This  was  exactly  what  he  had  needed.  He  returned  with  an
expectant face.

Johnson  had  put  the  book  down  and  was  sitting  there,  looking  at  him  slyly.

“Thanks,” he said.

Sheppard  stopped.  The  boy’s  expression  was  predatory.  He  was  openly

leering.

“You ain’t such a bad liar yourself,” he said.
“Liar?” Sheppard murmured. Could the boy have left and come back? He felt
himself sicken. Then a rush of anger sent him forward. “Did you leave?” he said
furiously. “I didn’t see you leave.”

The boy only smiled.
“You went up in the attic to see Norton,” Sheppard said.
“Naw,” Johnson said, “that kid is crazy. He don’t want to do nothing but look

through that stinking telescope.”

“I  don’t  want  to  hear  about  Norton,”  Sheppard  said  harshly.  “Where  were

you?”

“I was sitting on that pink can by my ownself,” Johnson said. “There wasn’t no

witnesses.”

Sheppard took out his handkerchief and wiped his forehead. He managed to

smile.

Johnson rolled his eyes. “You don’t believe in me,” he said. His voice was
cracked the way it had been in the dark room two nights before. “You make out
like you got all this confidence in me but you ain’t got any. When things get hot,
you’ll  fade  like  the  rest  of  them.”  The  crack  became  exaggerated,  comic.  The
mockery in it was blatant. “You don’t believe in me. You ain’t got no confidence,”
he wailed. “And you ain’t any smarter than that cop. All that about tracks—that
was a trap. There wasn’t any tracks. That whole place is concreted in the back
and my feet were dry.”

Sheppard slowly put the handkerchief back in his pocket. He dropped down on
the sofa and gazed at the rug beneath his feet. The boy’s clubfoot was set within
the  circle  of  his  vision.  The  pieced-together  shoe  appeared  to  grin  at  him  with
Johnson’s  own  face.  He  caught  hold  of  the  edge  of  the  sofa  cushion  and  his

knuckles turned white. A chill of hatred shook him. He hated the shoe, hated the
foot, hated the boy. His face paled. Hatred choked him. He was aghast at himself.
He caught the boy’s shoulder and gripped it fiercely as if to keep himself from
falling. “Listen,” he said, “you looked in that window to embarrass me. That was
all you wanted—to shake my resolve to help you, but my resolve isn’t shaken. I’m
stronger than you are. I’m stronger than you are and I’m going to save you. The
good will triumph.”

“Not when it ain’t true,” the boy said. “Not when it ain’t right.”
“My resolve isn’t shaken,” Sheppard repeated. “I’m going to save you.”
Johnson’s  look  became  sly  again.  “You  ain’t  going  to  save  me,”  he  said.
“You’re going to tell me to leave this house. I did those other two jobs too—the
first  one  as  well  as  the  one  I  done  when  I  was  supposed  to  be  in  the  picture
show.”

“I’m not going to tell you to leave,” Sheppard said. His voice was toneless,

mechanical. “I’m going to save you.”

Johnson  thrust  his  head  forward.  “Save  yourself,”  he  hissed.  “Nobody  can

save me but Jesus.”

Sheppard laughed curtly. “You don’t deceive me,” he said. “I flushed that out

of your head in the reformatory. I saved you from that, at least.”

The muscles in Johnson’s face stiffened. A look of such repulsion hardened on
his face that Sheppard drew back. The boy’s eyes were like distorting mirrors in
which  he  saw  himself  made  hideous  and  grotesque.  “I’ll  show  you,”  Johnson
whispered. He rose abruptly and started headlong for the door as if he could not
get out of Sheppard’s sight quick enough, but it was the door to the back hall he
went through, not the front door. Sheppard turned on the sofa and looked behind
him where the boy had disappeared. He heard the door to his room slam. He was
not leaving. The intensity had gone out of Sheppard’s eyes. They looked flat and
lifeless as if the shock of the boy’s revelation were only now reaching the center
of his consciousness. “If he would only leave,” he murmured. “If he would only
leave now of his own accord.”

*   *   *

The next morning Johnson appeared at the breakfast table in the grandfather’s suit
he had come in. Sheppard pretended not to notice but one look told him what he
already knew, that he was trapped, that there could be nothing now but a battle of
nerves and that Johnson would win it. He wished he had never laid eyes on the
boy. The failure of his compassion numbed him. He got out of the house as soon as
he could and all day he dreaded to go home in the evening. He had a faint hope
that  the  boy  might  be  gone  when  he  returned.  The  grandfather’s  suit  might  have
meant he was leaving. The hope grew in the afternoon. When he came home and
opened the front door, his heart was pounding.

He stopped in the hall and looked silently into the living room. His expectant
expression faded.  His  face  seemed  suddenly  as  old  as  his  white  hair.  The  two
boys  were  sitting  close  together  on  the  sofa,  reading  the  same  book.  Norton’s
cheek rested against the sleeve of Johnson’s black suit. Johnson’s finger moved
under the lines they were reading. The elder brother and the younger. Sheppard
looked woodenly at this scene for almost a minute. Then he walked into the room
and took off his coat and dropped it on a chair. Neither boy noticed him. He went
on to the kitchen.

Leola left the supper on the stove every afternoon before she left and he put it
on the table. His head ached and his nerves were taut. He sat down on the kitchen
stool  and  remained  there,  sunk  in  his  depression.  He  wondered  if  he  could
infuriate Johnson enough to make him leave of his own accord. Last night what
had enraged him was the Jesus business. It might enrage Johnson, but it depressed
him.  Why  not  simply  tell  the  boy  to  go?  Admit  defeat.  The  thought  of  facing
Johnson again sickened him. The boy looked at him as if he were the guilty one, as
if he were a moral leper. He knew without conceit that he was a good man, that he
had  nothing  to  reproach  himself  with.  His  feelings  about  Johnson  now  were
involuntary. He would like to feel compassion for him. He would like to be able
to help him. He longed for the time when there would be no one but himself and
Norton in the house, when the child’s simple selfishness would be all he had to
contend with, and his own loneliness.

He  got  up  and  took  three  serving  dishes  off  the  shelf  and  took  them  to  the
stove. Absently  he  began  pouring  the  butterbeans  and  the  hash  into  the  dishes.

When the food was on the table, he called them in.

They brought the book with them. Norton pushed his place setting around to the
same side of the table as Johnson’s and moved his chair next to Johnson’s chair.
They  sat  down  and  put  the  book  between  them.  It  was  a  black  book  with  red
edges.

“What’s that you’re reading?” Sheppard asked, sitting down.
“The Holy Bible,” Johnson said.
God give me strength, Sheppard said under his breath.
“We lifted it from a ten cent store,” Johnson said.
“We?” Sheppard muttered. He turned and glared at Norton. The child’s face
was bright and there was an excited sheen to his eyes. The change that had come
over the boy struck him for the first time. He looked alert. He had on a blue plaid
shirt and his eyes were a brighter blue than he had ever seen them before. There
was a strange new life in him, the sign of new and more rugged vices. “So now
you steal?” he said, glowering. “You haven’t learned to be generous but you have
learned to steal.”

“No  he  ain’t,”  Johnson  said.  “I  was  the  one  lifted  it.  He  only  watched.  He
can’t  sully  himself.  It  don’t  make  any  difference  about  me.  I’m  going  to  hell
anyway.”

Sheppard held his tongue.
“Unless,” Johnson said, “I repent.”
“Repent, Rufus,” Norton said in a pleading voice. “Repent, hear? You don’t

want to go to hell.”

“Stop talking this nonsense,” Sheppard said, looking sharply at the child.
“If I do repent, I’ll be a preacher,” Johnson said. “If you’re going to do it, it’s

no sense in doing it halfway.”

“What  are  you  going  to  be,  Norton,”  Sheppard  asked  in  a  brittle  voice,  “a

preacher too?”

There was a glitter of wild pleasure in the child’s eyes. “A space man!” he

shouted.

“Wonderful,” Sheppard said bitterly.
“Those  space  ships  ain’t  going  to  do  you  any  good  unless  you  believe  in

Jesus,” Johnson said. He wet his finger and began to leaf through the pages of the
Bible. “I’ll read you where it says so,” he said.

Sheppard leaned forward and said in a low furious voice, “Put that Bible up,

Rufus, and eat your dinner.”

Johnson continued searching for the passage.
“Put that Bible up!” Sheppard shouted.
The boy stopped and looked up. His expression was startled but pleased.
“That  book  is  something  for  you  to  hide  behind,”  Sheppard  said.  “It’s  for
cowards, people who are afraid to stand on their own feet and figure things out for
themselves.”

Johnson’s  eyes  snapped.  He  backed  his  chair  a  little  way  from  the  table.

“Satan has you in his power,” he said. “Not only me. You too.”

Sheppard reached across the table to grab the book but Johnson snatched it and

put it in his lap.

Sheppard laughed. “You don’t believe in that book and you know you don’t

believe in it!”

“I  believe  it!”  Johnson  said.  “You  don’t  know  what  I  believe  and  what  I

don’t.”

Sheppard shook his head. “You don’t believe it. You’re to intelligent.”
“I ain’t too intelligent,” the boy muttered. “You don’t know nothing about me.

Even if I didn’t believe it, it would still be true.”

“You don’t believe it!” Sheppard said. His face was a taunt.
“I  believe  it!”  Johnson  said  breathlessly.  “I’ll  show  you  I  believe  it!”  He
opened the book in his lap and tore out a page of it and thrust it into his mouth. He
fixed his eyes on Sheppard. His jaws worked furiously and the paper crackled as
he chewed it.

“Stop this,” Sheppard said in a dry, burnt-out voice. “Stop it.”
The boy raised the Bible and tore out a page with his teeth and began grinding

it in his mouth, his eyes burning.

Sheppard  reached  across  the  table  and  knocked  the  book  out  of  his  hand.

“Leave the table,” he said coldly.

Johnson swallowed what was in his mouth. His eyes widened as if a vision of

splendor were opening up before him. “I’ve eaten it!” he breathed. “I’ve eaten it
like Ezekiel and it was honey to my mouth!”

“Leave this table,” Sheppard said. His hands were clenched beside his plate.
“I’ve eaten it!” the boy cried. Wonder transformed his face. “I’ve eaten it like

Ezekiel and I don’t want none of your food after it nor no more ever.”

“Go then,” Sheppard said softly. “Go. Go.”
The boy rose and picked up the Bible and started toward the hall with it. At
the door he paused, a small black figure on the threshold of some dark apocalypse.
“The devil has you in his power,” he said in a jubilant voice and disappeared.

*   *   *

After supper Sheppard sat in the living room alone. Johnson had left the house but
he could not believe that the boy had simply gone. The first feeling of release had
passed. He felt dull and cold as at the onset of an illness and dread had settled in
him like a fog. Just to leave would be too anticlimactic an end for Johnson’s taste;
he would return and try to prove something. He might come back a week later and
set fire to the place. Nothing seemed too outrageous now.

He picked up the paper and tried to read. In a moment he threw it down and
got up and went into the hall and listened. He might be hiding in the attic. He went
to the attic door and opened it.

The lantern was lit, casting a dim light on the stairs. He didn’t hear anything.
“Norton,” he called, “are you up there?” There was no answer. He mounted the
narrow stairs to see.

Amid  the  strange  vine-like  shadows  cast  by  the  lantern,  Norton  sat  with  his
eye to the telescope. “Norton,” Sheppard said, “do you know where Rufus went?”
The  child’s  back  was  to  him.  He  was  sitting  hunched,  intent,  his  large  ears
directly above his shoulders. Suddenly he waved his hand and crouched closer to
the telescope as if he could not get near enough to what he saw.

“Norton!” Sheppard said in a loud voice.
The child didn’t move.
“Norton!” Sheppard shouted.
Norton started. He turned around. There was an unnatural brightness about his

eyes. After a moment he seemed to see that it was Sheppard. “I’ve found her!” he
said breathlessly.

“Found who?” Sheppard said.
“Mamma!”
Sheppard steadied himself in the door way. The jungle of shadows around the

child thickened.

“Come and look!” he cried. He wiped his sweaty face on the tail of his plaid
shirt and then put his eye back to the telescope. His back became fixed in a rigid
intensity. All at once he waved again.

“Norton,”  Sheppard  said,  “you  don’t  see  anything  in  the  telescope  but  star
clusters. Now you’ve had enough of that for one night. You’d better go to bed. Do
you know where Rufus is?”

“She’s there!” he cried, not turning around from the telescope. “She waved at

me!”

“I want you in bed in fifteen minutes,” Sheppard said. After a moment he said,

“Do you hear me, Norton?”

The child began to wave frantically.
“I mean what I say,” Sheppard said. “I’m going to call in fifteen minutes and

see if you’re in bed.”

He went down the steps again and returned to the parlor. He went to the front
door and cast a cursory glance out. The sky was crowded with the stars he had
been  fool  enough  to  think  Johnson  could  reach.  Somewhere  in  the  small  wood
behind  the  house,  a  bull  frog  sounded  a  low  hollow  note.  He  went  back  to  his
chair and sat a few minutes. He decided to go to bed. He put his hands on the arms
of the chair and leaned forward and heard, like the first shrill note of a disaster
warning,  the  siren  of  a  police  car,  moving  slowly  into  the  neighborhood  and
nearer until it subsided with a moan outside the house.

He felt a cold weight on his shoulders as if an icy cloak had been thrown about

him. He went to the door and opened it.

Two  policemen  were  coming  up  the  walk  with  a  dark  snarling  Johnson
between  them,  handcuffed  to  each.  A  reporter  jogged  alongside  and  another
policeman waited in the patrol car.

“Here’s your boy,” the dourest of the policemen said. “Didn’t I tell you we’d

get him?”

Johnson jerked his arm down savagely. “I was waitin for you!” he said. “You
wouldn’t have got me if I hadn’t of wanted to get caught. It was my idea.” He was
addressing the policemen but leering at Sheppard.

Sheppard looked at him coldly.
“Why did you want to get caught?” the reporter asked, running around to get

beside Johnson. “Why did you deliberately want to get caught?”

The question and the sight of Sheppard seemed to throw the boy into a fury.
“To show up that big tin Jesus!” he hissed and kicked his leg out at Sheppard. “He
thinks he’s God. I’d rather be in the reformatory than in his house, I’d rather be in
the pen! The Devil has him in his power. He don’t know his left hand from his
right, he don’t have as much sense as his crazy kid!” He paused and then swept on
to his fantastic conclusion. “He made suggestions to me!”

Sheppard’s face blanched. He caught hold of the door facing.
“Suggestions?” the reporter said eagerly, “what kind of suggestion?”
“Immor’l suggestions!” Johnson said. “What kind of suggestions do you think?

But I ain’t having none of it, I’m a Christian, I’m…”

Sheppard’s face was tight with pain. “He knows that’s not true,” he said in a
shaken voice. “He knows he’s lying. I did everything I knew how for him. I did
more for him than I did for my own child. I hoped to save him and I failed, but it
was  an  honorable  failure.  I  have  nothing  to  reproach  myself  with.  I  made  no
suggestions to him.”

“Do  you  remember  the  suggestions?”  the  reporter  asked.  “Can  you  tell  us

exactly what he said?”

“He’s a dirty atheist,” Johnson said. “He said there wasn’t no hell.”
“Well, they seen each other now,” one of the policemen said with a knowing

sigh. “Let’s us go.”

“Wait,”  Sheppard  said.  He  came  down  one  step  and  fixed  his  eyes  on
Johnson’s eyes in a last desperate effort to save himself. “Tell the truth, Rufus,” he
said.  “You  don’t  want  to  perpetrate  this  lie.  You’re  not  evil,  you’re  mortally
confused. You don’t have to make up for that foot, you don’t have to…”

Johnson hurled himself forward. “Listen at him!” he screamed. “I lie and steal
because I’m good at it! My foot don’t have a thing to do with it! The lame shall
enter first! The halt’ll be gathered together. When I get ready to be saved, Jesus’ll
save me, not that lying stinking atheist, not that…”

“That’ll be enough out of you,” the policeman said and yanked him back. “We
just  wanted  you  to  see  we  got  him,”  he  said  to  Sheppard,  and  the  two  of  them
turned  around  and  dragged  Johnson  away,  half  turned  and  screaming  back  at
Sheppard.

“The  lame’ll  carry  off  the  prey!”  he  screeched,  but  his  voice  was  muffled
inside  the  car.  The  reporter  scrambled  into  the  front  seat  with  the  driver  and
slammed the door and the siren wailed into the darkness.

Sheppard  remained  there,  bent  slightly  like  a  man  who  has  been  shot  but
continues to stand. After a minute he turned and went back in the house and sat
down  in  the  chair  he  had  left.  He  closed  his  eyes  on  a  picture  of  Johnson  in  a
circle  of  reporters  at  the  police  station,  elaborating  his  lies.  “I  have  nothing  to
reproach myself with,” he murmured. His every action had been selfless, his one
aim had been to save Johnson for some decent kind of service, he had not spared
himself, he had sacrificed his reputation, he had done more for Johnson than he
had done for his own child. Foulness hung about him like an odor in the air, so
close  that  it  seemed  to  come  from  his  own  breath.  “I  have  nothing  to  reproach
myself with,” he repeated. His voice sounded dry and harsh. “I did more for him
than I did for my own child.” He was swept with a sudden panic. He heard the
boy’s jubilant voice. Satan has you in his power.

“I have nothing to reproach myself with,” he began again. “I did more for him
than I did for my own child.” He heard his voice as if it were the voice of his
accuser. He repeated the sentence silently.

Slowly his face drained of color. It became almost gray beneath the white halo
of his hair. The sentence echoed in his mind, each syllable like a dull blow. His
mouth twisted and he closed his eyes against the revelation. Norton’s face rose
before  him,  empty,  forlorn,  his  left  eye  listing  almost  imperceptibly  toward  the
outer rim as if it could not bear a full view of grief. His heart constricted with a
repulsion for himself so clear and intense that he gasped for breath. He had stuffed

his own emptiness with good works like a glutton. He had ignored his own child
to feed his vision of himself. He saw the clear-eyed Devil, the sounder of hearts,
leering  at  him  from  the  eyes  of  Johnson.  His  image  of  himself  shrivelled  until
everything was black before him. He sat there paralyzed, aghast.

He saw Norton at the telescope, all back and ears, saw his arm shoot up and
wave  frantically. A  rush  of  agonizing  love  for  the  child  rushed  over  him  like  a
transfusion of life. The little boy’s face appeared to him transformed; the image of
his salvation; all light. He groaned with joy. He would make everything up to him.
He would never let him suffer again. He would be mother and father. He jumped
up and ran to his room, to kiss him, to tell him that he loved him, that he would
never fail him again.

The  light  was  on  in  Norton’s  room  but  the  bed  was  empty.  He  turned  and
dashed up the attic stairs and at the top reeled back like a man on the edge of a pit.
The tripod had fallen and the telescope lay on the floor. A few feet over it, the
child  hung  in  the  jungle  of  shadows,  just  below  the  beam  from  which  he  had
launched his flight into space.

Why Do the Heathen Rage?

TILMAN had had his stroke in the state capital, where he had gone on business, and
he had stayed two weeks in the hospital there. He did not remember his arrival
home by ambulance but his wife did. She had sat for two hours on the jump seat at
his feet, gazing fixedly at his face. Only his left eye, twisted inward, seemed to
harbor  his  former  personality.  It  burned  with  rage.  The  rest  of  his  face  was
prepared for death. Justice was grim and she took satisfaction in it when she found
it. It might take just this ruin to wake Walter up.

By accident both children were at home when they arrived. Mary Maud was
driving in from school, not realizing that the ambulance was behind her. She got
out—a  large  woman  of  thirty  with  a  round  childish  face  and  a  pile  of  carrot-
colored hair that seeped about in an invisible net on top of her head—kissed her
mother,  glanced  at  Tilman  and  gasped;  then,  grim-faced  but  flustered,  marched
behind the rear attendant, giving him high-pitched instructions on how to get the
stretcher  around  the  curve  of  the  front  steps.  Exactly  like  a  schoolteacher,  her
mother  thought.  Schoolteacher  all  over.  As  the  forward  attendant  reached  the
porch, Mary Maud said sharply in a voice used to controlling children, “Get up,
Walter, and open the door!”

Walter was sitting on the edge of his chair, absorbed in the proceedings, his
finger folded in the book he had been reading before the ambulance came. He got
up and held open the screen door, and while the attendants carried the stretcher
across the porch, he gazed, obviously fascinated, at his father’s face. “Glad to see
you back, capt’n,” he said and raised his hand in a sloppy salute.

Tilman’s enraged left eye appeared to include him  in  its  vision  but  he  gave

him no sign of recognition.

Roosevelt, who from now on would be nurse instead of yard man, stood inside
the door, waiting. He had put on the white coat that he was supposed to wear for
occasions. He peered forward at what was on the stretcher. The bloodshot veins
in his eyes swelled. Then, all at once, tears glazed them and glistened on his black

cheeks like sweat. Tilman made a weak rough motion with his good arm. It was
the only gesture of affection he had given any of them. The Negro followed the
stretcher to the back bedroom, snuffling as if someone had hit him.

Mary Maud went in to direct the stretcher bearers.
Walter  and  his  mother  remained  on  the  porch.  “Close  the  door,”  she  said.

“You’re letting flies in.”

She had been watching him all along, searching for some sign in his big bland
face that some sense of urgency had touched him, some sense that now he had to
take hold, that now he had to do something, anything—she would have been glad
to  see  him  make  a  mistake,  even  make  a  mess  of  things  if  it  meant  that  he  was
doing something—but she saw that nothing had happened. His eyes were on her,
glittering just slightly behind his glasses. He had taken in every detail of Tilman’s
face;  he  had  registered  Roosevelt’s  tears,  Mary  Maud’s  confusion,  and  now  he
was studying her to see how she was taking it. She yanked her hat straight, seeing
by his eyes that it had slipped toward the back of her head.

“You ought to wear it that way,” he said. “It makes you look sort of relaxed-

by-mistake.”

She made her face hard, as hard as she could make it. “The responsibility is

yours now,” she said in a harsh, final voice.

He stood there with his half smile and said nothing. Like an absorbent lump,
she thought, taking everything in, giving nothing out. She might have been looking
at a stranger using the family face. He had the same noncommittal lawyer’s smile
as her father and grandfather, set in the same heavy jaw, under the same Roman
nose;  he  had  the  same  eyes  that  were  neither  blue  nor  green  nor  gray;  his  skull
would  soon  be  bald  like  theirs.  Her  face  became  even  harder.  “You’ll  have  to
take over and manage this place,” she said and folded her arms, “if you want to
stay here.”

The smile left him. He looked at her once hard, his expression empty, and then
beyond her out across the meadow, beyond the four oaks and the black distant tree
line, into the vacant afternoon sky. “I thought it was home,” he said, “but it don’t
do to presume.”

Her heart  constricted.  She  had  an  instant’s  revelation  that  he  was  homeless.

Homeless  here  and  homeless  anywhere.  “Of  course  it’s  home,”  she  said,  “but
somebody has to take over. Somebody has to make these Negroes work.”

“I  can’t  make  Negroes  work,”  he  muttered.  “That’s  about  the  last  thing  I’m

capable of.”

“I’ll tell you everything to do,” she said.
“Ha!” he said. “That you would.” He looked at her and his half smile returned.
“Lady,” he said, “you’re coming into your own. You were born to take over. If the
old man had had his stroke ten years ago, we’d all be better off. You could have
run a wagon train through the Bad Lands. You could stop a mob. You’re the last of
the nineteenth century, you’re.…”

“Walter,” she said, “you’re a man. I’m only a woman.”
“A woman of your generation,” Walter said, “is better than a man of mine.”
Her  mouth  drew  into  a  tight  line  of  outrage  and  her  head  trembled  almost

imperceptibly. “I would be ashamed to say it!” she whispered.

Walter dropped into the chair he had been sitting in and opened his book. A
sluggish-looking flush settled on his face. “The only virtue of my generation,” he
said,  “is  that  it  ain’t  ashamed  to  tell  the  truth  about  itself.”  He  was  already
reading. Her interview was at an end.

She  remained  standing  there,  rigid,  her  eyes  on  him  in  stunned  disgust.  Her
son. Her only son. His eyes and his skull and his smile belonged to the family face
but underneath them was a different kind of man from any she had ever known.
There  was  no  innocence  in  him,  no  rectitude,  no  conviction  either  of  sin  or
election.  The  man  she  saw  courted  good  and  evil  impartially  and  saw  so  many
sides of every question that he could not move, he could not work, he could not
even  make  niggers  work.  Any  evil  could  enter  that  vacuum.  God  knows,  she
thought and caught her breath, God knows what he might do!

He had not done anything. He was twenty-eight now and, so far as she could
see, nothing occupied him but trivia. He had the air of a person who is waiting for
some  big  event  and  can’t  start  any  work  because  it  would  only  be  interrupted.
Since he was always idle, she had thought that perhaps he wanted to be an artist or
a philosopher or something, but this was not the case. He did not want to write
anything  with  a  name.  He  amused  himself  writing  letters  to  people  he  did  not

know  and  to  the  newspapers.  Under  different  names  and  using  different
personalities, he wrote to strangers. It was a peculiar, small, contemptible vice.
Her father and her grandfather had been moral men but they would have scorned
small vices more than great ones. They knew who they were and what they owed
to themselves. It was impossible to tell what Walter knew or what his views were
on anything. He read books that had nothing to do with anything that mattered now.
Often she came behind him and found some strange underlined passage in a book
he had left lying somewhere and she would puzzle over it for days. One passage
she found in a book he had left lying on the upstairs-bathroom floor stayed with
her ominously.

“Love should be full of anger,” it began, and she thought, well mine is. She
was furious all the time. It went on, “Since you have already spurned my request,
perhaps you will listen to admonishment. What business have you in your father’s
house, O you effeminate soldier? Where are your ramparts and trenches, where is
the winter spent at the front lines? Listen! the battle trumpet blares from heaven
and see how our General marches fully armed, coming amid the clouds to conquer
the whole world. Out of the mouth of our King emerges a double-edged sword that
cuts down everything in the way. Arising finally from your nap, do you come to
the battlefield! Abandon the shade and seek the sun.”

She turned back in the book to see what she was reading. It was a letter from a
St.  Jerome  to  a  Heliodorus,  scolding  him  for  having  abandoned  the  desert.  A
footnote  said  that  Heliodorus  was  one  of  the  famous  group  that  had  centered
around Jerome at Aquileia in 370. He had accompanied Jerome to the Near East
with  the  intention  of  cultivating  a  hermitic  life.  They  had  separated  when
Heliodorus continued on to Jerusalem. Eventually he returned to Italy, and in later
years he became a distinguished churchman as the bishop of Altinum.

This was the kind of thing he read—something that made no sense for now.
Then it came to her, with an unpleasant little jolt, that the General with the sword
in his mouth, marching to do violence, was Jesus.

Revelation

THE  doctor’s  waiting  room,  which  was  very  small,  was  almost  full  when  the
Turpins entered and Mrs. Turpin, who was very large, made it look even smaller
by her presence. She stood looming at the head of the magazine table set in the
center of it, a living demonstration that the room was inadequate and ridiculous.
Her  little  bright  black  eyes  took  in  all  the  patients  as  she  sized  up  the  seating
situation. There was one vacant chair and a place on the sofa occupied by a blond
child in a dirty blue romper who should have been told to move over and make
room for the lady. He was five or six, but Mrs. Turpin saw at once that no one
was going to tell him to move over. He was slumped down in the seat, his arms
idle at his sides and his eyes idle in his head; his nose ran unchecked.

Mrs.  Turpin  put  a  firm  hand  on  Claud’s  shoulder  and  said  in  a  voice  that
included  anyone  who  wanted  to  listen,  “Claud,  you  sit  in  that  chair  there,”  and
gave him a push down into the vacant one. Claud was florid and bald and sturdy,
somewhat shorter than Mrs. Turpin, but he sat down as if he were accustomed to
doing what she told him to.

Mrs. Turpin remained standing. The only man in the room besides Claud was a
lean  stringy  old  fellow  with  a  rusty  hand  spread  out  on  each  knee,  whose  eyes
were closed as if he were asleep or dead or pretending to be so as not to get up
and offer her his seat. Her gaze settled agreeably on a well-dressed gray-haired
lady whose eyes met hers and whose expression said: if that child belonged to me,
he  would  have  some  manners  and  move  over—there’s  plenty  of  room  there  for
you and him too.

Claud looked up with a sigh and made as if to rise.
“Sit down,” Mrs. Turpin said. “You know you’re not supposed to stand on that

leg. He has an ulcer on his leg,” she explained.

Claud lifted his foot onto the magazine table and rolled his trouser leg up to

reveal a purple swelling on a plump marble-white calf.

“My!” the pleasant lady said. “How did you do that?”

“A cow kicked him,” Mrs. Turpin said.
“Goodness!” said the lady.
Claud rolled his trouser leg down.
“Maybe the little boy would move over,” the lady suggested, but the child did

not stir.

“Somebody  will  be  leaving  in  a  minute,”  Mrs.  Turpin  said.  She  could  not
understand why a doctor—with as much money as they made charging five dollars
a day to just stick their head in the hospital door and look at you—couldn’t afford
a decent-sized waiting room. This one was hardly bigger than a garage. The table
was cluttered with limp-looking magazines and at one end of it there was a big
green glass ash tray full of cigarette butts and cotton wads with little blood spots
on them. If she had had anything to do with the running of the place, that would
have been emptied every so often. There were no chairs against the wall at the
head of the room. It had a rectangular-shaped panel in it that permitted a view of
the office where the nurse came and went and the secretary listened to the radio. A
plastic fern in a gold pot sat in the opening and trailed its fronds down almost to
the floor. The radio was softly playing gospel music.

Just then the inner door opened and a nurse with the highest stack of yellow
hair Mrs. Turpin had ever seen put her face in the crack and called for the next
patient. The woman sitting beside Claud grasped the two arms of her chair and
hoisted herself up; she pulled her dress free from her legs and lumbered through
the door where the nurse had disappeared.

Mrs. Turpin eased into the vacant chair, which held her tight as a corset. “I

wish I could reduce,” she said, and rolled her eyes and gave a comic sigh.

“Oh, you aren’t fat,” the stylish lady said.
“Ooooo I am too,” Mrs. Turpin said. “Claud he eats all he wants to and never
weighs over one hundred and seventy-five pounds, but me I just look at something
good to eat and I gain some weight,” and her stomach and shoulders shook with
laughter. “You can eat all you want to, can’t you, Claud?” she  asked, turning to
him.

Claud only grinned.
“Well, as long as you have such a good disposition,” the stylish lady said, “I

don’t think it makes a bit of difference what size you are. You just can’t beat a
good disposition.”

Next to her was a fat girl of eighteen or nineteen, scowling into a thick blue
book which Mrs. Turpin saw was entitled Human Development. The girl raised
her head and directed her scowl at Mrs. Turpin as if she did not like her looks.
She appeared annoyed that anyone should speak while she tried to read. The poor
girl’s face was blue with acne and Mrs. Turpin thought how pitiful it was to have
a  face  like  that  at  that  age.  She  gave  the  girl  a  friendly  smile  but  the  girl  only
scowled the harder. Mrs. Turpin herself was fat but she had always had good skin,
and, though  she  was  forty-seven  years  old,  there  was  not  a  wrinkle  in  her  face
except around her eyes from laughing too much.

Next to the ugly girl was the child, still in exactly the same position, and next
to him was a thin leathery old woman in a cotton print dress. She and Claud had
three sacks of chicken feed in their pump house that was in the same print. She had
seen from the first that the child belonged with the old woman. She could tell by
the way they sat—kind of vacant and white-trashy, as if they would sit there until
Doomsday if nobody called and told them to get up. And at right angles but next to
the  well-dressed  pleasant  lady  was  a  lank-faced  woman  who  was  certainly  the
child’s  mother.  She  had  on  a  yellow  sweat  shirt  and  wine-colored  slacks,  both
gritty-looking, and the rims of her lips were stained with snuff. Her dirty yellow
hair was tied behind with a little piece of red paper ribbon. Worse than niggers
any day, Mrs. Turpin thought.

The gospel hymn playing was, “When I looked up and He looked down,” and
Mrs. Turpin, who knew it, supplied the last line mentally, “And wona these days I
know I’ll we-eara crown.”

Without  appearing  to,  Mrs.  Turpin  always  noticed  people’s   feet.  The  well-
dressed lady had on red and gray suede shoes to match her dress. Mrs. Turpin had
on her good black patent leather pumps. The ugly girl had on Girl Scout shoes and
heavy socks. The old woman had on tennis shoes and the white-trashy mother had
on what appeared to be bedroom slippers, black straw with gold braid threaded
through them—exactly what you would have expected her to have on.

Sometimes at night when she couldn’t go to sleep, Mrs. Turpin would occupy

herself with the question of who she would have chosen to be if she couldn’t have
been  herself.  If  Jesus  had  said  to  her  before  he  made  her,  “There’s  only  two
places available for you. You can either be a nigger or white-trash,” what would
she  have  said?  “Please,  Jesus,  please,”  she  would  have  said,  “just  let  me  wait
until there’s another place available,” and he would have said, “No, you have to
go right now and I have only those two places so make up your mind.” She would
have wiggled and squirmed and begged and pleaded but it would have been no
use and finally she would have said, “All right, make me a nigger then—but that
don’t mean a trashy one.” And he would have made her a neat clean respectable
Negro woman, herself but black.

Next to the child’s mother was a red-headed youngish woman, reading one of
the  magazines  and  working  a  piece  of  chewing  gum,  hell  for  leather,  as  Claud
would say. Mrs. Turpin could not see the woman’s feet. She was not white-trash,
just common. Sometimes Mrs. Turpin occupied herself at night naming the classes
of people. On the bottom of the heap were most colored people, not the kind she
would have been if she had been one, but most of them; then next to them—not
above,  just  away  from—were  the  white-trash;  then  above  them  were  the  home-
owners,  and  above  them  the  home-and-land  owners,  to  which  she  and  Claud
belonged. Above she and Claud were people with a lot of money and much bigger
houses and much more land. But here the complexity of it would begin to bear in
on her, for some of the people with a lot money were common and ought to be
below she and Claud and some of the people who had good blood had lost their
money and had to rent and then there were colored people who owned their homes
and land as well. There was a colored dentist in town who had two red Lincolns
and a swimming pool and a farm with registered white-face cattle on it. Usually
by  the  time  she  had  fallen  asleep  all  the  classes  of  people  were  moiling  and
roiling  around  in  her  head,  and  she  would  dream  they  were  all  crammed  in
together in a box car, being ridden off to be put in a gas oven.

“That’s a beautiful clock,” she said and nodded to her right. It was a big wall

clock, the face encased in a brass sunburst.

“Yes, it’s very pretty,” the stylish lady said agreeably. “And right  on the dot

too,” she added, glancing at her watch.

The ugly girl beside her cast an eye upward at the clock, smirked, then looked
directly at Mrs. Turpin and smirked again. Then she returned her eyes to her book.
She was obviously the lady’s daughter because, although they didn’t look anything
alike as to disposition, they both had the same shape of face and the same blue
eyes.  On  the  lady  they  sparkled  pleasantly  but  in  the  girl’s  seared  face  they
appeared alternately to smolder and to blaze.

What if Jesus had said, “All right, you can be white-trash or a nigger or ugly”!
Mrs. Turpin felt an awful pity for the girl, though she thought it was one thing

to be ugly and another to act ugly.

The woman with the snuff-stained lips turned around in her chair and looked
up at the clock. Then she turned back and appeared to look a little to the side of
Mrs. Turpin. There was a cast in one of her eyes. “You want to know wher you
can get you one of themther clocks?” she asked in a loud voice.

“No, I already have a nice clock,” Mrs. Turpin said. Once somebody like her

got a leg in the conversation, she would be all over it.

“You can get you one with green stamps,” the woman said. “That’s  most likely
wher he got hisn. Save you up enough, you can get you most anythang. I got me
some joo’ry.”

Ought to have got you a wash rag and some soap, Mrs. Turpin thought.
“I get contour sheets with mine,” the pleasant lady said.
The  daughter  slammed  her  book  shut.  She  looked  straight  in  front  of  her,
directly through Mrs. Turpin and on through the yellow curtain and the plate glass
window  which  made  the  wall  behind  her.  The  girl’s  eyes  seemed  lit  all  of  a
sudden  with  a  peculiar  light,  an  unnatural  light  like  night  road  signs  give.  Mrs.
Turpin  turned  her  head  to  see  if  there  was  anything  going  on  outside  that  she
should  see,  but  she  could  not  see  anything.  Figures  passing  cast  only  a  pale
shadow through the curtain. There was no reason the girl should single her out for
her ugly looks.

“Miss Finley,” the nurse said, cracking the door. The gum-chewing woman got
up and passed in front of her and Claud and went into the office. She had on red
high-heeled shoes.

Directly across the table, the ugly girl’s eyes were fixed on Mrs. Turpin as if

she had some very special reason for disliking her.

“This is wonderful weather, isn’t it?” the girl’s mother said.
“It’s good weather for cotton if you can get the niggers to pick it,” Mrs. Turpin
said,  “but  niggers  don’t  want  to  pick  cotton  any  more. You  can’t  get  the  white
folks to pick it and now you can’t get the niggers—because they got to be right up
there with the white folks.”

“They gonna try anyways,” the white-trash woman said, leaning forward.
“Do you have one of the cotton-picking machines?” the pleasant lady asked.
“No,” Mrs. Turpin said, “they leave half the cotton in the field. We don’t have
much cotton anyway. If you want to make it farming now, you have to have a little
of everything. We got a couple of acres of cotton and a few hogs and chickens and
just enough white-face that Claud can look after them himself.”

“One thang I don’t want,” the white-trash woman said, wiping her mouth with
the back of her hand. “Hogs. Nasty stinking things, a-gruntin and a-rootin all over
the place.”

Mrs. Turpin gave her the merest edge of her attention. “Our hogs are not dirty
and  they  don’t  stink,”  she  said.  “They’re  cleaner  than  some  children  I’ve  seen.
Their feet never touch the ground. We have a pig-parlor—that’s where you raise
them  on  concrete,”  she  explained  to  the  pleasant  lady,  “and  Claud  scoots  them
down with the hose every afternoon and washes off the floor.” Cleaner by far than
that child right there, she thought. Poor nasty little thing. He had not moved except
to put the thumb of his dirty hand into his mouth.

The woman turned her face away from Mrs. Turpin. “I know I wouldn’t scoot

down no hog with no hose,” she said to the wall.

You wouldn’t have no hog to scoot down, Mrs. Turpin said to herself.
“A-gruntin and a-rootin and a-groanin,” the woman muttered.
“We got a little of everything,” Mrs. Turpin said to the pleasant lady. “It’s no
use  in  having  more  than  you  can  handle  yourself  with  help  like  it  is.  We  found
enough niggers to pick our cotton this year but Claud he has to go after them and
take them home again in the evening. They can’t walk that half a mile.  No  they
can’t. I tell you,” she said and laughed merrily, “I sure am tired of buttering up
niggers, but you got to love em if you want em to work for you. When they come in

the morning, I run out and I say, ‘Hi yawl this morning?’ and when Claud drives
them off to the field I just wave to beat the band and they just wave back.” And
she waved her hand rapidly to illustrate.

“Like you read out of the same book,” the lady said, showing she understood

perfectly.

“Child, yes,” Mrs. Turpin said. “And when they come in from the field, I run
out with a bucket of icewater. That’s the way it’s going to be from now on,” she
said. “You may as well face it.”

“One thang I know,” the white-trash woman said. “Two thangs I ain’t going to
do: love no niggers or scoot down no hog with no hose.” And she let out a bark of
contempt.

The look that Mrs. Turpin and the pleasant lady exchanged indicated they both
understood  that  you  had  to have  certain  things  before  you  could know  certain
things. But every time Mrs. Turpin exchanged a look with the lady, she was aware
that the ugly girl’s peculiar eyes were still on her, and she had trouble bringing her
attention back to the conversation.

“When you got something,” she said, “you got to look after it.” And when you
ain’t got a thing but breath and britches, she added to herself, you can afford to
come to town every morning and just sit on the Court House coping and spit.

A grotesque revolving shadow passed across the curtain behind her and was
thrown  palely  on  the  opposite  wall.  Then  a  bicycle  clattered  down  against  the
outside of the building. The door opened and a colored boy glided in with a tray
from the drugstore. It had two large red and white paper cups on it with tops on
them. He was a tall, very black boy in discolored white pants and a green nylon
shirt.  He  was  chewing  gum  slowly,  as  if  to  music.  He  set  the  tray  down  in  the
office opening next to the fern and stuck his head through to look for the secretary.
She  was  not  in  there.  He  rested  his  arms  on  the  ledge  and  waited,  his  narrow
bottom stuck out, swaying to the left and right. He raised a hand over his head and
scratched the base of his skull.

“You see that button there, boy?” Mrs. Turpin said. “You can punch that and

she’ll come. She’s probably in the back somewhere.”

“Is  thas  right?”  the  boy  said  agreeably,  as  if  he  had  never  seen  the  button

before. He leaned to the right and put his finger on it. “She sometime out,” he said
and twisted around to face his audience, his elbows behind him on the counter.
The nurse appeared and he twisted back again. She handed him a dollar and he
rooted in his pocket and made the change and counted it out to her. She gave him
fifteen cents for a tip and he went out with the empty tray. The heavy door swung
to slowly and closed at  length  with  the  sound  of  suction.  For  a  moment  no  one
spoke.

“They ought to send all them niggers back to Africa,” the white-trash woman

said. “That’s wher they come from in the first place.”

“Oh, I couldn’t do without my good colored friends,” the pleasant lady said.
“There’s a heap of things worse than a nigger,” Mrs. Turpin agreed. “It’s all

kinds of them just like it’s all kinds of us.”

“Yes, and it takes all kinds to make the world go round,” the lady said in her

musical voice.

As  she  said  it,  the  raw-complexioned  girl  snapped  her  teeth  together.  Her
lower lip turned downwards and inside out, revealing the pale pink inside of her
mouth. After a second it rolled back up. It was the ugliest face Mrs. Turpin had
ever seen anyone make and for a moment she was certain that the girl had made it
at her. She was looking at her as if she had known and disliked her all her life—
all  of  Mrs.  Turpin’s  life,  it  seemed  too,  not  just  all  the  girl’s  life.  Why,  girl,  I
don’t even know you, Mrs. Turpin said silently.

She  forced  her  attention  back  to  the  discussion.  “It  wouldn’t  be  practical  to
send them back to Africa,” she said. “They wouldn’t want to go. They got it too
good here.”

“Wouldn’t be what they wanted—if I had anythang to do with it,” the woman

said.

“It  wouldn’t  be  a  way  in  the  world  you  could  get  all  the  niggers  back  over
there,” Mrs. Turpin said. “They’d be hiding out and lying down and turning sick
on you and wailing and hollering and raring and pitching. It wouldn’t be a way in
the world to get them over there.”

“They got over here,” the trashy woman said. “Get back like they got over.”
“It wasn’t so many of them then,” Mrs. Turpin explained.

The  woman  looked  at  Mrs.  Turpin  as  if  here  was  an  idiot  indeed  but  Mrs.

Turpin was not bothered by the look, considering where it came from.

“Nooo,” she said, “they’re going to stay here where they can go to New York
and marry white folks and improve their color. That’s what they all want to do,
every one of them, improve their color.”

“You know what comes of that, don’t you?” Claud asked.
“No, Claud, what?” Mrs. Turpin said.
Claud’s eyes twinkled. “White-faced niggers,” he said with never a smile.
Everybody in the office laughed except the white-trash and the ugly girl. The
girl  gripped  the  book  in  her  lap  with  white  fingers.  The  trashy  woman  looked
around her from face to face as if she thought they were all idiots. The old woman
in  the  feed  sack  dress  continued  to  gaze  expressionless  across  the  floor  at  the
high-top shoes of the man opposite her, the one who had been pretending to be
asleep when the Turpins came in. He was laughing heartily, his hands still spread
out on his knees. The child had fallen to the side and was lying now almost face
down in the old woman’s lap.

While they recovered from their laughter, the nasal chorus on the radio kept

the room from silence.

“You go to blank blank
And I’ll go to mine
But we’ll all blank along
To-geth-ther,
And all along the blank
We’ll hep eachother out
Smile-ling in any kind of
Weath-ther!”

Mrs. Turpin didn’t catch every word but she caught enough to agree with the
spirit of the song and it turned her thoughts sober. To help anybody out that needed
it was her philosophy of life. She never spared herself when she found somebody
in need, whether they were white or black, trash or decent. And of all she had to
be thankful for, she was most thankful that this was so. If Jesus had said, “You can
be high society and have all the money you want and be thin and svelte-like, but

you can’t be a good woman with it,” she would have had to say, “Well don’t make
me that then. Make me a good woman and it don’t matter what else, how fat or
how ugly or how poor!” Her heart rose. He had not made her a nigger or white-
trash or ugly! He had made her herself and given her a little of everything. Jesus,
thank  you!  she  said.  Thank  you  thank  you  thank  you!  Whenever  she  counted  her
blessings  she  felt  as  buoyant  as  if  she  weighed  one  hundred  and  twenty-five
pounds instead of one hundred and eighty.

“What’s wrong with your little boy?” the pleasant lady asked the white-trashy

woman.

“He has a ulcer,” the woman said proudly. “He ain’t give me a minute’s peace
since  he  was  born.  Him  and  her  are  just  alike,”  she  said,  nodding  at  the  old
woman, who was running her leathery fingers through the child’s pale hair. “Look
like I can’t get nothing down them two but Co’ Cola and candy.”

That’s all you try to get down em, Mrs. Turpin said to herself. Too lazy to light
the  fire.  There  was  nothing  you  could  tell  her  about  people  like  them  that  she
didn’t know already. And it was not just that they didn’t have anything. Because if
you gave them everything, in two weeks it would all be broken or filthy or they
would  have  chopped  it  up  for  lightwood.  She  knew  all  this  from  her  own
experience. Help them you must, but help them you couldn’t.

All at once the ugly girl turned her lips inside out again. Her eyes fixed like
two  drills  on  Mrs.  Turpin.  This  time  there  was  no  mistaking  that  there  was
something urgent behind them.

Girl, Mrs. Turpin exclaimed silently, I haven’t done a thing to you! The girl
might be confusing her with somebody else. There was no need to sit by and let
herself be intimidated. “You must be in college,” she said boldly, looking directly
at the girl. “I see you reading a book there.”

The girl continued to stare and pointedly did not answer.
Her  mother  blushed  at  this  rudeness.  “The  lady  asked  you  a  question,  Mary

Grace,” she said under her breath.
“I have ears,” Mary Grace said.
The poor mother blushed again. “Mary Grace goes to Wellesley College,” she
explained. She twisted one of the buttons on her dress. “In Massachusetts,” she

added with a grimace. “And in the summer she just keeps right on studying. Just
reads all the time, a real book worm. She’s done real well at Wellesley; she’s
taking  English  and  Math  and  History  and  Psychology  and  Social  Studies,”  she
rattled on, “and I think it’s too much. I think she ought to get out and have fun.”

The girl looked as if she would like to hurl them all through the plate glass

window.

“Way up north,” Mrs. Turpin murmured and thought, well, it hasn’t done much

for her manners.

“I’d almost rather to have him sick,” the white-trash woman said, wrenching
the  attention  back  to  herself.  “He’s  so  mean  when  he  ain’t.  Look  like  some
children just take natural to meanness. It’s some gets bad when they get sick but he
was the opposite. Took sick and turned good. He don’t give me no trouble now.
It’s me waitin to see the doctor,” she said.

If I was going to send anybody back to Africa, Mrs. Turpin thought, it would
be your kind, woman. “Yes, indeed,” she said aloud, but looking up at the ceiling,
“it’s a heap of things worse than a nigger.” And dirtier than a hog, she added to
herself.

“I  think  people  with  bad  dispositions  are  more  to  be  pitied  than  anyone  on

earth,” the pleasant lady said in a voice that was decidedly thin.

“I thank the Lord he has blessed me with a good one,” Mrs. Turpin said. “The

day has never dawned that I couldn’t find something to laugh at.”

“Not since she married me anyways,” Claud said with a comical straight face.
Everybody laughed except the girl and the white-trash.
Mrs.  Turpin’s  stomach  shook.  “He’s  such  a  caution,”  she  said,  “that  I  can’t

help but laugh at him.”

The girl made a loud ugly noise through her teeth.
Her mother’s mouth grew thin and tight. “I think the worst thing in the world,”
she  said,  “is  an  ungrateful  person.  To  have  everything  and  not  appreciate  it.  I
know  a  girl,”  she  said,  “who  has  parents  who  would  give  her  anything,  a  little
brother who loves her dearly, who is getting a good education, who wears the best
clothes, but who can never say a kind word to anyone, who never smiles, who just
criticizes and complains all day long.”

“Is she too old to paddle?” Claud asked.
The girl’s face was almost purple.
“Yes,”  the  lady  said,  “I’m  afraid  there’s  nothing  to  do  but  leave  her  to  her

folly. Some day she’ll wake up and it’ll be too late.”

“It never hurt anyone to smile,” Mrs. Turpin said. “It just makes you feel better

all over.”

“Of course,” the lady said sadly, “but there are just some people you can’t tell

anything to. They can’t take criticism.”

“If it’s one thing I am,” Mrs. Turpin said with feeling, “it’s grateful. When I
think  who  all  I  could  have  been  besides  myself  and  what  all  I  got,  a  little  of
everything, and a good disposition besides, I just feel like shouting, ‘Thank you,
Jesus, for making everything the way it is!’ It could have been different!” For one
thing, somebody else could have got Claud. At the thought of this, she was flooded
with gratitude and a terrible pang of joy  ran  through  her.  “Oh  thank  you,  Jesus,
Jesus, thank you!” she cried aloud.

The  book  struck  her  directly  over  her  left  eye.  It  struck  almost  at  the  same
instant  that  she  realized  the  girl  was  about  to  hurl  it.  Before  she  could  utter  a
sound,  the  raw  face  came  crashing  across  the  table  toward  her,  howling.  The
girl’s fingers sank like clamps into the soft flesh of her neck. She heard the mother
cry out and Claud shout, “Whoa!” There was an instant when she was certain that
she was about to be in an earthquake.

All  at  once  her  vision  narrowed  and  she  saw  everything  as  if  it  were
happening in a small room far away, or as if she were looking at it through the
wrong end of a telescope. Claud’s face crumpled and fell out of sight. The nurse
ran in, then out, then in again. Then the gangling figure of the doctor rushed out of
the inner door. Magazines flew this way and that as the table turned over. The girl
fell  with  a  thud  and  Mrs.  Turpin’s  vision  suddenly  reversed  itself  and  she  saw
everything  large  instead  of  small.  The  eyes  of  the  white-trashy  woman  were
staring hugely at the floor. There the girl, held down on one side by the nurse and
on the other by her mother, was wrenching and turning in their grasp. The doctor
was kneeling astride her, trying to hold her arm down. He managed after a second
to sink a long needle into it.

Mrs. Turpin felt entirely hollow except for her heart which swung from side to

side as if it were agitated in a great empty drum of flesh.

“Somebody that’s not busy call for the ambulance,” the doctor said in the off-

hand voice young doctors adopt for terrible occasions.

Mrs. Turpin could not have moved a finger. The old man who had been sitting
next to her skipped nimbly into the office and made the call, for the secretary still
seemed to be gone.

“Claud!” Mrs. Turpin called.
He was not in his chair. She knew she must jump up and find him but she felt
like some one trying to catch a train in a dream, when everything moves in slow
motion and the faster you try to run the slower you go.

“Here I am,” a suffocated voice, very unlike Claud’s, said.
He was doubled up in the corner on the floor, pale as paper, holding his leg.
She wanted to get up and go to him but she could not move. Instead, her gaze was
drawn slowly downward to the churning face on the floor, which she could see
over the doctor’s shoulder.

The  girl’s  eyes  stopped  rolling  and  focused  on  her.  They  seemed  a  much
lighter blue than before, as if a door that had been tightly closed behind them was
now open to admit light and air.

Mrs.  Turpin’s  head  cleared  and  her  power  of  motion  returned.  She  leaned
forward until she was looking directly into the fierce brilliant eyes. There was no
doubt  in  her  mind  that  the  girl  did  know  her,  knew  her  in  some  intense  and
personal way, beyond time and place and condition. “What you got to say to me?”
she asked hoarsely and held her breath, waiting, as for a revelation.

The  girl  raised  her  head.  Her  gaze  locked  with  Mrs.  Turpin’s.  “Go  back  to
hell where you came from, you old wart hog,” she whispered. Her voice was low
but  clear.  Her  eyes  burned  for  a  moment  as  if  she  saw  with  pleasure  that  her
message had struck its target.

Mrs. Turpin sank back in her chair.
After a moment the girl’s eyes closed and she turned her head wearily to the

side.

The doctor rose and handed the nurse the empty syringe. He leaned over and

put both hands for a moment on the mother’s shoulders, which were shaking. She
was sitting on the floor, her lips pressed together, holding Mary Grace’s hand in
her lap. The girl’s fingers were gripped like a baby’s around her thumb. “Go on to
the hospital,” he said. “I’ll call and make the arrangements.”

“Now let’s see that neck,” he said in a jovial voice to Mrs. Turpin. He began
to inspect her neck with his first two fingers. Two little moon-shaped lines like
pink fish bones were indented over her windpipe. There was the beginning of an
angry red swelling above her eye. His fingers passed over this also.

“Lea’  me  be,”  she  said  thickly  and  shook  him  off.  “See  about  Claud.  She

kicked him.”

“I’ll see about him in a minute,” he said and felt her pulse. He was a thin gray-
haired man, given to pleasantries. “Go home and have yourself a vacation the rest
of the day,” he said and patted her on the shoulder.

Quit your pattin me, Mrs. Turpin growled to herself.
“And put an ice pack over that eye,” he said. Then he went and squatted down
beside Claud and looked at his leg. After a moment he pulled him up and Claud
limped after him into the office.

Until  the  ambulance  came,  the  only  sounds  in  the  room  were  the  tremulous
moans  of  the  girl’s  mother,  who  continued  to  sit  on  the  floor.  The  white-trash
woman  did  not  take  her  eyes  off  the  girl.  Mrs.  Turpin  looked  straight  ahead  at
nothing. Presently the ambulance drew up, a long dark shadow, behind the curtain.
The attendants came in and set the stretcher down beside the girl and lifted her
expertly  onto  it  and  carried  her  out.  The  nurse  helped  the  mother  gather  up  her
things.  The  shadow  of  the  ambulance  moved  silently  away  and  the  nurse  came
back in the office.

“That  ther  girl  is  going  to  be  a  lunatic,  ain’t  she?”  the  white-trash  woman

asked the nurse, but the nurse kept on to the back and never answered her.

“Yes, she’s going to be a lunatic,” the white-trash woman said to the rest of

them.

“Po’ critter,” the old woman murmured. The child’s face was still in her lap.
His eyes looked idly out over her knees. He had not moved during the disturbance
except to draw one leg up under him.

“I thank Gawd,” the white-trash woman said fervently, “I ain’t a lunatic.”
Claud came limping out and the Turpins went home.
As their pick-up truck turned into their own dirt road and made the crest of the
hill, Mrs. Turpin gripped the window ledge and looked out suspiciously. The land
sloped gracefully down through a field dotted with lavender weeds and at the start
of the rise their small yellow frame house, with its little flower beds spread out
around it like a fancy apron, sat primly in its accustomed place between two giant
hickory trees. She would not have been startled to see a burnt wound between two
blackened chimneys.

Neither of them felt like eating so they put on their house clothes and lowered
the shade in the bedroom and lay down, Claud with his leg on a pillow and herself
with  a  damp  washcloth  over  her  eye.  The  instant  she  was  flat  on  her  back,  the
image of a razor-backed hog with warts on its face and horns coming out behind
its ears snorted into her head. She moaned, a low quiet moan.

“I am not,” she said tearfully, “a wart hog. From hell.” But the denial had no
force. The girl’s eyes and her words, even the tone of her voice, low but clear,
directed  only  to  her,  brooked  no  repudiation.  She  had  been  singled  out  for  the
message,  though  there  was  trash  in  the  room  to  whom  it  might  justly  have  been
applied. The full force of this fact struck her only now. There was a woman there
who was neglecting her own child but she had been overlooked. The message had
been  given  to  Ruby  Turpin,  a  respectable,  hard-working,  church-going  woman.
The tears dried. Her eyes began to burn instead with wrath.

She rose on her elbow and the washcloth fell into her hand. Claud was lying
on his back, snoring. She wanted to tell him what the girl had said. At the same
time, she did not wish to put the image of herself as a wart hog from hell into his
mind.

“Hey, Claud,” she muttered and pushed his shoulder.
Claud opened one pale baby blue eye.
She tooked into it warily. He did not think about anything. He just went his

way.

“Wha, whasit?” he said and closed the eye again.
“Nothing,” she said. “Does your leg pain you?”

“Hurts like hell,” Claud said.
“It’ll  quit  terreckly,”  she  said  and  lay  back  down.  In  a  moment  Claud  was
snoring  again.  For  the  rest  of  the  afternoon  they  lay  there.  Claud  slept.  She
scowled at the ceiling. Occasionally she raised her fist and made a small stabbing
motion over her chest as if she was defending her innocence to invisible guests
who were like the comforters of Job, reasonable-seeming but wrong.

About five-thirty Claud stirred. “Got to go after those niggers,” he sighed, not

moving.

She was looking straight up as if there were unintelligible handwriting on the
ceiling. The protuberance over her eye had turned a greenish-blue. “Listen here,”
she said.

“What?”
“Kiss me.”
Claud leaned over and kissed her loudly on the mouth. He pinched her side
and  their  hands  interlocked.  Her  expression  of  ferocious  concentration  did  not
change.  Claud  got  up,  groaning  and  growling,  and  limped  off.  She  continued  to
study the ceiling.

She  did  not  get  up  until  she  heard  the  pick-up  truck  coming  back  with  the
Negroes. Then she rose and thrust her feet in her brown oxfords, which she did not
bother to lace, and stumped out onto the back porch and got her red plastic bucket.
She emptied a tray of ice cubes into it and filled it half full of water and went out
into the back yard. Every afternoon after Claud brought the hands in, one of the
boys helped him put out hay and the rest waited in the back of the truck until he
was ready to take them home. The truck was parked in the shade under one of the
hickory trees.

“Hi yawl this evening?” Mrs Turpin asked grimly, appearing with the bucket

and the dipper. There were three women and a boy in the truck.

“Us doin nicely,” the oldest woman said. “Hi you doin?” and her gaze stuck
immediately on the dark lump on Mrs. Turpin’s forehead. “You done fell down,
ain’t you?” she asked in a solicitous voice. The old woman was dark and almost
toothless. She had on an old felt hat of Claud’s set back on her head. The other
two women were younger and lighter and they both had new bright green sunhats.

One of them had hers on her head; the other had taken hers off and the boy was
grinning beneath it.

Mrs.  Turpin  set  the  bucket  down  on  the  floor  of  the  truck.  “Yawl  hep
yourselves,”  she  said.  She  looked  around  to  make  sure  Claud  had  gone.  “No,  I
didn’t fall down,” she said, folding her arms. “It was something worse than that.”
“Ain’t nothing bad happen to you!” the old woman said. She said it as if they
all  knew  that  Mrs.  Turpin  was  protected  in  some  special  way  by  Divine
Providence. “You just had you a little fall.”

“We  were  in  town  at  the  doctor’s  office  for  where  the  cow  kicked  Mr.
Turpin,” Mrs. Turpin said in a flat tone that indicated they could leave off their
foolishness. “And there was this girl there. A big fat girl with her face all broke
out. I could look at that girl and tell she was peculiar but I couldn’t tell how. And
me and her mama was just talking and going along and all of a sudden WHAM!
She throws this big book she was reading at me and…”

“Naw!” the old woman cried out.
“And then she jumps over the table and commences to choke me.”
“Naw!” they all exclaimed, “naw!”
“Hi come she do that?” the old woman asked. “What ail her?”
Mrs. Turpin only glared in front of her.
“Somethin ail her,” the old woman said.
“They carried  her  off  in  an  ambulance,”  Mrs.  Turpin  continued,  “but  before
she went she was rolling on the floor and they were trying to hold her down to
give her a shot and she said something to me.” She paused. “You know what she
said to me?”

“What she say?” they asked.
“She  said,”  Mrs.  Turpin  began,  and  stopped,  her  face  very  dark  and  heavy.
The  sun  was  getting  whiter  and  whiter,  blanching  the  sky  overhead  so  that  the
leaves of the hickory tree were black in the face of it. She could not bring forth the
words. “Something real ugly,” she muttered.

“She  sho  shouldn’t  said  nothin  ugly  to  you,”  the  old  woman  said.  “You  so

sweet. You the sweetest lady I know.”

“She pretty too,” the one with the hat on said.

“And stout,” the other one said. “I never knowed no sweeter white lady.”
“That’s the truth befo’ Jesus,” the old woman said. “Amen! You des as sweet

and pretty as you can be.”

Mrs. Turpin knew exactly how much Negro flattery was worth and it added to
her rage. “She said,” she began again and finished this time with a fierce rush of
breath, “that I was an old wart hog from hell.”

There was an astounded silence.
“Where she at?” the youngest woman cried in a piercing voice.
“Lemme see her. I’ll kill her!”
“I’ll kill her with you!” the other one cried.
“She  b’long  in  the  sylum,”  the  old  woman  said  emphatically.  “You  the

sweetest white lady I know.”

“She  pretty  too,”  the  other  two  said.  “Stout  as  she  can  be  and  sweet.  Jesus

satisfied with her!”

“Deed he is,” the old woman declared.
Idiots!  Mrs.  Turpin  growled  to  herself.  You  could  never  say  anything
intelligent to a nigger. You could talk at them but not with them. “Yawl ain’t drunk
your water,” she said shortly. “Leave the bucket in the truck when you’re finished
with it. I got more to do than just stand around and pass the time of day,” and she
moved off and into the house.

She stood for a moment in the middle of the kitchen. The dark protuberance
over  her  eye  looked  like  a  miniature  tornado  cloud  which  might  any  moment
sweep across the horizon of her brow. Her lower lip protruded dangerously. She
squared her massive shoulders. Then she marched into the front of the house and
out the side door and started down the road to the pig parlor. She had the look of a
woman going single-handed, weaponless, into battle.

The sun was a deep yellow now like a harvest moon and was riding westward
very fast over the far tree line as if it meant to reach the hogs before she did. The
road was rutted and she kicked several good-sized stones out of her path as she
strode along. The pig parlor was on a little knoll at the end of a lane that ran off
from the side of the barn. It was a square of concrete as large as a small room,
with  a  board  fence  about  four  feet  high  around  it.  The  concrete  floor  sloped

slightly so that the hog wash could drain off into a trench where it was carried to
the  field  for  fertilizer.  Claud  was  standing  on  the  outside,  on  the  edge  of  the
concrete, hanging onto the top board, hosing down the floor inside. The hose was
connected to the faucet of a water trough nearby.

Mrs.  Turpin  climbed  up  beside  him  and  glowered  down  at  the  hogs  inside.
There were seven long-snouted bristly shoats in it—tan with liver-colored spots
—and  an  old  sow  a  few  weeks  off  from  farrowing.  She  was  lying  on  her  side
grunting.  The  shoats  were  running  about  shaking  themselves  like  idiot  children,
their little slit pig eyes searching the floor for anything left. She had read that pigs
were  the  most  intelligent  animal.  She  doubted  it.  They  were  supposed  to  be
smarter  than  dogs.  There  had  even  been  a  pig  astronaut.  He  had  performed  his
assignment perfectly but died of a heart attack afterwards because they left him in
his electric suit, sitting upright  throughout  his  examination  when  naturally  a  hog
should be on all fours.

A-gruntin and a-rootin and a-groanin.
“Gimme that hose,” she said, yanking it away from Claud. “Go on and carry

them niggers home and then get off that leg.”

“You look like you might have swallowed a mad dog,” Claud observed, but he

got down and limped off. He paid no attention to her humors.

Until he was out of earshot, Mrs. Turpin stood on the side of the pen, holding
the  hose  and  pointing  the  stream  of  water  at  the  hind  quarters  of  any  shoat  that
looked as if it might try to lie down. When he had had time to get over the hill, she
turned her head slightly and her wrathful eyes scanned the path. He was nowhere
in  sight.  She  turned  back  again  and  seemed  to  gather  herself  up.  Her  shoulders
rose and she drew in her breath.

“What do you send me a message like that for?” she said in a low fierce voice,
barely  above  a  whisper  but  with  the  force  of  a  shout  in  its  concentrated  fury.
“How am I a hog and me both? How am I saved and from hell too?” Her free fist
was knotted and with the other she gripped the hose, blindly pointing the stream of
water in and out of the eye of the old sow whose outraged squeal she did not hear.
The pig parlor commanded a view of the back pasture where their twenty beef
cows  were  gathered  around  the  hay-bales  Claud  and  the  boy  had  put  out.  The

freshly cut pasture sloped down to the highway. Across it was their cotton field
and beyond that a dark green dusty wood which they owned as well. The sun was
behind  the  wood,  very  red,  looking  over  the  paling  of  trees  like  a  farmer
inspecting his own hogs.

“Why  me?”  she  rumbled.  “It’s  no  trash  around  here,  black  or  white,  that  I
haven’t given to. And break my back to the bone every day working. And do for
the church.”

She  appeared  to  be  the  right  size  woman  to  command  the  arena  before  her.
“How am I a hog?” she demanded. “Exactly how am I like them?” and she jabbed
the stream of water at the shoats. “There was plenty of trash there. It didn’t have to
be me.

“If  you  like  trash  better,  go  get  yourself  some  trash  then,”  she  railed.  “You
could have made me trash. Or a nigger. If trash is what you wanted why didn’t you
make  me  trash?”  She  shook  her  fist  with  the  hose  in  it  and  a  watery  snake
appeared  momentarily  in  the  air.  “I  could  quit  working  and  take  it  easy  and  be
filthy,” she growled. “Lounge about the sidewalks all day drinking root beer. Dip
snuff and spit in every puddle and have it all over my face. I could be nasty.

“Or you could have made me a nigger. It’s too late for me to be a nigger,” she
said with deep sarcasm, “but I could act like one. Lay down in the middle of the
road and stop traffic. Roll on the ground.”

In the deepening light everything was taking on a mysterious hue. The pasture
was  growing  a  peculiar  glassy  green  and  the  streak  of  highway  had  turned
lavender. She braced herself for a final assault and this time her voice rolled out
over the pasture. “Go on,” she yelled, “call me a hog! Call me a hog again. From
hell. Call me a wart hog from hell. Put that bottom rail on top. There’ll still be a
top and bottom!”

A garbled echo returned to her.
A final surge of fury shook her and she roared, “Who do you think you are?”
The color of everything, field and crimson sky, burned for a moment with a
transparent intensity. The question carried over the pasture and across the highway
and the cotton field and returned to her clearly like an answer from beyond the
wood.

She opened her mouth but no sound came out of it.
A tiny truck, Claud’s, appeared on the highway, heading rapidly out of sight.
Its gears scraped thinly. It looked like a child’s toy. At any moment a bigger truck
might smash into it and scatter Claud’s and the niggers’ brains all over the road.

Mrs. Turpin stood there, her gaze fixed on the highway, all her muscles rigid,
until in five or six minutes the truck reappeared, returning. She waited until it had
had time to turn into their own road. Then like a monumental statue coming to life,
she bent her head slowly and gazed, as if through the very heart of mystery, down
into the pig parlor at the hogs. They had settled all in one corner around the old
sow who was grunting softly. A red glow suffused them. They appeared to pant
with a secret life.

Until the sun slipped finally behind the tree line, Mrs. Turpin remained there
with  her  gaze  bent  to  them  as  if  she  were  absorbing  some  abysmal  life-giving
knowledge. At last she lifted her head. There was only a purple streak in the sky,
cutting through a field of crimson and leading, like an extension of the highway,
into the descending dusk. She raised her hands from the side of the pen in a gesture
hieratic and profound. A visionary light settled in her eyes. She saw the streak as
a vast swinging bridge extending upward from the earth through a field of living
fire.  Upon  it  a  vast  horde  of  souls  were  rumbling  toward  heaven.  There  were
whole companies of white-trash, clean for the first time in their lives, and bands
of black niggers in white robes, and battalions of freaks and lunatics shouting and
clapping and leaping like frogs. And bringing up the end of the procession was a
tribe of people whom she recognized at once as those who, like herself and Claud,
had always had a little of everything and the God-given wit to use it right. She
leaned  forward  to  observe  them  closer.  They  were  marching  behind  the  others
with  great  dignity,  accountable  as  they  had  always  been  for  good  order  and
common sense and respectable behavior. They alone were on key. Yet she could
see by their shocked and altered faces that even their virtues were being burned
away. She lowered her hands and gripped the rail of the hog pen, her eyes small
but  fixed  unblinkingly  on  what  lay  ahead.  In  a  moment  the  vision  faded  but  she
remained where she was, immobile.

At length she got down and turned off the faucet and made her slow way on the

darkening path to the house. In the woods around her the invisible cricket choruses
had struck up, but what she heard were the voices of the souls climbing upward
into the starry field and shouting hallelujah.

Parker’s Back

PARKER’S wife was sitting on the front porch floor, snapping beans. Parker was
sitting  on  the  step,  some  distance  away,  watching  her  sullenly.  She  was  plain,
plain. The skin on her face was thin and drawn as tight as the skin on an onion and
her eyes were gray and sharp like the points of two icepicks. Parker understood
why he had married her—he couldn’t have got her any other way—but he couldn’t
understand why he stayed with her now. She was pregnant and pregnant women
were not his favorite kind. Nevertheless, he stayed as if she had him conjured. He
was puzzled and ashamed of himself.

The  house  they  rented  sat  alone  save  for  a  single  tall  pecan  tree  on  a  high
embankment overlooking a highway. At intervals a car would shoot past below
and his wife’s eyes would swerve suspiciously after the sound of it and then come
back to rest on the newspaper full of beans in her lap. One of the things she did not
approve  of  was  automobiles.  In  addition  to  her  other  bad  qualities,  she  was
forever sniffing up sin. She did not smoke or dip, drink whiskey, use bad language
or  paint  her  face,  and  God  knew  some  paint  would  have  improved  it,  Parker
thought. Her being against color, it was the more remarkable she had married him.
Sometimes he supposed that she had married him because she meant to save him.
At other times he had a suspicion that she actually liked everything she said she
didn’t. He could account for her one way or another; it was himself he could not
understand.

She turned her head in his direction and said, “It’s no reason you can’t work

for a man. It don’t have to be a woman.”

“Aw shut your mouth for a change,” Parker muttered.
If he had been certain she was jealous of the woman he worked for he would
have  been  pleased  but  more  likely  she  was  concerned  with  the  sin  that  would
result if he and the woman took a liking to each other. He had told her that the
woman was a hefty young blonde; in fact she was nearly seventy years old and too
dried up to have an interest in anything except getting as much work out of him as

she could. Not that an old woman didn’t sometimes get an interest in a young man,
particularly  if  he  was  as  attractive  as  Parker  felt  he  was,  but  this  old  woman
looked at him the same way she looked at her old tractor—as if she had to put up
with it because it was all she had. The tractor had broken down the second day
Parker was on it and she had set him at once to cutting bushes, saying out of the
side of her mouth to the nigger, “Everything he touches, he breaks.” She also asked
him to wear his shirt when he worked; Parker had removed it even though the day
was not sultry; he put it back on reluctantly.

This ugly woman Parker married was his first wife. He had had other women
but he had planned never to get himself tied up legally. He had first seen her one
morning when his truck broke down on the highway. He had managed to pull it off
the road into a neatly swept yard on which sat a peeling two-room house. He got
out and opened the hood of the truck and began to study the motor. Parker had an
extra sense that told him when there was a woman nearby watching him. After he
had leaned over the motor a few minutes, his neck began to prickle. He cast his
eye over the empty yard and porch of the house. A woman he could not see was
either nearby beyond a clump of honeysuckle or in the house, watching him out the
window.

Suddenly Parker began to jump up and down and fling his hand about as if he
had mashed it in the machinery. He doubled over and held his hand close to his
chest.  “God  dammit!”  he  hollered,  “Jesus  Christ  in  hell!  Jesus  God  Almighty
damm! God dammit to hell!” he went on, flinging out the same few oaths over and
over as loud as he could.

Without warning a terrible bristly claw slammed the side of his face and he
fell backwards on the hood of the truck. “You don’t talk no filth here!” a voice
close to him shrilled.

Parker’s  vision  was  so  blurred  that  for  an  instant  he  thought  he  had  been
attacked by some creature from above, a giant hawk-eyed angel wielding a hoary
weapon. As  his  sight  cleared,  he  saw  before  him  a  tall  raw-boned  girl  with  a
broom.

“I  hurt  my  hand,”  he  said.  “I  HURT  my  hand.”  He  was  so  incensed  that  he
forgot that he hadn’t hurt his hand. “My hand may be broke,” he growled although

his voice was still unsteady.

“Lemme see it,” the girl demanded.
Parker stuck out his hand and she came closer and looked at it. There was no
mark on the palm and she took the hand and turned it over. Her own hand was dry
and  hot  and  rough  and  Parker  felt  himself  jolted  back  to  life  by  her  touch.  He
looked more closely at her. I don’t want nothing to do with this one, he thought.

The girl’s sharp eyes peered at the back of the stubby reddish hand she held.
There  emblazoned  in  red  and  blue  was  a  tattooed  eagle  perched  on  a  cannon.
Parker’s sleeve was rolled to the elbow. Above the eagle a serpent was coiled
about  a  shield  and  in  the  spaces  between  the  eagle  and  the  serpent  there  were
hearts,  some  with  arrows  through  them. Above  the  serpent  there  was  a  spread
hand of cards. Every space on the skin of Parker’s arm, from wrist to elbow, was
covered in some loud design. The girl gazed at this with an almost stupefied smile
of shock, as if she had accidentally grasped a poisonous snake; she dropped the
hand.

“I  got  most  of  my  other  ones  in  foreign  parts,”  Parker  said.  “These  here  I
mostly  got  in  the  United  States.  I  got  my  first  one  when  I  was  only  fifteen  year
old.”

“Don’t tell me,” the girl said, “I don’t like it. I ain’t got any use for it.”
“You ought to see the ones you can’t see,” Parker said and winked.
Two circles of red appeared like apples on the girl’s cheeks and softened her
appearance. Parker was intrigued. He did not for a minute think that she didn’t like
the tattoos. He had never yet met a woman who was not attracted to them.

Parker was fourteen when he saw a man in a fair, tattooed from head to foot.
Except for his loins which were girded with a panther hide, the man’s skin was
patterned  in  what  seemed  from  Parker’s  distance—he  was  near  the  back  of  the
tent,  standing  on  a  bench—a  single  intricate  design  of  brilliant  color.  The  man,
who was small and sturdy, moved about on the platform, flexing his muscles so
that the arabesque of men and beasts and flowers on his skin appeared to have a
subtle motion of its own. Parker was filled with emotion, lifted up as some people
are when the flag passes. He was a boy whose mouth habitually hung open. He
was heavy and earnest, as ordinary as a loaf of bread. When the show was over,

he had remained standing on the bench, staring where the tattooed man had been,
until the tent was almost empty.

Parker had never before felt the least motion of wonder in himself. Until  he
saw the man at the fair, it did not enter his head that there was anything out of the
ordinary about the fact that he existed. Even then it did not enter his head, but a
peculiar unease settled in him. It was as if a blind boy had been turned so gently in
a different direction that he did not know his destination had been changed.

He  had  his  first  tattoo  some  time  after—the  eagle  perched  on  the  cannon.  It
was  done  by  a  local  artist.  It  hurt  very  little,  just  enough  to  make  it  appear  to
Parker  to  be  worth  doing.  This  was  peculiar  too  for  before  he  had  thought  that
only what did not hurt was worth doing. The next year he quit school because he
was sixteen and could. He went to the trade school for a while, then he quit the
trade school and worked for six months in a garage. The only reason he worked at
all was to pay for more tattoos. His mother worked in a laundry and could support
him, but she would not pay for any tattoo except her name on a heart, which he had
put on, grumbling. However, her name was Betty Jean and nobody had to know it
was his mother. He found out that the tattoos were attractive to the kind of girls he
liked but who had never liked him before. He began to drink beer and get in fights.
His mother wept over what was becoming of him. One night she dragged him off
to a revival with her, not telling him where they were going. When he saw the big
lighted church, he jerked out of her grasp and ran. The next day he lied about his
age and joined the navy.

Parker was large for the tight sailor’s pants but the silly white cap, sitting low
on  his  forehead,  made  his  face  by  contrast  look  thoughtful  and  almost  intense.
After  a  month  or  two  in  the  navy,  his  mouth  ceased  to  hang  open.  His  features
hardened into the features of a man. He stayed in the navy five years and seemed a
natural part of the gray mechanical ship, except for his eyes, which were the same
pale slate-color as the ocean and reflected the immense spaces around him as if
they  were  a  microcosm  of  the  mysterious  sea.  In  port  Parker  wandered  about
comparing the run-down places he was in to Birmingham, Alabama. Everywhere
he went he picked up more tattoos.

He had stopped having lifeless ones like anchors and crossed rifles. He had a

tiger and a panther on each shoulder, a cobra coiled about a torch on his chest,
hawks  on  his  thighs,  Elizabeth  II  and  Philip  over  where  his  stomach  and  liver
were respectively. He did not care much what the subject was so long as it was
colorful; on his abdomen he had a few obscenities but only because that seemed
the  proper  place  for  them.  Parker  would  be  satisfied  with  each  tattoo  about  a
month, then something about it that had attracted him would wear off. Whenever a
decent-sized mirror was available, he would get in front of it and study his overall
look.  The  effect  was  not  of  one  intricate  arabesque  of  colors  but  of  something
haphazard  and  botched.  A  huge  dissatisfaction  would  come  over  him  and  he
would go off and find another tattooist and have another space filled up. The front
of Parker was almost completely covered but there were no tattoos on his back.
He  had  no  desire  for  one  anywhere  he  could  not  readily  see  it  himself. As  the
space  on  the  front  of  him  for  tattoos  decreased,  his  dissatisfaction  grew  and
became general.

After one of his furloughs, he didn’t go back to the navy but remained away
without official leave, drunk, in a rooming house in a city he did not know. His
dissatisfaction,  from  being  chronic  and  latent,  had  suddenly  become  acute  and
raged in him. It was as if the panther and the lion and the serpents and the eagles
and the hawks had penetrated his skin and lived inside him in a raging warfare.
The navy caught up with him, put him in the brig for nine months and then gave him
a dishonorable discharge.

After that Parker decided that country air was the only kind fit to breathe. He
rented the shack on the embankment and bought the old truck and took various jobs
which he kept as long as it suited him. At the time he met his future wife, he was
buying apples by the bushel and selling them for the same price by the pound to
isolated homesteaders on back country roads.

“All that there,” the woman said, pointing to his arm, “is no better than what a
fool Indian would do. It’s a heap of vanity.” She seemed to have found the word
she wanted. “Vanity of vanities,” she said.

Well what the hell do I care what she thinks of it? Parker asked himself, but he
was  plainly  bewildered.  “I  reckon  you  like  one  of  these  better  than  another
anyway,” he said, dallying until he thought of something that would impress her.

He thrust the arm back at her. “Which you like best?”

“None of them,” she said, “but the chicken is not as bad as the rest.
“What chicken?” Parker almost yelled.
She pointed to the eagle.
“That’s an eagle,” Parker said. “What fool would waste their time having a

chicken put on themself?”

“What fool would have any of it?” the girl said and turned away. She went
slowly  back  to  the  house  and  left  him  there  to  get  going.  Parker  remained  for
almost five minutes, looking agape at the dark door she had entered.

The  next  day  he  returned  with  a  bushel  of  apples.  He  was  not  one  to  be
outdone by anything that looked like her. He liked women with meat on them, so
you didn’t feel their muscles, much less their old bones. When he arrived, she was
sitting on the top step and the yard was full of children, all as thin and poor as
herself;  Parker  remembered  it  was  Saturday.  He  hated  to  be  making  up  to  a
woman when there were children around, but it was fortunate he had brought the
bushel  of  apples  off  the  truck. As  the  children  approached  him  to  see  what  he
carried, he gave each child an apple and told it to get lost; in that way he cleared
out the whole crowd.

The girl did nothing to acknowledge his presence. He might have been a stray
pig or goat that had wandered into the yard and she too tired to take up the broom
and send it off. He set the bushel of apples down next to her on the step. He sat
down on a lower step.

“Hep yourself,” he said, nodding at the basket; then he lapsed into silence.
She took an apple quickly as if the basket might disappear if she didn’t make
haste.  Hungry  people  made  Parker  nervous.  He  had  always  had  plenty  to  eat
himself. He grew very uncomfortable. He reasoned he had nothing to say so why
should he say it? He could not think now why he had come or why he didn’t go
before he wasted another bushel of apples on the crowd of children. He supposed
they were her brothers and sisters.

She chewed the apple slowly but with a kind of relish of concentration, bent
slightly but looking out ahead. The view from the porch stretched off across a long
incline studded with iron weed and across the highway to a vast vista of hills and

one small mountain. Long views depressed Parker. You look out into space like
that and you begin to feel as if someone were after you, the navy or the government
or religion.

“Who them children belong to, you?” he said at length.
“I ain’t married yet,” she said. “They belong to momma.” She said it as if it

were only a matter of time before she would be married.
Who in God’s name would marry her? Parker thought.
A large barefooted woman with a wide gap-toothed face appeared in the door

behind Parker. She had apparently been there for several minutes.

“Good evening,” Parker said.
The woman crossed the porch and picked up what was left of the bushel of

apples. “We thank you,” she said and returned with it into the house.

“That your old woman?” Parker muttered.
The  girl  nodded.  Parker  knew  a  lot  of  sharp  things  he  could  have  said  like
“You got my sympathy,” but he was gloomily silent. He just sat there, looking at
the view. He thought he must be coming down with something.

“If I pick up some peaches tomorrow I’ll bring you some,” he said.
“I’ll be much obliged to you,” the girl said.
Parker had no intention of taking any basket of peaches back there but the next
day he found himself doing it. He and the girl had almost nothing to say to each
other. One thing he did say was, “I ain’t got any tattoo on my back.”

“What you got on it?” the girl said.
“My shirt,” Parker said. “Haw.”
“Haw, haw,” the girl said politely.
Parker thought he was losing his mind. He could not believe for a minute that
he was attracted to a woman like this. She showed not the least interest in anything
but what he brought until he appeared the third time with two cantaloups. “What’s
your name?” she asked.

“O. E. Parker,” he said.
“What does the O. E. stand for?”
“You can just call me O. E.,” Parker said. “Or Parker. Don’t nobody call me

by my name.”

“What’s it stand for?” she persisted.
“Never mind,” Parker said. “What’s yours?”
“I’ll tell you when you tell me what them letters are the short of,” she said.
There was just a hint of flirtatiousness in her tone and it went rapidly to Parker’s
head. He had never revealed the name to any man or woman, only to the files of
the navy and the government, and it was on his baptismal record which he got at
the age of a month; his mother was a Methodist. When the name leaked out of the
navy files, Parker narrowly missed killing the man who used it.

“You’ll go blab it around,” he said.
“I’ll swear I’ll never tell nobody,” she said. “On God’s holy word I swear it.”
Parker sat for a few minutes in silence. Then he reached for the girl’s neck,

drew her ear close to his mouth and revealed the name in low voice.

“Obadiah,” she whispered. Her face slowly brightened as if the name came as

a sign to her. “Obadiah,” she said.

The name still stank in Parker’s estimation.
“Obadiah Elihue,” she said in a reverent voice.
“If  you  call  me  that  aloud,  I’ll  bust  your  head  open,”  Parker  said.  “What’s

yours?”

“Sarah Ruth Cates,” she said.
“Glad to meet you, Sarah Ruth,” Parker said.
Sarah  Ruth’s  father  was  a  Straight  Gospel  preacher  but  he  was  away,
spreading it in Florida. Her mother did not seem to mind his attention to the girl so
long as he brought a basket of something with him when he came. As for Sarah
Ruth herself, it was plain to Parker after he had visited three times that she was
crazy about him. She liked him even though she insisted that pictures on the skin
were vanity of vanities and even after hearing him curse, and even after she had
asked him if he was saved and he had replied that he didn’t see it was anything in
particular to save him from. After that, inspired, Parker had said, “I’d be saved
enough if you was to kiss me.”

She scowled. “That ain’t being saved,” she said.
Not long after that she agreed to take a ride in his truck. Parker parked it on a

deserted road and suggested to her that they lie down together in the back of it.

“Not until after we’re married,” she said—just like that.
“Oh that ain’t necessary,” Parker said and as he reached for her, she thrust him
away with such force that the door of the truck came off and he found himself flat
on his back on the ground. He made up his mind then and there to have nothing
further to do with her.

They were married in the County Ordinary’s office because Sarah Ruth thought
churches were idolatrous. Parker had no opinion about that one way or the other.
The Ordinary’s office was lined with cardboard file boxes and record books with
dusty  yellow  slips  of  paper  hanging  on  out  of  them.  The  Ordinary  was  an  old
woman with red hair who had held office for forty years and looked as dusty as
her  books.  She  married  them  from  behind  the  iron-grill  of  a  stand-up  desk  and
when she finished, she said with a flourish, “Three dollars and fifty cents and till
death do you part!” and yanked some forms out of a machine.

Marriage did not change Sarah Ruth a jot and it made Parker gloomier than
ever. Every morning he decided he had had enough and would not return that night;
every night he returned. Whenever Parker couldn’t stand the way he felt, he would
have another tattoo, but the only surface left on him now was his back. To see a
tattoo on his own back he would have to get two mirrors and stand between them
in just the correct position and this seemed to Parker a good way to make an idiot
of  himself.  Sarah  Ruth  who,  if  she  had  had  better  sense,  could  have  enjoyed  a
tattoo on his back, would not even look at the ones he had elsewhere. When he
attempted to point out especial details of them, she would shut her eyes tight and
turn her back as well. Except in total darkness, she preferred Parker dressed and
with his sleeves rolled down.

“At the judgement seat of God, Jesus is going to say to you, ‘What you been

doing all your life besides have pictures drawn all over you?’” she said.

“You  don’t  fool  me  none,”  Parker  said,  “you’re  just  afraid  that  hefty  girl  I
work  for’ll  like  me  so  much  she’ll  say,  ‘Come  on,  Mr.  Parker,  let’s  you  and
me…’”

“You’re tempting sin,” she said, “and at the judgement seat of God you’ll have

to answer for that too. You ought to go back to selling the fruits of the earth.”

Parker did nothing much when he was at home but listen to what the judgement

seat of God would be like for him if he didn’t change his ways. When he could, he
broke in with tales of the hefty girl he worked for. “‘Mr. Parker,’” he said she
said,  ‘I  hired  you  for  your  brains.’”  (She  had  added,  “So  why  don’t  you  use
them?”)

“And  you  should  have  seen  her  face  the  first  time  she  saw  me  without  my
shirt,” he said. “‘Mr. Parker,’ she said, ‘you’re a walking panner-rammer!’” This
had,  in  fact,  been  her  remark  but  it  had  been  delivered  out  of  one  side  of  her
mouth.

Dissatisfaction began to grow so great in Parker that there was no containing it
outside of a tattoo. It had to be his back. There was no help for it. A dim half-
formed inspiration began to work in his mind. He visualized having a tattoo put
there that Sarah Ruth would not be able to resist—a religious subject. He thought
of an open book with HOLY BIBLE  tattooed under it and an actual verse printed on
the page. This seemed just the thing for a while; then he began to hear her say,
“Ain’t I already got a real Bible? What you think I want to read the same verse
over and over for when I can read it all?” He needed something better even than
the Bible! He thought about it so much that he began to lose sleep. He was already
losing flesh—Sarah Ruth just threw food in the pot and let it boil. Not knowing for
certain why he continued to stay with a woman who was both ugly and pregnant
and no cook made him generally nervous and irritable, and he developed a little
tic in the side of his face.

Once or twice he found himself turning around abruptly as if someone were
trailing him. He had had a granddaddy who had ended in the state mental hospital,
although not until he was seventy-five, but as urgent as it might be for him to get a
tattoo, it was just as urgent that he get exactly the right one to bring Sarah Ruth to
heel. As  he  continued  to  worry  over  it,  his  eyes  took  on  a  hollow  preoccupied
expression. The old woman he worked for told him that if he couldn’t keep his
mind on what he was doing, she knew where she could find a fourteen-year-old
colored boy who could. Parker was too preoccupied even to be offended. At any
time previous, he would have left her then and there, saying drily, “Well, you go
ahead on and get him then.”

Two or three mornings later he was baling hay with the old woman’s sorry

baler and her broken down tractor in a large field, cleared save for one enormous
old tree standing in the middle of it. The old woman was the kind who would not
cut down a large old tree because it was a large old tree. She had pointed it out to
Parker  as  if  he  didn’t  have  eyes  and  told  him  to  be  careful  not  to  hit  it  as  the
machine picked up hay near it. Parker began at the outside of the field and made
circles  inward  toward  it.  He  had  to  get  off  the  tractor  every  now  and  then  and
untangle the baling cord or kick a rock out of the way. The old woman had told
him to carry the rocks to the edge of the field, which he did when she was there
watching. When he thought he could make it, he ran over them. As he circled the
field his mind was on a suitable design for his back. The sun, the size of a golf
ball, began to switch regularly from in front to behind him, but he appeared to see
it both places as if he had eyes in the back of his head. All at once he saw the tree
reaching  out  to  grasp  him. A  ferocious  thud  propelled  him  into  the  air,  and  he
heard himself yelling in an unbelievably loud voice, “GOD ABOVE!”

He landed on his back while the tractor crashed upside down into the tree and
burst into flame. The first thing Parker saw were his shoes, quickly being eaten by
the  fire;  one  was  caught  under  the  tractor,  the  other  was  some  distance  away,
burning by itself. He was not in them. He could feel the hot breath of the burning
tree on his face. He scrambled backwards, still sitting, his eyes cavernous, and if
he had known how to cross himself he would have done it.

His truck was on a dirt road at the edge of the field. He moved toward it, still
sitting, still backwards, but faster and faster; halfway to it he got up and began a
kind of forward-bent run from which he collapsed on his knees twice. His legs felt
like  two  old  rusted  rain  gutters.  He  reached  the  truck  finally  and  took  off  in  it,
zigzagging up the road. He drove past his house on the embankment and straight
for the city, fifty miles distant.

Parker did not allow himself to think on the way to the city. He only knew that
there had been a great change in his life, a leap forward into a worse unknown,
and  that  there  was  nothing  he  could  do  about  it.  It  was  for  all  intents
accomplished.

The artist had two large cluttered rooms over a chiropodist’s office on a back
street. Parker, still barefooted, burst silently in on him at a little after three in the

afternoon.  The  artist,  who  was  about  Parker’s  own  age—twenty-eight—but  thin
and  bald,  was  behind  a  small  drawing  table,  tracing  a  design  in  green  ink.  He
looked  up  with  an  annoyed  glance  and  did  not  seem  to  recognize  Parker  in  the
hollow-eyed creature before him.

“Let me see the book you got with all the pictures of God in it,” Parker said

breathlessly. “The religious one.”

The artist continued to look at him with his intellectual, superior stare. “I don’t

put tattoos on drunks,” he said.

“You know me!” Parker cried indignantly. “I’m O. E. Parker! You done work

for me before and I always paid!”

The  artist  looked  at  him  another  moment  as  if  he  were  not  altogether  sure.

“You’ve fallen off some,” he said. “You must have been in jail.”

“Married,” Parker said.
“Oh,” said the artist. With the aid of mirrors the artist had tattooed on the top
of his head a miniature owl, perfect in every detail. It was about the size of a half-
dollar and served him as a show piece. There were cheaper artists in town but
Parker had never wanted anything but the best. The artist went over to a cabinet at
the  back  of  the  room  and  began  to  look  over  some  art  books.  “Who  are  you
interested in?” he said, “saints, angels, Christs or what?”

“God,” Parker said.
“Father, Son or Spirit?”
“Just God,” Parker said impatiently. “Christ. I don’t care. Just so it’s God.”
The artist returned with a book. He moved some papers off another table and
put the book down on it and told Parker to sit down and see what he liked. “The
up-t-date ones are in the back,” he said.

Parker sat down with the book and wet his thumb. He began to go through it,
beginning  at  the  back  where  the  up-to-date  pictures  were.  Some  of  them  he
recognized—The Good Shepherd, Forbid Them Not, The Smiling Jesus, Jesus the
Physician’s Friend, but he kept turning rapidly backwards and the pictures became
less and less reassuring. One showed a gaunt green dead face streaked with blood.
One was yellow with sagging purple eyes. Parker’s heart began to beat faster and
faster until it appeared to be roaring inside him like a great generator. He flipped

the pages quickly, feeling that when he reached  the  one  ordained,  a  sign  would
come.  He  continued  to  flip  through  until  he  had  almost  reached  the  front  of  the
book. On one of the pages a pair of eyes glanced at him swiftly. Parker sped on,
then stopped. His heart too appeared to cut off; there was absolute silence. It said
as plainly as if silence were a language itself, GO BACK.

Parker returned to the picture—the haloed head of a flat stern Byzantine Christ
with all-demanding eyes. He sat there trembling; his heart began slowly to beat
again as if it were being brought to life by a subtle power.

“You found what you want?” the artist asked.
Parker’s throat was too dry to speak. He got up and thrust the book at the artist,

opened at the picture.

“That’ll  cost  you  plenty,”  the  artist  said.  “You  don’t  want  all  those  little

blocks though, just the outline and some better features.”

“Just like it is,” Parker said, “just like it is or nothing.”
“It’s  your  funeral,”  the  artist  said,  “but  I  don’t  do  that  kind  of  work  for

nothing.”

“How much?” Parker asked.
“It’ll take maybe two days work.”
“How much?” Parker said.
“On time or cash?” the artist asked. Parker’s other jobs had been on time, but

he had paid.

“Ten down and ten for every day it takes,” the artist said.
Parker drew ten dollar bills out of his wallet; he had three left in.
“You come back in the morning,” the artist said, putting the money in his own

pocket. “First I’ll have to trace that out of the book.”

“No no!” Parker said. “Trace it now or gimme my money back,” and his eyes

blared as if he were ready for a fight.

The  artist  agreed. Any  one  stupid  enough  to  want  a  Christ  on  his  back,  he
reasoned, would be just as likely as not to change his mind the next minute, but
once the work was begun he could hardly do so.

While he worked on the tracing, he told Parker to go wash his back at the sink
with the special soap he used there. Parker did it and returned to pace back and

forth across the room, nervously flexing his shoulders. He wanted to go look at the
picture again but at the same time he did not want to. The artist got up finally and
had Parker lie down on the table. He swabbed his back with ethyl chloride and
then began to outline the head on it with his iodine pencil. Another hour passed
before he took up his electric instrument. Parker felt no particular pain. In Japan
he had had a tattoo of the Buddha done on his upper arm with ivory needles; in
Burma,  a  little  brown  root  of  a  man  had  made  a  peacock  on  each  of  his  knees
using thin pointed sticks, two feet long; amateurs had worked on him with pins and
soot. Parker was usually so relaxed and easy under the hand of the artist that he
often went to sleep, but this time he remained awake, every muscle taut.

At midnight the artist said he was ready to quit. He propped one mirror, four
feet square, on a table by the wall and took a smaller mirror off the lavatory wall
and put it in Parker’s hands. Parker stood with his back to the one on the table and
moved the other until he saw a flashing burst of color reflected from his back. It
was  almost  completely  covered  with  little  red  and  blue  and  ivory  and  saffron
squares; from them he made out the lineaments of the face—a mouth, the beginning
of heavy brows, a straight nose, but the face was empty; the eyes had not yet been
put in. The impression for the moment was almost as if the artist had tricked him
and done the Physician’s Friend.

“It don’t have eyes,” Parker cried out.
“That’ll come,” the artist said, “in due time. We have another day to go on it

yet.”

Parker  spent  the  night  on  a  cot  at  the  Haven  of  Light  Christian  Mission.  He
found these the best places to stay in the city because they were free and included
a meal of sorts. He got the last available cot and because he was still barefooted,
he accepted a pair of secondhand shoes which, in his confusion, he put on to go to
bed;  he  was  still  shocked  from  all  that  had  happened  to  him. All  night  he  lay
awake in the long dormitory of cots with lumpy figures on them. The only light
was from a phosphorescent cross glowing at the end of the room. The tree reached
out to grasp him again, then burst into flame; the shoe burned quietly by itself; the
eyes in the book said to him distinctly GO BACK and at the same time did not utter a
sound. He wished that he were not in this city, not in this Haven of Light Mission,

not in a bed by himself. He longed miserably for Sarah Ruth. Her sharp tongue and
icepick eyes were the only comfort he could bring to mind. He decided he was
losing it. Her eyes appeared soft and dilatory compared with the eyes in the book,
for even though he could not summon up the exact look of those eyes, he could still
feel their penetration. He felt as though, under their gaze, he was as transparent as
the wing of a fly.

The tattooist had told him not to come until ten in the morning, but when he
arrived at that hour, Parker was sitting in the dark hallway on the floor, waiting
for him. He had decided upon getting up that, once the tattoo was on him, he would
not look at it, that all his sensations of the day and night before were those of a
crazy man and that he would return to doing things according to his own sound
judgement.

The  artist  began  where  he  left  off.  “One  thing  I  want  to  know,”  he  said
presently as he worked over Parker’s back, “why do you want this on you? Have
you gone and got religion? Are you saved?” he asked in a mocking voice.

Parker’s throat felt salty and dry. “Naw,” he said, “I ain’t got no use for none
of that. A man can’t save his self from whatever it is he don’t deserve none of my
sympathy.” These words seemed to leave his mouth like wraiths and to evaporate
at once as if he had never uttered them.

“Then why…”
“I married this woman that’s saved,” Parker said. “I never should have done

it. I ought to leave her. She’s done gone and got pregnant.”

“That’s too bad,” the artist said. “Then it’s her making you have this tattoo.”
“Naw,” Parker said, “she don’t know nothing about it. It’s a surprise for her.”
“You think she’ll like it and lay off you a while?”
“She can’t hep herself,” Parker said. “She can’t say she don’t like the looks of
God.” He decided he had told the artist enough of his business. Artists were all
right in their place but he didn’t like them poking their noses into the affairs of
regular people. “I didn’t get no sleep last night,” he said. “I think I’ll get some
now.”

That closed the mouth of the artist but it did not bring him any sleep. He lay
there, imagining how Sarah Ruth would be struck speechless by the face on his

back and every now and then this would be interrupted by a vision of the tree of
fire and his empty shoe burning beneath it.

The  artist  worked  steadily  until  nearly  four  o’clock,  not  stopping  to  have
lunch, hardly pausing with the electric instrument except to wipe the dripping dye
off Parker’s back as he went along. Finally he finished. “You can get up and look
at it now,” he said.

Parker sat up but he remained on the edge of the table.
The artist was pleased with his work and wanted Parker to look at it at once.
Instead Parker continued to sit on the edge of the table, bent forward slightly but
with a vacant look. “What ails you?” the artist said. “Go look at it.”

“Ain’t nothing ail me,” Parker said in a sudden belligerent voice. “That tattoo
ain’t going nowhere. It’ll be there when I get there.” He reached for his shirt and
began gingerly to put it on.

The  artist  took  him  roughly  by  the  arm  and  propelled  him  between  the  two

mirrors. “Now look,” he said, angry at having his work ignored.

Parker looked, turned white and moved away. The eyes in the reflected face

continued to look at him—still, straight, all-demanding, enclosed in silence.

“It  was  your  idea,  remember,”  the  artist  said.  “I  would  have  advised

something else.”

Parker said nothing. He put on his shirt and went out the door while the artist

shouted, “I’ll expect all of my money!”

Parker  headed  toward  a  package  shop  on  the  corner.  He  bought  a  pint  of
whiskey and took it into a nearby alley and drank it all in five minutes. Then he
moved on to a pool hall nearby which he frequented when he came to the city. It
was a well-lighted barnlike place with a bar up one side and gambling machines
on the other and pool tables in the back. As soon as Parker entered, a large man in
a  red  and  black  checkered  shirt  hailed  him  by  slapping  him  on  the  back  and
yelling, “Yeyyyyyy boy! O. E. Parker!”

Parker was not yet ready to be struck on the back. “Lay off,” he said, “I got a

fresh tattoo there.”

“What  you  got  this  time?”  the  man  asked  and  then  yelled  to  a  few  at  the

machines. “O.E.’s got him another tattoo.”

“Nothing special this time,” Parker said and slunk over to a machine that was

not being used.

“Come on,” the big man said, “let’s have a look at O.E.’s tattoo,” and while
Parker squirmed in their hands, they pulled up his shirt. Parker felt all the hands
drop away instantly and his shirt fell again like a veil over the face. There was a
silence in the pool room which seemed to Parker to grow from the circle around
him until it extended to the foundations under the building and upward through the
beams in the roof.

Finally some one said, “Christ!” Then they all broke into noise at once. Parker

turned around, an uncertain grin on his face.

“Leave  it  to  O.E.!”  the  man  in  the  checkered  shirt  said.  “That  boy’s  a  real

card!”

“Maybe he’s gone and got religion,” some one yelled.
“Not on your life,” Parker said.
“O.E.’s got religion and is witnessing for Jesus, ain’t you, O.E.?” a little man
with a piece of cigar in his mouth said wryly. “An o-riginal way to do it if I ever
saw one.”

“Leave it to Parker to think of a new one!” the fat man said.
“Yyeeeeeeyyyyyyy  boy!”  someone  yelled  and  they  all  began  to  whistle  and

curse in compliment until Parker said, “Aaa shut up.”

“What’d you do it for?” somebody asked.
“For laughs,” Parker said. “What’s it to you?”
“Why ain’t you laughing then?” somebody yelled. Parker lunged into the midst
of  them  and  like  a  whirlwind  on  a  summer’s  day  there  began  a  fight  that  raged
amid overturned tables and swinging fists until two of them grabbed him and ran
to the door with him and threw him out. Then a calm descended on the pool hall as
nerve shattering as if the long barnlike room were the ship from which Jonah had
been cast into the sea.

Parker  sat  for  a  long  time  on  the  ground  in  the  alley  behind  the  pool  hall,
examining his soul. He saw it as a spider web of facts and lies that was not at all
important to him but which appeared to be necessary in spite of his opinion. The
eyes  that  were  now  forever  on  his  back  were  eyes  to  be  obeyed.  He  was  as

certain of it as he had ever been of anything. Throughout his life, grumbling and
sometimes  cursing,  often  afraid,  once  in  rapture,  Parker  had  obeyed  whatever
instinct of this kind had come to him—in rapture when his spirit had lifted at the
sight of the tattooed man at the fair, afraid when he had joined the navy, grumbling
when he had married Sarah Ruth.

The thought of her brought him slowly to his feet. She would know what he
had to do. She would clear up the rest of it, and she would at least be pleased. It
seemed to him that, all along, that was what he wanted, to please her. His truck
was still parked in front of the building where the artist had his place, but it was
not far away. He got in it and drove out of the city and into the country night. His
head was almost clear of liquor and he observed that his dissatisfaction was gone,
but he felt not quite like himself. It was as if he were himself but a stranger to
himself, driving into a new country though everything he saw was familiar to him,
even at night.

He arrived finally at the house on the embankment, pulled the truck under the
pecan tree and got out. He made as much noise as possible to assert that he was
still in charge here, that his leaving her for a night without word meant nothing
except it was the way he did things. He slammed the car door, stamped up the two
steps  and  across  the  porch  and  rattled  the  door  knob.  It  did  not  respond  to  his
touch. “Sarah Ruth!” he yelled, “let me in.”

There  was  no  lock  on  the  door  and  she  had  evidently  placed  the  back  of  a
chair against the knob. He began to beat on the door and rattle the knob at the same
time.

He  heard  the  bed  springs  screak  and  bent  down  and  put  his  head  to  the
keyhole, but it was stopped up with paper. “Let me in!” he hollered, bamming on
the door again. “What you got me locked out for?”

A sharp voice close to the door said, “Who’s there?”
“Me,” Parker said, “O.E.”
He waited a moment.
“Me,” he said impatiently, “O.E.”
Still no sound from inside.
He  tried  once  more.  “O.E.,”  he  said,  bamming  the  door  two  or  three  more

times. “O. E. Parker. You know me.”

There was a silence. Then the voice said slowly, “I don’t know no O.E.”
“Quit  fooling,”  Parker  pleaded.  “You  ain’t  got  any  business  doing  me  this

way. It’s me, old O.E., I’m back. You ain’t afraid of me.”

“Who’s there?” the same unfeeling voice said.
Parker turned his head as if he expected someone behind him to give him the
answer.  The  sky  had  lightened  slightly  and  there  were  two  or  three  streaks  of
yellow  floating  above  the  horizon.  Then  as  he  stood  there,  a  tree  of  light  burst
over the skyline.

Parker fell back against the door as if he had been pinned there by a lance.
“Who’s  there?”  the  voice  from  inside  said  and  there  was  a  quality  about  it
now that seemed final. The knob rattled and the voice said peremptorily, “Who’s
there, I ast you?”

Parker bent down and put his mouth near the stuffed keyhole. “Obadiah,” he
whispered and all at once he felt the light pouring through him, turning his spider
web  soul  into  a  perfect  arabesque  of  colors,  a  garden  of  trees  and  birds  and
beasts.

“Obadiah Elihue!” he whispered.
The door opened and he stumbled in. Sarah Ruth loomed there, hands on her
hips. She began at once, “That was no hefty blonde woman you was working for
and you’il have to pay her every penny on her tractor you busted up. She don’t
keep insurance on it. She came here and her and me had us a long talk and I…”

Trembling, Parker set about lighting the kerosene lamp.
“What’s  the  matter  with  you,  wasting  that  kerosene  this  near  daylight?”  she

demanded. “I ain’t got to look at you.”

A  yellow  glow  enveloped  them.  Parker  put  the  match  down  and  began  to

unbutton his shirt.

“And you ain’t going to have none of me this near morning,” she said.
“Shut your mouth,” he said quietly. “Look at this and then I don’t want to hear

no more out of you.” He removed the shirt and turned his back to her.

“Another picture,” Sarah Ruth growled. “I might have known you was off after

putting some more trash on yourself.”

Parker’s knees went hollow under him. He wheeled around and cried, “Look

at it! Don’t just say that! Look at it!”

“I done looked,” she said.
“Don’t you know who it is?” he cried in anguish.
“No, who is it?” Sarah Ruth said. “It ain’t anybody I know.”
“It’s him,” Parker said.
“Him who?”
“God!” Parker cried.
“God? God don’t look like that!”
“What do you know how he looks?” Parker moaned. “You ain’t seen him.”
“He don’t look,” Sarah Ruth said. “He’s a spirit. No man shall see his face.”
“Aw listen,” Parker groaned, “this is just a picture of him.”
“Idolatry!”  Sarah  Ruth  screamed.  “Idolatry!  Enflaming  yourself  with  idols
under  every  green  tree!  I  can  put  up  with  lies  and  vanity  but  I  don’t  want  no
idolator  in  this  house!”  and  she  grabbed  up  the  broom  and  began  to  thrash  him
across the shoulders with it.

Parker was too stunned to resist. He sat there and let her beat him until she had
nearly  knocked  him  senseless  and  large  welts  had  formed  on  the  face  of  the
tattooed Christ. Then he staggered up and made for the door.

She stamped the broom two or three times on the floor and went to the window
and shook it out to get the taint of him off it. Still gripping it, she looked toward
the  pecan  tree  and  her  eyes  hardened  still  more.  There  he  was—who  called
himself Obadiah Elihue—leaning against the tree, crying like a baby.

Judgement Day

TANNER was conserving all his strength for the trip home. He meant to walk as far
as  he  could  get  and  trust  to  the Almighty  to  get  him  the  rest  of  the  way.  That
morning and the morning before, he had allowed his daughter to dress him and had
conserved that much more energy. Now he sat in the chair by the window—his
blue shirt buttoned at the collar, his coat on the back of the chair, and his hat on his
head—waiting for her to leave. He couldn’t escape until she got out of the way.
The window looked out on a brick wall and down into an alley full of New York
air, the kind fit for cats and garbage. A few snow flakes drifted past the window
but they were too thin and scattered for his failing vision.

The daughter was in the kitchen washing dishes. She dawdled over everything,
talking to herself. When he had first come, he had answered her, but that had not
been wanted. She glowered at him as if, old fool that he was, he should still have
had sense enough not to answer a woman talking to herself. She questioned herself
in one voice and answered herself in another. With the energy he had conserved
yesterday letting her dress him, he had written a note and pinned it in his pocket. IF
FOUND DEAD SHIP EXPRESS COLLECT TO COLEMAN PARRUM, CORINTH, GEORGIA.  Under
this he had continued: COLEMAN SELL MY BELONGINGS AND PAY THE FREIGHT ON ME
&  THE  UNDERTAKER.  ANYTHING  LEFT  OVER  YOU  CAN  KEEP.  YOURS  TRULY  T.  C.
TANNER.  P.S.  STAY  WHERE  YOU  ARE.  DON’T  LET  THEM  TALK  YOU  INTO  COMING  UP
HERE.  ITS  NO  KIND  OF  PLACE. It had taken him the better part of thirty minutes to
write  the  paper;  the  script  was  wavery  but  decipherable  with  patience.  He
controlled one hand by holding the other on top of it. By the time he had got it
written, she was back in the apartment from getting her groceries.

Today he was ready. All he had to do was push one foot in front of the other
until he got to the door and down the steps. Once down the steps, he would get out
of the neighborhood. Once out of it, he would hail a taxi cab and go to the freight
yards. Some bum would help him onto a car. Once he got in the freight car, he
would lie down and rest. During the night the train would start South, and the next

day or the morning after, dead or alive, he would be home. Dead or alive. It was
being there that mattered; the dead or alive did not.

If he had had good sense he would have gone the day after he arrived; better
sense and he would not have arrived. He had not got desperate until two days ago
when he had heard his daughter and son-in-law taking leave of each other after
breakfast. They were standing in the front door, she seeing him off for a three-day
trip. He drove a long distance moving van. She must have handed him his leather
headgear. “You ought to get you a hat,” she said, “a real one.”

“And  sit  all  day  in  it,”  the  son-in-law  said,  “like  him  in  there. Yah! All  he
does is sit all day with that hat on. Sits all day with that damn black hat on his
head. Inside!”

“Well you don’t even have you a hat,” she said. “Nothing but that leather cap
with flaps. People that are somebody wear hats. Other kinds wear those leather
caps like you got on.”

“People that are somebody!” he cried. “People that are somebody! That kills
me! That really kills me!” The son-in-law had a stupid muscular face and a yankee
voice to go with it.

“My daddy is here to stay,” his daughter said. “He ain’t going to last long. He
was somebody when he was somebody. He never worked for nobody in his life
but himself and had people—other people—working for him.”

“Yah? Niggers is what he had working for him,” the son-in-law said. “That’s

all. I’ve worked a nigger or two myself.”

“Those were just nawthun niggers you worked,” she said, her voice suddenly
going lower so that Tanner had to lean forward to catch the words. “It takes brains
to work a real nigger. You got to know how to handle them.”

“Yah so I don’t have brains,” the son-in-law said.
One of the sudden, very occasional, feelings of warmth for the daughter came
over Tanner. Every now and then she said something that might make you think she
had a little sense stored away somewhere for safe keeping.
“You got them,” she said. “You don’t always use them.”
“He has a stroke when he sees a nigger in the building,” the son-in-law said,

“and she tells me…”

“Shut up talking so loud,” she said. “That’s not why he had the stroke.”
There was a silence. “Where you going to bury him?” the son-in-law asked,

taking a different tack.

“Bury who?”
“Him in there.”
“Right here in New York,” she said. “Where do you think? We got a lot. I’m

not taking that trip down there again with nobody.”
“Yah. Well I just wanted to make sure,” he said.
When she returned to the room, Tanner had both hands gripped on the chair
arms.  His  eyes  were  trained  on  her  like  the  eyes  of  an  angry  corpse.  “You
promised  you’d  bury  me  there,”  he  said.  “Your  promise  ain’t  any  good.  Your
promise ain’t any good. Your promise ain’t any good.” His voice was so dry it
was  barely  audible.  He  began  to  shake,  his  hands,  his  head,  his  feet.  “Bury  me
here and burn in hell!” he cried and fell back into his chair.

The daughter shuddered  to  attention.  “You  ain’t  dead  yet!”  She  threw  out  a
ponderous sigh. “You got a long time to be worrying about that.” She turned and
began to pick up parts of the newspaper scattered on the floor. She had gray hair
that hung to her shoulders and a round face, beginning to wear. “I do every last
living thing for you,” she muttered, “and this is the way you carry on.” She stuck
the papers under her arm and said, “And don’t throw hell at me. I don’t believe in
it. That’s a lot of hardshell Baptist hooey.” Then she went into the kitchen.

He kept his mouth stretched taut, his top plate gripped between his tongue and
the roof of his mouth. Still the tears flooded down his cheeks; he wiped each one
furtively on his shoulder.

Her  voice  rose  from  the  kitchen.  “As  bad  as  having  a  child.  He  wanted  to

come and now he’s here, he don’t like it.”

He had not wanted to come.
“Pretended he didn’t but I could tell. I said if you don’t want to come I can’t
make you. If you don’t want to live like decent people there’s nothing I can do
about it.”

“As for me,” her higher voice said, “when I die that ain’t the time I’m going to
start getting choosey. They can lay me in the nearest spot. When I pass from this

world I’ll be considerate of them that stay in it. I won’t be thinking of just myself.”
“Certainly not,” the other voice said, “You never been that selfish. You’re the

kind that looks out for other people.”

“Well I try,” she said, “I try.”
He laid his head on the back of the chair for a moment and the hat tilted down
over his eyes. He had raised three boys and her. The three boys were gone, two in
the war and one to the devil and there was nobody left who felt a duty toward him
but her, married and childless, in New York City like Mrs. Big and ready when
she came back and found him living the way he was to take him back with her. She
had  put  her  face  in  the  door  of  the  shack  and  had  stared,  expressionless,  for  a
second. Then all at once she had screamed and jumped back.

“What’s that on the floor?”
“Coleman,” he said.
The old Negro was curled up on a pallet asleep at the foot of Tanner’s bed, a
stinking skin full of bones, arranged in what seemed vaguely human form. When
Coleman was young, he had looked like a bear; now that he was old he looked
like a monkey. With Tanner it was the opposite; when he was young he had looked
like a monkey but when he got old, he looked like a bear.

The daughter stepped back onto the porch. There were the bottoms of two cane
chairs tilted against the clapboard but she declined to take a seat. She stepped out
about ten feet from the house as if it took that much space to clear the odor. Then
she had spoken her piece.

“If you don’t have any pride I have and I know my duty and I was raised to do
it. My mother raised me to do it if you didn’t. She was from plain people but not
the kind that likes to settle in with niggers.”

At  that  point  the  old  Negro  roused  up  and  slid  out  the  door,  a  doubled-up

shadow which Tanner just caught sight of gliding away.

She  had  shamed  him.  He  shouted  so  they  both  could  hear.  “Who  you  think
cooks? Who you think cuts my firewood and empties my slops? He’s paroled to
me. That no-good scoundrel has been on my hands for thirty years. He ain’t a bad
nigger.”

She was unimpressed. “Whose shack is this anyway?” she had asked. “Yours

or his?”

“Him and me built it,” he said. “You go on back up there. I wouldn’t come

with you for no million dollars or no sack of salt.”

“It looks like him and you built it. Whose land is it on?”
“Some people that live in Florida,” he said evasively. He had known then that
it was land up for sale but he thought it was too sorry for anyone to buy. That same
afternoon he had found out different. He had found out in time to go back with her.
If he had found out a day later, he might still be there, squatting on the doctor’s
land.

When he saw the brown porpoise-shaped figure striding across the field that
afternoon, he had known at once what had happened; no one had to tell him. If that
nigger  had  owned  the  whole  world  except  for  one  runty  rutted  peafield  and  he
acquired it, he would walk across it that way, beating the weeds aside, his thick
neck swelled, his stomach a throne for his gold watch and chain. Doctor Foley. He
was only part black. The rest was Indian and white.

He  was  everything  to  the  niggers—druggist  and  undertaker  and  general
counsel  and  real  estate  man  and  sometimes  he  got  the  evil  eye  off  them  and
sometimes he put it on. Be prepared, he said to himself, watching him approach, to
take something off him, nigger though he be. Be prepared, because you ain’t got a
thing to hold up to him but the skin you come in, and that’s no more use to you now
than  what  a  snake  would  shed.  You  don’t  have  a  chance   with  the  government
against you.

He  was  sitting  on  the  porch  in  the  piece  of  straight  chair  tilted  against  the
shack.  “Good  evening,  Foley,”  he  said  and  nodded  as  the  doctor  came  up  and
stopped short at the edge of the clearing, as if he had only just that minute seen him
though it was plain he had sighted him as he crossed the field.

“I be out here to look at my property,” the doctor said. “Good evening.” His

voice was quick and high.

Ain’t  been  your  property  long,  he  said  to  himself.  “I  seen  you  coming,”  he

said.

“I acquired this here recently,” the doctor said and proceeded without looking
at him again to walk around to one side of the shack. In a moment he came back

and stopped in front of him. Then he stepped boldly to the door of the shack and
put  his  head  in.  Coleman  was  in  there  that  time  too,  asleep.  He  looked  for  a
moment and then turned aside. “I know that nigger,” he said. “Coleman Parrum—
how long does it take him to sleep off that stump liquor you all make?”

Tanner took hold of the knobs on the chair bottom and held them hard. “This

shack ain’t in your property. Only on it, by my mistake,” he said.

The doctor removed his cigar momentarily from his mouth. “It ain’t my mis-

take,” he said and smiled.

He had only sat there, looking ahead.
“It don’t pay to make this kind of mis-take,” the doctor said.
“I never found nothing that paid yet,” he muttered.
“Everything  pays,”  the  Negro  said,  “if  you  knows  how  to  make  it,”  and  he
remained  there  smiling,  looking  the  squatter  up  and  down.  Then  he  turned  and
went around the other side of the shack. There was a silence. He was looking for
the still.

Then would have been the time to kill him. There was a gun inside the shack
and  he  could  have  done  it  as  easy  as  not,  but,  from  childhood,  he  had  been
weakened for that kind of violence by the fear of hell. He had never killed one, he
had always handled them with his wits and with luck. He was known to have a
way  with  niggers.  There  was  an  art  to  handling  them.  The  secret  of  handling  a
nigger  was  to  show  him  his  brains  didn’t  have  a  chance  against  yours;  then  he
would jump on your back and know he had a good thing there for life. He had had
Coleman on his back for thirty years.

Tanner had first seen Coleman when he was working six of them at a saw mill
in the middle of a pine forest fifteen miles from nowhere. They were as sorry a
crew as he had worked, the kind that on Monday they didn’t show up. What was in
the air had reached them. They thought there was a new Lincoln elected who was
going to abolish work. He managed them with a very sharp penknife. He had had
something wrong with his kidney then that made his hands shake and he had taken
to whittling to force that waste motion out of sight. He did not intend them to see
that his hands shook of their own accord and he did not intend to see it himself or
to countenance it. The knife had moved constantly, violently, in his quaking hands

and here and there small crude figures—that he never looked at again and could
not  have  said  what  they  were  if  he  had—dropped  to  the  ground.  The  Negroes
picked them up and took them home; there was not much time between them and
darkest Africa. The knife glittered constantly in his hands. More than once he had
stopped short and said in an off-hand voice to some half-reclining, head-averted
Negro, “Nigger, this knife is in my hand now but if you don’t quit wasting my time
and  money,  it’ll  be  in  your  gut  shortly.” And  the  Negro  would  begin  to  rise—
slowly, but he would be in the act—before the sentence was completed.

A  large  black  loose-jointed  Negro,  twice  his  own  size,  had  begun  hanging
around the edge of the saw mill, watching the others work and when he was not
watching,  sleeping,  in  full  view  of  them,  sprawled  like  a  gigantic  bear  on  his
back. “Who is that?” he had asked. “If he wants to work, tell him to come here. If
he don’t, tell him to go. No idlers are going to hang around here.”

None  of  them  knew  who  he  was.  They  knew  he  didn’t  want  to  work.  They
knew nothing else, not where he had come from, nor why, though he was probably
brother to one, cousin to all of them. He had ignored him for a day; against the six
of them he was one yellow-faced scrawny white man with shaky hands. He was
willing to wait for trouble, but not forever. The next day the stranger came again.
After the six Tanner worked had seen the idler there for half the morning, they quit
and  began  to  eat,  a  full  thirty  minutes  before  noon.  He  had  not  risked  ordering
them up. He had gone to the source of the trouble.

The stranger was leaning against a tree on the edge of the clearing, watching
with  half-closed  eyes.  The  insolence  on  his  face  barely  covered  the  wariness
behind it. His look said, this ain’t much of a white man so why he come on so big,
what he fixing to do?

He had meant to say, “Nigger, this knife is in my hand now but if you ain’t out
of my sight…” but as he drew closer he changed his mind. The Negro’s eyes were
small and bloodshot. Tanner supposed there was a knife on him somewhere that
he would as soon use as not. His own penknife moved, directed solely by some
intruding  intelligence  that  worked  in  his  hands.  He  had  no  idea  what  he  was
carving, but when he reached the Negro, he had already made two holes the size
of half dollars in the piece of bark.

The Negro’s gaze fell on his hands and was held. His jaw slackened. His eyes
did not move from the knife tearing recklessly around the bark. He watched as if
he saw an invisible power working on the wood.

He looked himself then and, astonished, saw the connected rims of a pair of

spectacles.

He  held  them  away  from  him  and  looked  through  the  holes  past  a  pile  of
shavings and on into the woods to the edge of the pen where they kept their mules.
“You can’t see so good, can you, boy?” he said and began scraping the ground
with his foot to turn up a piece of wire. He picked up a small piece of haywire; in
a minute he found another, shorter piece and picked that up. He began to attach
these to the bark. He was in no hurry now that he knew what he was doing. When
the spectacles were finished, he handed them to the Negro. “Put these on,” he said.
“I hate to see anybody can’t see good.”

There was an instant when the Negro might have done one thing or another,
might have taken the glasses and crushed them in his hand or grabbed the knife and
turned it on him. He saw the exact instant in the muddy liquor-swollen eyes when
the  pleasure  of  having  a  knife  in  this  white  man’s  gut  was  balanced  against
something else, he could not tell what.

The Negro reached for the glasses. He attached the bows carefully behind his
ears and looked forth. He peered this way and that with exaggerated solemnity.
And then he looked directly at Tanner and grinned, or grimaced, Tanner could not
tell which, but he had an instant’s sensation of seeing before him a negative image
of himself, as if clownishness and captivity had been their common lot. The vision
failed him before he could decipher it.

“Preacher,”  he  said,  “what  you  hanging  around  here  for?”  He  picked  up
another piece of bark and began, without looking at it, to carve again. “This ain’t
Sunday.”

“This here ain’t Sunday?” the Negro said.
“This is Friday,” he said. “That’s the way it is with you preachers—drunk all

week so you don’t know when Sunday is. What you see through those glasses?”

“See a man.”
“What kind of a man?”

“See the man make theseyer glasses.”
“Is he white or black?”
“He  white!”  the  Negro  said  as  if  only  at  that  moment  was  his  vision

sufficiently improved to detect it. “Yessuh, he white!” he said.

“Well, you treat him like he was white,” Tanner said. “What’s your name?”
“Name Coleman,” the Negro said.
And he had not got rid of Coleman since. You make a monkey out of one of
them and he jumps on your back and stays there for life, but let one make a monkey
out of you and all you can do is kill him or disappear. And he was not going to
hell for killing a nigger. Behind the shack he heard the doctor kick over a bucket.
He sat and waited.

In a moment the doctor appeared again, beating his way around the other side
of  the  house,  whacking  at  scattered  clumps  of  Johnson  grass  with  his  cane.  He
stopped  in  the  middle  of  the  yard,  about  where  that  morning  the  daughter  had
delivered her ultimatum.

“You don’t belong here,” he began. “I could have you prosecuted.”
Tanner remained there, dumb, staring across the field.
“Where’s your still?” the doctor asked.
“If it’s a still around here, it don’t belong to me,” he said and shut his mouth

tight.

The  Negro  laughed  softly.  “Down  on  your  luck,  ain’t  you?”  he  murmured.

“Didn’t you used to own a little piece of land over acrost the river and lost it?”

He had continued to study the woods ahead.
“If you want to run the still for me, that’s one thing,” the doctor said. “If you

don’t, you might as well had be packing up.”

“I don’t have to work for you,” he said. “The governmint ain’t got around yet

to forcing the white folks to work for the colored.”

The doctor polished the stone in his ring with the ball of his thumb. “I don’t
like the governmint no bettern you,” he said. “Where you going instead? You going
to the city and get you a soot of rooms at the Biltmo’ Hotel?”

Tanner said nothing.
“The  day  coming,”  the  doctor  said,  “when  the  white  folks  IS  going  to  be

working for the colored and you mights well to git ahead of the crowd.”

“That day ain’t coming for me,” Tanner said shortly.
“Done come for you,” the doctor said. “Ain’t come for the rest of them.”
Tanner’s gaze drove on past the farthest blue edge of the tree line into the pale
empty afternoon sky. “I got a daughter in the north,” he said. “I don’t have to work
for you.”

The doctor took his watch from his watch pocket and looked at it and put it
back.  He  gazed  for  a  moment  at  the  back  of  his  hands.  He  appeared  to  have
measured and to know secretly the time it would take everything to change finally
upside down. “She don’t want no old daddy like you,” he said. “Maybe she say
she do, but that ain’t likely. Even if you rich,” he said, “they don’t want you. They
got they own ideas. The black ones they rares and they pitches. I made mine,” he
said, “and I ain’t done none of that.” He looked again at Tanner. “I be back here
next week,” he said, “and if you still here, I know you going to work for me.” He
remained there a moment, rocking on his heels, waiting for some answer. Finally
he turned and started beating his way back through the overgrown path.

Tanner had continued to look across the field as if his spirit had been sucked
out of him into the woods and nothing was left on the chair but a shell. If he had
known it was a question of this—sitting here looking out of this window all day in
this no-place, or just running a still for a nigger, he would have run the still for the
nigger. He would have been a nigger’s white nigger any day. Behind him he heard
the daughter come in from the kitchen. His heart accelerated but after a second he
heard her plump herself down on the sofa. She was not yet ready to go. He did not
turn and look at her.

She sat there silently a few moments. Then she began. “The trouble with you
is,” she said, “you sit in front of that window all the time where there’s nothing to
look out at. You need some inspiration and an out-let. If you would let me pull
your chair around to look at the TV, you would quit thinking about morbid stuff,
death and hell and judgement. My Lord.”

“The Judgement is coming,” he muttered. “The sheep’ll be separated from the
goats. Them that kept their promises from them that didn’t. Them that did the best
they could with what they had from them that didn’t. Them that honored their father

and their mother from them that cursed them. Them that…”

She heaved a mammoth sigh that all but drowned him out. “What’s the use in
me wasting my good breath?” she asked. She rose and went back in the kitchen
and began knocking things about.

She was so high and mighty! At home he had been living in a shack but there
was at least air around it. He could put his feet on the ground. Here she didn’t
even live in a house. She lived in a pigeon-hutch of a building, with all stripes of
foreigner, all of them twisted in the tongue. It was no place for a sane man. The
first morning here she had taken him sightseeing and he had seen in fifteen minutes
exactly how it was. He had not been out of the apartment since. He never wanted
to set foot again on the underground railroad or the steps that moved under you
while you stood still or any elevator to the thirty-fourth floor. When he was safely
back in the apartment again, he had imagined going over it with Coleman. He had
to turn his head every few seconds to make sure Coleman was behind him. Keep
to the inside or these people’ll knock you down, keep right behind me or you’ll get
left, keep your hat on, you damn idiot, he had said, and Coleman had come on with
his bent running shamble, panting and muttering, What we doing here? Where you
get this fool idea coming here?

I come to show you it was no kind of place. Now you know you were well off

where you were.

I knowed it before, Coleman said. Was you didn’t know it.
When he had been here a week, he had got a postcard from Coleman that had
been written for him by Hooten at the railroad station. It was written in green ink
and  said,  “This  is  Coleman—X—howyou  boss.”  Under  it  Hooten  had  written
from  himself,  “Quit  frequenting  all  those  nitespots  and  come  on  home,  you
scoundrel, yours truly. W. P. Hooten.”  He had sent Coleman a card in return, care
of  Hooten,  that  said,  “This  place  is  alrite  if  you  like  it.  Yours  truly,  W.  T.
Tanner.” Since the daughter had to mail the card, he had not put on it that he was
returning as soon as his pension check came. He had not intended to tell her but to
leave her a note. When the check came, he would hire himself a taxi to the bus
station and be on his way. And it would have made her as happy as it made him.
She had found his company dour and her duty irksome. If he had sneaked out, she

would  have  had  the  pleasure  of  having  tried  to  do  it  and  to  top  that  off,  the
pleasure of his ingratitude.

As for him, he would have returned to squat on the doctor’s land and to take
his orders from a nigger who chewed ten-cent cigars. And to think less about it
than formerly. Instead he had been done in by a nigger actor, or one who called
himself an actor. He didn’t believe the nigger was any actor.

There were two apartments on each floor of the building. He had been with the
daughter three weeks when the people in the next hutch moved out. He had stood
in the hall and watched the moving out and the next day he had watched a moving-
in.  The  hall  was  narrow  and  dark  and  he  stood  in  the  corner  out  of  the  way,
offering only a suggestion every now and then to the movers that would have made
their work easier for them if they had paid any attention. The furniture was new
and cheap so he decided the people moving in might be a newly married couple
and he would just wait around until they came and wish them well. After a while a
large Negro in a light blue suit came lunging up the stairs, carrying two canvas
suitcases, his head lowered against the strain. Behind him stepped a young tan-
skinned woman with bright copper-colored hair. The Negro dropped the suitcases
with a thud in front of the door of the next apartment.

“Be careful, Sweetie,” the woman said. “My make-up is in there.”
It broke upon him then just what was happening.
The Negro was grinning. He took a swipe at one of her hips.
“Quit it,” she said, “there’s an old guy watching.”
They both turned and looked at him.
“Had-do,” he said and nodded. Then he turned quickly into his own door.
His daughter was in the kitchen. “Who you think’s rented that apartment over

there?” he asked, his face alight.

She looked at him suspiciously. “Who?” she muttered.
“A nigger!” he said in a gleeful voice. “A South Alabama nigger if I ever saw
one. And got him this high-yeller, high-stepping woman with red hair and they two
are going to live next door to you!” He slapped his knee. “Yes siree!” he said.
“Damn if they ain’t!” It was the first time since coming up here that he had had
occasion to laugh.

Her face squared up instantly. “All right now you listen to me,” she said. “You
keep  away  from  them.  Don’t  you  go  over  there  trying  to  get  friendly  with  him.
They ain’t the same around here and I don’t want any trouble with niggers, you
hear me? If you have to live next to them, just you mind your business and they’ll
mind  theirs.  That’s  the  way  people  were  meant  to  get  along  in  this  world.
Everybody can get along if they just mind their business. Live and let live.” She
began to wrinkle her nose like a rabbit, a stupid way she had. “Up here everybody
minds their own business and everybody gets along. That’s all you have to do.”

“I  was  getting  along  with  niggers  before  you  were  born,”  he  said.  He  went
back out into the hall and waited. He was willing to bet the nigger would like to
talk to someone who understood him. Twice while he waited, he forgot and in his
excitement, spit his tobacco juice against the baseboard. In about twenty minutes,
the door of the apartment opened again and the Negro came out. He had put on a
tie and a pair of horn-rimmed spectacles and Tanner noticed for the first time that
he  had  a  small  almost  invisible  goatee.  A  real  swell.  He  came  on  without
appearing to see there was anyone else in the hall.

“Haddy, John,” Tanner  said and nodded, but the Negro brushed past without

hearing and went rattling rapidly down the stairs.

Could be deaf and dumb, Tanner thought. He went back into the apartment and
sat down but each time he heard a noise in the hall, he got up and went to the door
and stuck his head out to see if it might be the Negro. Once in the middle of the
afternoon, he caught the Negro’s eye just as he was rounding the bend of the stairs
again but before he could get out a word, the man was in his own apartment and
had slammed the door. He had never known one to move that fast unless the police
were after him.

He was standing in the hall early the next morning when the woman came out
of her door alone, walking on high gold-painted heels. He wished to bid her good
morning or simply to nod but instinct told him to beware. She didn’t look like any
kind of woman, black or white, he had ever seen before and he remained pressed
against the wall, frightened more than anything else, and feigning invisibility.

The woman gave him a flat stare, then turned her head away and stepped wide
of him as if she were skirting an open garbage can. He held his breath until she

was out of sight. Then he waited patiently for the man.

The Negro came out about eight o’clock.
This time Tanner advanced squarely in his path. “Good morning, Preacher,” he
said.  It  had  been  his  experience  that  if  a  Negro  tended  to  be  sullen,  this  title
usually cleared up his expression.
The Negro stopped abruptly.
“I seen you move in,” Tanner said. “I ain’t been up here long myself. It ain’t
much  of  a  place  if  you  ask  me.  I  reckon  you  wish  you  were  back  in  South
Alabama.”

The Negro did not take a step or answer. His eyes began to move. They moved
from the top of the black hat, down to the collarless blue shirt, neatly buttoned at
the neck, down the faded galluses to the gray trousers and the high-top shoes and
up again, very slowly, while some unfathomable dead-cold rage seemed to stiffen
and shrink him.

“I thought you might know somewhere around here we could find us a pond,
Preacher,” Tanner said in a voice growing thinner but still with considerable hope
in it.

A seething noise came out of the Negro before he spoke. “I’m not from South
Alabama,” he said in a breathless wheezing voice. “I’m from New York City. And
I’m not no preacher! I’m an actor.”

Tanner chortled. “It’s a little actor in most preachers,   ain’t  it?”  he  said  and

winked. “I reckon you just preach on the side.”

“I don’t preach!” the Negro cried and rushed past him as if a swarm of bees
had suddenly come down on him out of nowhere. He dashed down the stairs and
was gone.

Tanner stood here for some time before he went back in the apartment. The
rest of the day he sat in his chair and debated whether he would have one more try
at making friends with him. Every time he heard a noise on the stairs he went to
the door and looked out, but the Negro did not return until late in the afternoon.
Tanner was standing in the hall waiting for him when he reached the top of the
stairs. “Good evening, preacher,” he said, forgetting that the Negro called himself
an actor.

The Negro stopped and gripped the banister rail. A tremor racked him  from
his head to his crotch. Then he began to come forward slowly. When he was close
enough he lunged and grasped Tanner by both shoulders. “I don’t take no crap,” he
whispered, “off no wool-hat red-neck son-of-a-bitch peckerwood old bastard like
you.”  He  caught  his  breath.  And  then  his  voice  came  out  in  the  sound  of  an
exasperation so profound that it rocked on the verge of a laugh. It was high  and
piercing and weak, “And I’m not no preacher! I’m not even no Christian. I don’t
believe that crap. There ain’t no Jesus and there ain’t no God.”

The old man felt his heart inside him hard and tough as an oak knot. “And you

ain’t black,” he said. “And I ain’t white!”

The Negro slammed him against the wall. He yanked the black hat down over
his eyes. Then he grabbed his shirt front and shoved him backwards to his open
door and knocked him through it. From the kitchen the daughter saw him blindly
hit the edge of the inside hall door and fall reeling into the living room.

For days his tongue appeared to be frozen in his mouth. When it unthawed it
was  twice  its  normal  size  and  he  could  not  make  her  understand  him.  What  he
wanted to know was if the government check had come because he meant to buy a
bus  ticket  with  it  and  go  home. After  a  few  days,  he  made  her  understand.  “It
came,” she said, “and it’ll just pay the first two weeks’ doctor-bill and please tell
me how you’re going home when you can’t talk or walk or think straight and you
got one eye crossed yet? Just please tell me that?”

It had come to him then slowly just what his present situation was. At least he
would have to make her understand that he must be sent home to be buried. They
could have him shipped back in a refrigerated car so that he would keep for the
trip. He didn’t want any undertaker up here messing with him. Let them get him off
at  once  and  he  would  come  in  on  the  early  morning  train  and  they  could  wire
Hooten to get Coleman and Coleman would do the rest; she would not even have
to go herself. After a lot of argument, he wrung the promise from her. She would
ship him back.

After that he slept peacefully and improved a little. In his dreams he could feel
the cold early morning air of home coming in through the cracks of the pine box.
He  could  see  Coleman  waiting,  red-eyed,  on  the  station  platform  and  Hooten

standing there with his green eyeshade and black alpaca sleeves. If the old  fool
had stayed at home where he belonged, Hooten would be thinking, he wouldn’t be
arriving on the 6:03 in no box. Coleman had turned the borrowed mule and cart so
that  they  could  slide  the  box  off  the  platform  onto  the  open  end  of  the  wagon.
Everything was ready and the two of them, shut-mouthed, inched the loaded coffin
toward the wagon. From inside he began to scratch on the wood. They let go as if
it had caught fire.

They stood looking at each other, then at the box.
“That him,” Coleman said. “He in there his self.”
“Naw,” Hooten said, “must be a rat got in there with him.”
“That him. This here one of his tricks.”
“If it’s a rat he might as well stay.”
“That him. Git a crowbar.”
Hooten went grumbling off and got the crowbar and came back and began to
pry  open  the  lid.  Even  before  he  had  the  upper  end  pried  open,  Coleman  was
jumping up and down, wheezing and panting from excitement. Tanner gave a thrust
upward  with  both  hands  and  sprang  up  in  the  box.  “Judgement  Day!  Judgement
Day!” he cried. “Don’t you two fools know it’s Judgement Day?”

Now he knew exactly what her promises were worth. He would do as well to
trust to the note pinned in his coat and to any stranger who found him dead in the
street or in the boxcar or wherever. There was nothing to be looked for from her
except  that  she  would  do  things  her  way.  She  came  out  of  the  kitchen  again,
holding her hat and coat and rubber boots.

“Now listen,” she said, “I have to go to the store. Don’t you try to get up and
walk around while I’m gone. You’ve been to the bathroom and you shouldn’t have
to go again. I don’t want to find you on the floor when I get back.”

You won’t find me atall when you get back, he said to himself. This was the
last time he would see her flat dumb face. He felt guilty. She had been good to him
and he had been nothing but a nuisance to her.

“Do you want you a glass of milk before I go?” she asked.
“No,” he said. Then he drew breath and said, “You got a nice place here. It’s a
nice part of the country. I’m sorry if I’ve give you a lot of trouble getting sick. It

was  my  fault  trying  to  be  friendly  with  that  nigger.”  And  I’m  a  damned  liar
besides, he said to himself to kill the outrageous taste such a statement made in his
mouth.

For a moment she stared as if he were losing his mind. Then she seemed to
think better of it. “Now don’t saying something pleasant like that once in a while
make you feel better?” she asked and sat down on the sofa.

His knees itched to unbend. Git on, git on, he fumed silently. Make haste and

go.

“It’s great to have you here,” she said. “I wouldn’t have you any other place.
My own daddy.” She gave him a big smile and hoisted her right leg up and began
to pull on her boot. “I wouldn’t wish a dog out on a day like this,” she said, “but I
got to go. You can sit here and hope I don’t slip and break my neck.” She stamped
the booted foot on the floor and then began to tackle the other one.

He turned his eyes to the window. The snow was beginning to stick and freeze
to the outside pane. When he looked at her again, she was standing there like a big
doll  stuffed  into  its  hat  and  coat.  She  drew  on  a  pair  of  green  knitted  gloves.
“Okay,” she said, “I’m gone. You sure you don’t want anything?”

“No,” he said, “go ahead on.”
“Well so long then,” she said.
He raised the hat enough to reveal a bald palely speckled head. The hall door
closed behind her. He began to tremble with excitement. He reached behind him
and drew the coat into his lap. When he got it on, he waited until he had stopped
panting, then he gripped the arms of the chair and pulled himself up. His body felt
like a great heavy bell whose clapper swung from side to side but made no noise.
Once  up,  he  remained  standing  a  moment,  swaying  until  he  got  his  balance. A
sensation of terror and defeat swept over him. He would never make it. He would
never get there dead or alive. He pushed one foot forward and did not fall and his
confidence returned. “The Lord is my shepherd,” he muttered, “I shall not want.”
He began moving toward the sofa where he would have support. He reached it.
He was on his way.

By the time he got to the door, she would be down the four flights of steps and
out of the building. He got past the sofa and crept along by the wall, keeping his

hand on it for support. Nobody was going to bury him here. He was as confident
as if the woods of home lay at the bottom of the stairs. He reached the front door
of the apartment and opened it and peered into the hall. This was the first time he
had looked into it since the actor had knocked him down. It was dank-smelling and
empty.  The  thin  piece  of  linoleum  stretched  its  moldy  length  to  the  door  of  the
other apartment, which was closed. “Nigger actor,” he said.

The head of the stairs was ten or twelve feet from where he stood and he bent
his attention to getting there without creeping around the long way with a hand on
the  wall.  He  held  his  arms  a  little  way  out  from  his  sides  and  pushed  forward
directly. He was halfway there when all at once his legs disappeared, or felt as if
they had. He looked down, bewildered, for they were still there. He fell forward
and grasped the banister post with both hands. Hanging there, he gazed for what
seemed the longest time he had ever looked at anything down the steep unlighted
steps; then he closed his eyes and pitched forward. He landed upside down in the
middle of the flight.

He felt presently the tilt of the box as they took it off the train and got it on the
baggage  wagon.  He  made  no  noise  yet.  The  train  jarred  and  slid  away.  In  a
moment  the  baggage  wagon  was  rumbling  under  him,  carrying  him  back  to  the
station side. He heard footsteps rattling closer and closer to him and he supposed
that a crowd was gathering. Wait until they see this, he thought.

“That him,” Coleman said, “one of his tricks.”
“It’s a damm rat in there,” Hooten said.
“It’s him. Git the crowbar.”
In  a  moment  a  shaft  of  greenish  light  fell  on  him.  He  pushed  through  it  and
cried in a weak voice, “Judgement Day! Judgement Day! You idiots didn’t know it
was Judgement Day, did you?”
“Coleman?” he murmured.
The Negro bending over him had a large surly mouth and sullen eyes.
“Ain’t any coal man, either,” he said. This must be the wrong station, Tanner
thought. Those fools put me off too soon. Who is this nigger? It ain’t even daylight
here.

At the Negro’s side was another face, a woman’s—pale, topped with a pile of

copper-glinting hair and twisted as if she had just stepped in a pile of dung.

“Oh,” Tanner said, “it’s you.”
The actor leaned closer and grasped him by the front of his shirt. “Judgement
day,” he said in a mocking voice. “Ain’t no judgement day, old man. Cept this.
Maybe this here judgement day for you.”

Tanner  tried  to  catch  hold  of  a  banister-spoke  to  raise  himself  but  his  hand
grasped  air.  The  two  faces,  the  black  one  and  the  pale  one,  appeared  to  be
wavering. By an effort of will he kept them focused before him while he lifted his
hand, as light as a breath, and said in his jauntiest voice, “Hep me up, Preacher.
I’m on my way home!”

His daughter found him when she came in from the grocery store. His hat had
been pulled down over his face and his head and arms thrust between the spokes
of  the  banister;  his  feet  dangled  over  the  stairwell  like  those  of  a  man  in  the
stocks. She tugged at him frantically and then flew for the police. They cut him out
with a saw and said he had been dead about an hour.

She buried him in New York City, but after she had done it she could not sleep
at night. Night after night she turned and tossed and very definite lines began to
appear in her face, so she had him dug up and shipped the body to Corinth. Now
she rests well at night and her good looks have mostly returned.





                               CHAPTER 1


Hazel Motes sat at a forward angle on the green plush train seat,
looking one minute at the window as if he might want to jump out of it,
and the next down the aisle at the other end of the car. The train was
racing through tree tops that fell away at intervals and showed the sun
standing, very red, on the edge of the farthest woods. Nearer, the
plowed fields curved and faded and the few hogs nosing in the furrows
looked like large spotted stones. Mrs. Wally Bee Hitchcock, who was
facing Motes in the section, said that she thought the early evening
like this was the prettiest time of day and she asked him if he didn’t
think so too. She was a fat woman with pink collars and cuffs and
pear-shaped legs that slanted off the train seat and didn’t reach the
floor.

He looked at her a second and, without answering, leaned forward and
stared down the length of the car again. She turned to see what was back
there but all she saw was a child peering around one of the sections
and, farther up at the end of the car, the porter opening the closet
where the sheets were kept.

“I guess you’re going home,” she said, turning back to him again. He
didn’t look, to her, much over twenty, but he had a stiff black
broad-brimmed hat on his lap, a hat that an elderly country preacher
would wear. His suit was a glaring blue and the price tag was still
stapled on the sleeve of it.

He didn’t answer her or move his eyes from whatever he was looking at.
The sack at his feet was an army duffel bag and she decided that he had
been in the army and had been released and that now he was going home.
She wanted to get close enough to see what the suit had cost him but she
found herself squinting instead at his eyes, trying almost to look into
them. They were the color of pecan shells and set in deep sockets. The
outline of a skull under his skin was plain and insistent.

She felt irked and wrenched her attention loose and squinted at the
price tag. The suit had cost him $11.98. She felt that that placed him
and looked at his face again as if she were fortified against it now. He
had a nose like a shrike’s bill and a long vertical crease on either
side of his mouth; his hair looked as if it had been permanently
flattened under the heavy hat, but his eyes were what held her attention
longest. Their settings were so deep that they seemed, to her, almost
like passages leading somewhere and she leaned halfway across the space
that separated the two seats, trying to see into them. He turned toward
the window suddenly and then almost as quickly turned back again to
where his stare had been fixed.

What he was looking at was the porter. When he had first got on the
train, the porter had been standing between the two cars—a
thick-figured man with a round yellow bald head. Haze had stopped and
the porter’s eyes had turned toward him and away, indicating which car
he was to go into. When he didn’t go, the porter said, “To the left,”
irritably, “to the left,” and Haze had moved on.

“Well,” Mrs. Hitchcock said, “there’s no place like home.”

He gave her a glance and saw the flat of her face, reddish under a cap
of fox-colored hair. She had got on two stops back. He had never seen
her before that. “I got to go see the porter,” he said. He got up and
went toward the end of the car where the porter had begun making up a
berth. He stopped beside him and leaned on a seat arm, but the porter
didn’t look at him. He was pulling a wall of the section farther out.

“How long does it take you to make one up?”

“Seven minutes,” the porter said, not looking at him.

Haze sat down on the seat arm. He said, “I’m from Eastrod.”

“That isn’t on this line,” the porter said. “You on the wrong train.”

“Going to the city,” Haze said. “I said I was raised in Eastrod.”

The porter didn’t say anything.

“Eastrod,” Haze said, louder.

The porter jerked the shade down. “You want your berth made up now, or
what you standing there for?” he asked.

“Eastrod,” Haze said. “Near Melsy.”

The porter wrenched one side of the seat flat. “I’m from Chicago,” he
said. He wrenched the other side down. When he bent over, the back of
his neck came out in three bulges.

“Yeah, I bet you are,” Haze said with a leer.

“Your feet in the middle of the aisle. Somebody going to want to get by
you,” the porter said, turning suddenly and brushing past.

Haze got up and hung there a few seconds. He looked as if he were held
by a rope caught in the middle of his back and attached to the train
ceiling. He watched the porter move in a fine controlled lurch down the
aisle and disappear at the other end of the car. He knew him to be a
Parrum nigger from Eastrod. He went back to his section and folded into
a slouched position and settled one foot on a pipe that ran under the
window. Eastrod filled his head and then went out beyond and filled the
space that stretched from the train across the empty darkening fields.
He saw the two houses and the rust-colored road and the few Negro shacks
and the one barn and the stall with the red and white CCC snuff ad
peeling across the side of it.

“Are you going home?” Mrs. Hitchcock asked.

He looked at her sourly and gripped the black hat by the brim. “No, I
ain’t,” he said in a sharp high nasal Tennessee voice.

Mrs. Hitchcock said neither was she. She told him she had been a Miss
Weatherman before she married and that she was going to Florida to visit
her married daughter, Sarah Lucile. She said it seemed like she had
never had time to take a trip that far off. The way things happened, one
thing after another, it seemed like time went by so fast you couldn’t
tell if you were young or old.

He thought he could tell her she was old if she asked him. He stopped
listening to her after a while. The porter passed back up the aisle and
didn’t look at him. Mrs. Hitchcock lost her train of talk. “I guess
you’re on your way to visit somebody?” she asked.

“Going to Taulkinham,” he said and ground himself into the seat and
looked at the window. “Don’t know nobody there, but I’m going to do some
things.

“I’m going to do some things I never have done before,” he said and gave
her a sidelong glance and curled his mouth slightly.

She said she knew an Albert Sparks from Taulkinham. She said he was her
sister-in-law’s brother-in-law and that he . . .

“I ain’t from Taulkinham,” he said. “I said I’m going there, that’s
all.” Mrs. Hitchcock began to talk again but he cut her short and said,
“That porter was raised in the same place where I was raised but he says
he’s from Chicago.”

Mrs. Hitchcock said she knew a man who lived in Chi . . .

“You might as well go one place as another,” he said. “That’s all I
know.”

Mrs. Hitchcock said well that time flies. She said she hadn’t seen her
sister’s children in five years and she didn’t know if she’d know them
if she saw them. There were three of them, Roy, Bubber, and John Wesley.
John Wesley was six years old and he had written her a letter, dear
Mammadoll. They called her Mammadoll and her husband Papadoll . . .

“I reckon you think you been redeemed,” he said.

Mrs. Hitchcock snatched at her collar.

“I reckon you think you been redeemed,” he repeated.

She blushed. After a second she said yes, life was an inspiration and
then she said she was hungry and asked him if he didn’t want to go into
the diner. He put on the fierce black hat and followed her out of the
car.

The dining car was full and people were waiting to get in it. He and
Mrs. Hitchcock stood in line for a half-hour, rocking in the narrow
passageway and every few minutes flattening themselves against the side
to let a trickle of people through. Mrs. Hitchcock talked to the woman
on the side of her. Hazel Motes looked at the wall. Mrs. Hitchcock told
the woman about her sister’s husband who was with the City Water Works
in Toolafalls, Alabama, and the lady told about a cousin who had cancer
of the throat. Finally they got almost up to the entrance of the diner
and could see inside it. There was a steward beckoning people to places
and handing out menus. He was a white man with greased black hair and a
greased black look to his suit. He moved like a crow, darting from table
to table. He motioned for two people and the line moved up so that Haze
and Mrs. Hitchcock and the lady she was talking to were ready to go
next. In a minute two more people left. The steward beckoned and Mrs.
Hitchcock and the woman walked in and Haze followed them. The man
stopped him and said, “Only two,” and pushed him back to the doorway.

Haze’s face turned an ugly red. He tried to get behind the next person
and then he tried to get through the line to go back to the car he had
come from but there were too many people bunched in the opening. He had
to stand there while everyone around looked at him. No one left for a
while. Finally a woman at the far end of the car got up and the steward
jerked his hand. Haze hesitated and saw the hand jerk again. He lurched
up the aisle, falling against two tables on the way and getting his hand
wet in somebody’s coffee. The steward placed him with three youngish
women dressed like parrots.

Their hands were resting on the table, red-speared at the tips. He sat
down and wiped his hand on the tablecloth. He didn’t take off his hat.
The women had finished eating and were smoking cigarettes. They stopped
talking when he sat down. He pointed to the first thing on the menu and
the steward, standing over him, said, “Write it down, sonny,” and winked
at one of the women; she made a noise in her nose. He wrote it down and
the steward went away with it. He sat and looked in front of him, glum
and intense, at the neck of the woman across from him. At intervals her
hand holding the cigarette would pass the spot on her neck; it would go
out of his sight and then it would pass again, going back down to the
table; in a second a straight line of smoke would blow in his face.
After it had blown at him three or four times, he looked at her. She had
a bold game-hen expression and small eyes pointed directly on him.

“If you’ve been redeemed,” he said, “I wouldn’t want to be.” Then he
turned his head to the window. He saw his pale reflection with the dark
empty space outside coming through it. A boxcar roared past, chopping
the empty space in two, and one of the women laughed.

“Do you think I believe in Jesus?” he said, leaning toward her and
speaking almost as if he were breathless. “Well I wouldn’t even if He
existed. Even if He was on this train.”

“Who said you had to?” she asked in a poisonous Eastern voice.

He drew back.

The waiter brought his dinner. He began eating slowly at first, then
faster as the women concentrated on watching the muscles that stood out
on his jaw when he chewed. He was eating something spotted with eggs and
livers. He finished that and drank his coffee and then pulled his money
out. The steward saw him but he wouldn’t come total the bill. Every time
he passed the table, he would wink at the women and stare at Haze. Mrs.
Hitchcock and the lady had already finished and gone. Finally the man
came and added up the bill. Haze shoved the money at him and then pushed
past him out of the car.

For a while he stood between two train cars where there was fresh air of
a sort and made a cigarette. Then the porter passed between the two
cars. “Hey you Parrum,” he called.

The porter didn’t stop.

Haze followed him into the car. All the berths were made up. The man in
the station in Melsy had sold him a berth because he said he would have
to sit up all night in the coaches; he had sold him an upper one. Haze
went to it and pulled his sack down and went into the men’s room and got
ready for the night. He was too full and he wanted to hurry and get in
the berth and lie down. He thought he would lie there and look out the
window and watch how the country went by a train at night. A sign said
to get the porter to let you into the uppers. He stuck his sack up into
his berth and then went to look for the porter. He didn’t find him at
one end of the car and he started back to the other. Going around the
corner he ran into something heavy and pink; it gasped and muttered,
“Clumsy!” It was Mrs. Hitchcock in a pink wrapper, with her hair in
knots around her head. She looked at him with her eyes squinted nearly
shut. The knobs framed her face like dark toadstools. She tried to get
past him and he tried to let her but they were both moving the same way
each time. Her face became purplish except for little white marks over
it that didn’t heat up. She drew herself stiff and stopped and said,
“What is the matter with you?” He slipped past her and dashed down the
aisle and ran into the porter so that the porter fell down.

“You got to let me into the berth, Parrum,” he said.

The porter picked himself up and went lurching down the aisle and after
a minute he came lurching back again, stone-faced, with the ladder. Haze
stood watching him while he put the ladder up; then he started up it.
Half-way up, he turned and said, “I remember you. Your father was a
nigger named Cash Parrum. You can’t go back there neither, nor anybody
else, not if they wanted to.”

“I’m from Chicago,” the porter said in an irritated voice. “My name is
not Parrum.”

“Cash is dead,” Haze said. “He got the cholera from a pig.”

The porter’s mouth jerked down and he said, “My father was a railroad
man.”

Haze laughed. The porter jerked the ladder off suddenly with a wrench of
his arm that sent the boy clutching at the blanket into the berth. He
lay on his stomach for a few minutes and didn’t move. After a while he
turned and found the light and looked around him. There was no window.
He was closed up in the thing except for a little space over the
curtain. The top of the berth was low and curved over. He lay down and
noticed that the curved top looked as if it were not quite closed; it
looked as if it were closing. He lay there for a while, not moving.
There was something in his throat like a sponge with an egg taste; he
didn’t want to turn over for fear it would move. He wanted the light
off. He reached up without turning and felt for the button and snapped
it and the darkness sank down on him and then faded a little with light
from the aisle that came in through the foot of space not closed. He
wanted it all dark, he didn’t want it diluted. He heard the porter’s
footsteps coming down the aisle, soft into the rug, coming steadily
down, brushing against the green curtains and fading up the other way
out of hearing. Then after a while when he was almost asleep, he thought
he heard them again coming back. His curtains stirred and the footsteps
faded.

In his half-sleep he thought where he was lying was like a coffin. The
first coffin he had seen with someone in it was his grandfather’s. They
had left it propped open with a stick of kindling the night it had sat
in the house with the old man in it, and Haze had watched from a
distance, thinking: he ain’t going to let them shut it on him; when the
time comes, his elbow is going to shoot into the crack. His grandfather
had been a circuit preacher, a waspish old man who had ridden over three
counties with Jesus hidden in his head like a stinger. When it was time
to bury him, they shut the top of his box down and he didn’t make a
move.

Haze had had two younger brothers; one died in infancy and was put in a
small box. The other fell in front of a mowing machine when he was
seven. His box was about half the size of an ordinary one, and when they
shut it, Haze ran and opened it up again. They said it was because he
was heartbroken to part with his brother, but it was not; it was because
he had thought, what if he had been in it and they had shut it on him.

He was asleep now and he dreamed he was at his father’s burying again.
He saw him humped over on his hands and knees in his coffin, being
carried that way to the graveyard. “If I keep my can in the air,” he
heard the old man say, “nobody can shut nothing on me,” but when they
got his box to the hole, they let it drop down with a thud and his
father flattened out like anybody else. The train jolted and stirred him
half-awake again and he thought, there must have been twenty-five people
in Eastrod then, three Motes. Now there were no more Motes, no more
Ashfields, no more Blasengames, Feys, Jacksons . . . or Parrums—even
niggers wouldn’t have it. Turning in the road, he saw in the dark the
store boarded and the barn leaning and the smaller house half carted
away, the porch gone and no floor in the hall.

It had not been that way when he was eighteen years old and had left it.
Then there had been ten people there and he had not noticed that it had
got smaller from his father’s time. He had left it when he was eighteen
years old because the army had called him. He had thought at first he
would shoot his foot and not go. He was going to be a preacher like his
grandfather and a preacher can always do without a foot. A preacher’s
power is in his neck and tongue and arm. His grandfather had traveled
three counties in a Ford automobile. Every fourth Saturday he had driven
into Eastrod as if he were just in time to save them all from Hell, and
he was shouting before he had the car door open. People gathered around
his Ford because he seemed to dare them to. He would climb up on the
nose of it and preach from there and sometimes he would climb onto the
top of it and shout down at them. They were like stones! he would shout.
But Jesus had died to redeem them! Jesus was so soul-hungry that He had
died, one death for all, but He would have died every soul’s death for
one! Did they understand that? Did they understand that for each stone
soul, He would have died ten million deaths, had His arms and legs
stretched on the cross and nailed ten million times for one of them?
(The old man would point to his grandson, Haze. He had a particular
disrespect for him because his own face was repeated almost exactly in
the child’s and seemed to mock him.) Did they know that even for that
boy there, for that mean sinful unthinking boy standing there with his
dirty hands clenching and unclenching at his sides, Jesus would die ten
million deaths before He would let him lose his soul? He would chase him
over the waters of sin! Did they doubt Jesus could walk on the waters of
sin? That boy had been redeemed and Jesus wasn’t going to leave him
ever. Jesus would never let him forget he was redeemed. What did the
sinner think there was to be gained? Jesus would have him in the end!

The boy didn’t need to hear it. There was already a deep black wordless
conviction in him that the way to avoid Jesus was to avoid sin. He knew
by the time he was twelve years old that he was going to be a preacher.
Later he saw Jesus move from tree to tree in the back of his mind, a
wild ragged figure motioning him to turn around and come off into the
dark where he was not sure of his footing, where he might be walking on
the water and not know it and then suddenly know it and drown. Where he
wanted to stay was in Eastrod with his two eyes open, and his hands
always handling the familiar thing, his feet on the known track, and his
tongue not too loose. When he was eighteen and the army called him, he
saw the war as a trick to lead him into temptation, and he would have
shot his foot except that he trusted himself to get back in a few
months, uncorrupted. He had a strong confidence in his power to resist
evil; it was something he had inherited, like his face, from his
grandfather. He thought that if the government wasn’t through with him
in four months, he would leave anyway. He had thought, then when he was
eighteen years old, that he would give them exactly four months of his
time. He was gone four years; he didn’t get back, even for a visit.

The only things from Eastrod he took into the army with him were a black
Bible and a pair of silver-rimmed spectacles that had belonged to his
mother. He had gone to a country school where he had learned to read and
write but that it was wiser not to; the Bible was the only book he read.
He didn’t read it often but when he did he wore his mother’s glasses.
They tired his eyes so that after a short time he was always obliged to
stop. He meant to tell anyone in the army who invited him to sin that he
was from Eastrod, Tennessee, and that he meant to get back there and
stay back there, that he was going to be a preacher of the gospel and
that he wasn’t going to have his soul damned by the government or by any
foreign place it sent him to.

After a few weeks in the camp, when he had some friends—they were not
actually friends but he had to live with them—he was offered the chance
he had been waiting for; the invitation. He took his mother’s glasses
out of his pocket and put them on. Then he told them he wouldn’t go with
them for a million dollars and a feather bed to lie on; he said he was
from Eastrod, Tennessee, and that he was not going to have his soul
damned by the government or any foreign place they . . . but his voice
cracked and he didn’t finish. He only stared at them, trying to steel
his face. His friends told him that nobody was interested in his goddam
soul unless it was the priest and he managed to answer that no priest
taking orders from no pope was going to tamper with his soul. They told
him he didn’t have any soul and left for their brothel.

He took a long time to believe them because he wanted to believe them.
All he wanted was to believe them and get rid of it once and for all,
and he saw the opportunity here to get rid of it without corruption, to
be converted to nothing instead of to evil. The army sent him halfway
around the world and forgot him. He was wounded and they remembered him
long enough to take the shrapnel out of his chest—they said they took
it out but they never showed it to him and he felt it still in there,
rusted, and poisoning him—and then they sent him to another desert and
forgot him again. He had all the time he could want to study his soul in
and assure himself that it was not there. When he was thoroughly
convinced, he saw that this was something that he had always known. The
misery he had was a longing for home; it had nothing to do with Jesus.
When the army finally let him go, he was pleased to think that he was
still uncorrupted. All he wanted was to get back to Eastrod, Tennessee.
The black Bible and his mother’s glasses were still in the bottom of his
duffel bag. He didn’t read any book now but he kept the Bible because it
had come from home. He kept the glasses in case his vision should ever
become dim.

When the army had released him two days before in a city about three
hundred miles north of where he wanted to be, he had gone immediately to
the railroad station there and bought a ticket to Melsy, the nearest
railroad stop to Eastrod. Then since he had to wait four hours for the
train, he went into a dark dry-goods store near the station. It was a
thin cardboard-smelling store that got darker as it got deeper. He went
deep into it and was sold a blue suit and a dark hat. He had his army
suit put in a paper sack and he stuffed it into a trashbox on the
corner. Once outside in the light, the new suit turned glare-blue and
the lines of the hat seemed to stiffen fiercely.

He was in Melsy at five o’clock in the afternoon and he caught a ride on
a cotton-seed truck that took him more than half the distance to
Eastrod. He walked the rest of the way and got there at nine o’clock at
night, when it had just got dark. The house was as dark as the night and
open to it and though he saw that the fence around it had partly fallen
and that weeds were growing through the porch floor, he didn’t realize
all at once that it was only a shell, that there was nothing here but
the skeleton of a house. He twisted an envelope and struck a match to it
and went through all the empty rooms, upstairs and down. When the
envelope burnt out, he lit another one and went through them all again.
That night he slept on the floor in the kitchen, and a board fell on his
head out of the roof and cut his face.

There was nothing left in the house but the chifforobe in the kitchen.
His mother had always slept in the kitchen and had her walnut chifforobe
in there. She had given thirty dollars for it and hadn’t bought herself
anything else big again. Whoever had got everything else, had left that.
He opened all the drawers. There were two lengths of wrapping cord in
the top one and nothing in the others. He was surprised nobody had come
and stolen a chifforobe like that. He took the wrapping cord and tied it
around the legs and through the floor boards and left a piece of paper
in each of the drawers: =This shiffer-robe belongs to Hazel Motes.
Do not steal it or you will be hunted down and killed.=

He thought about the chifforobe in his half-sleep and decided his mother
would rest easier in her grave, knowing it was guarded. If she came
looking any time at night, she would see. He wondered if she walked at
night and came there ever. She would come with that look on her face,
unrested and looking; the same look he had seen through the crack of her
coffin. He had seen her face through the crack when they were shutting
the top on her. He was sixteen then. He had seen the shadow that came
down over her face and pulled her mouth down as if she wasn’t any more
satisfied dead than alive, as if she were going to spring up and shove
the lid back and fly out and satisfy herself: but they shut it. She
might have been going to fly out of there, she might have been going to
spring. He saw her in his sleep, terrible, like a huge bat, dart from
the closing, fly out of there, but it was falling dark on top of her,
closing down all the time. From inside he saw it closing, coming closer
down and cutting off the light and the room. He opened his eyes and saw
it closing and he sprang up between the crack and wedged his head and
shoulders through it and hung there, dizzy, with the dim light of the
train slowly showing the rug below. He hung there over the top of the
berth curtain and saw the porter at the other end of the car, a white
shape in the darkness, standing there watching him and not moving.

“I’m sick!” he called. “I can’t be closed up in this thing. Get me out!”

The porter stood watching him and didn’t move.

“Jesus,” Haze said, “Jesus.”

The porter didn’t move. “Jesus been a long time gone,” he said in a sour
triumphant voice.




                               CHAPTER 2


He didn’t get to the city until six the next evening. That morning he
had got off the train at a junction stop to get some air and while he
had been looking the other way, the train had slid off. He had run after
it but his hat had blown away and he had had to run in the other
direction to save the hat. Fortunately, he had carried his duffel bag
out with him lest someone should steal something out of it. He had to
wait six hours at the junction stop until the right train came.

When he got to Taulkinham, as soon as he stepped off the train, he began
to see signs and lights. PEANUTS, =Western Union=, AJAX,
TAXI, HOTEL, CANDY. Most of them were electric and moved up and down or
blinked frantically. He walked very slowly, carrying his duffel bag by
the neck. His head turned to one side and then the other, first toward
one sign and then another. He walked the length of the station and then
he walked back as if he might be going to get on the train again. His
face was stern and determined under the heavy hat. No one observing him
would have known that he had no place to go. He walked up and down the
crowded waiting room two or three times, but he did not want to sit on
the benches there. He wanted a private place to go to.

Finally he pushed open a door at one end of the station where a plain
black and white sign said, =Men’s Toilet. White=. He went
into a narrow room lined on one side with washbasins and on the other
with a row of wooden stalls. The walls of this room had once been a
bright cheerful yellow but now they were more nearly green and were
decorated with handwriting and with various detailed drawings of the
parts of the body of both men and women. Some of the stalls had doors on
them and on one of the doors, written with what must have been a crayon,
was the large word, WELCOME, followed by three exclamation points and
something that looked like a snake. Haze entered this one.

He had been sitting in the narrow box for some time, studying the
inscriptions on the sides and door, before he noticed one that was to
the left over the toilet paper. It was written in a drunken-looking
hand. It said,

                    Mrs. Leora Watts!
                    60 Buckley Road
                    The friendliest bed in town!
                                    Brother.

After a while he took a pencil out of his pocket and wrote down the
address on the back of an envelope.

Outside he got in a yellow taxi and told the driver where he wanted to
go. The driver was a small man with a big leather cap on his head and
the tip of a cigar coming out from the center of his mouth. They had
driven a few blocks before Haze noticed him squinting at him through the
rear-view mirror. “You ain’t no friend of hers, are you?” the driver
asked.

“I never saw her before,” Haze said.

“Where’d you hear about her? She don’t usually have no preachers for
company.” He did not disturb the position of the cigar when he spoke; he
was able to speak on either side of it.

“I ain’t any preacher,” Haze said, frowning. “I only seen her name in
the toilet.”

“You look like a preacher,” the driver said. “That hat looks like a
preacher’s hat.”

“It ain’t,” Haze said, and leaned forward and gripped the back of the
front seat. “It’s just a hat.”

They stopped in front of a small one-story house between a filling
station and a vacant lot. Haze got out and paid his fare through the
window.

“It ain’t only the hat,” the driver said. “It’s a look in your face
somewheres.”

“Listen,” Haze said, tilting the hat over one eye, “I’m not a preacher.”

“I understand,” the driver said. “It ain’t anybody perfect on this green
earth of God’s, preachers nor nobody else. And you can tell people
better how terrible sin is if you know from your own personal
experience.”

Haze put his head in at the window, knocking the hat accidentally
straight again. He seemed to have knocked his face straight too for it
became completely expressionless. “Listen,” he said, “get this: I don’t
believe in anything.”

The driver took the stump of cigar out of his mouth. “Not in nothing at
all?” he asked, leaving his mouth open after the question.

“I don’t have to say it but once to nobody,” Haze said.

The driver closed his mouth and after a second he returned the piece of
cigar to it. “That’s the trouble with you preachers,” he said. “You’ve
all got too good to believe in anything,” and he drove off with a look
of disgust and righteousness.

Haze turned and looked at the house he was going into. It was little
more than a shack but there was a warm glow in one front window. He went
up on the front porch and put his eye to a convenient crack in the
shade, and found himself looking directly at a large white knee. After
some time he moved away from the crack and tried the front door. It was
not locked and he went into a small dark hall with a door on either side
of it. The door to the left was cracked and let out a narrow shaft of
light. He moved into the light and looked through the crack.

Mrs. Watts was sitting alone in a white iron bed, cutting her toenails
with a large pair of scissors. She was a big woman with very yellow hair
and white skin that glistened with a greasy preparation. She had on a
pink nightgown that would better have fit a smaller figure.

Haze made a noise with the doorknob and she looked up and observed him
standing behind the crack. She had a bold steady penetrating stare.
After a minute, she turned it away from him and began cutting her
toenails again.

He went in and stood looking around him. There was nothing much in the
room but the bed and a bureau and a rocking chair full of dirty clothes.
He went to the bureau and fingered a nail file and then an empty jelly
glass while he looked into the yellowish mirror and watched Mrs. Watts,
slightly distorted, grinning at him. His senses were stirred to the
limit. He turned quickly and went to her bed and sat down on the far
corner of it. He drew a long draught of air through one side of his nose
and began to run his hand carefully along the sheet.

The pink tip of Mrs. Watts’s tongue appeared and moistened her lower
lip. She seemed just as glad to see him as if he had been an old friend
but she didn’t say anything.

He picked up her foot, which was heavy but not cold, and moved it about
an inch to one side, and kept his hand on it.

Mrs. Watts’s mouth split in a wide full grin that showed her teeth. They
were small and pointed and speckled with green and there was a wide
space between each one. She reached out and gripped Haze’s arm just
above the elbow. “You huntin’ something?” she drawled.

If she had not had him so firmly by the arm, he might have leaped out
the window. Involuntarily his lips formed the words, “Yes, mam,” but no
sound came through them.

“Something on your mind?” Mrs. Watts asked, pulling his rigid figure a
little closer.

“Listen,” he said, keeping his voice tightly under control, “I come for
the usual business.”

Mrs. Watts’s mouth became more round, as if she were perplexed at this
waste of words. “Make yourself at home,” she said simply.

They stared at each other for almost a minute and neither moved. Then he
said in a voice that was higher than his usual voice, “What I mean to
have you know is: I’m no goddam preacher.”

Mrs. Watts eyed him steadily with only a slight smirk. Then she put her
other hand under his face and tickled it in a motherly way. “That’s
okay, son,” she said. “Momma don’t mind if you ain’t a preacher.”




                               CHAPTER 3


His second night in Taulkinham, Hazel Motes walked along down town close
to the store fronts but not looking in them. The black sky was
underpinned with long silver streaks that looked like scaffolding and
depth on depth behind it were thousands of stars that all seemed to be
moving very slowly as if they were about some vast construction work
that involved the whole order of the universe and would take all time to
complete. No one was paying any attention to the sky. The stores in
Taulkinham stayed open on Thursday nights so that people could have an
extra opportunity to see what was for sale. Haze’s shadow was now behind
him and now before him and now and then broken up by other people’s
shadows, but when it was by itself, stretching behind him, it was a thin
nervous shadow walking backwards. His neck was thrust forward as if he
were trying to smell something that was always being drawn away. The
glary light from the store windows made his blue suit look purple.

After a while he stopped where a lean-faced man had a card table set up
in front of a department store and was demonstrating a potato peeler.
The man had on a small canvas hat and a shirt patterned with bunches of
upside-down pheasants and quail and bronze turkeys. He was pitching his
voice under the street noises so that it reached every ear distinctly as
if in a private conversation. A few people gathered around. There were
two buckets on the card table, one empty and the other full of potatoes.
Between the two buckets there was a pyramid of green cardboard boxes
and, on top of the stack, one peeler was open for demonstration. The man
stood in front of this altar, pointing over it at various people. “How
about you?” he said, pointing at a damp-haired pimpled boy. “You ain’t
gonna let one of these go by?” He stuck a brown potato in one side of
the open machine. The machine was a square tin box with a red handle,
and as he turned the handle, the potato went into the box and then in a
second, backed out the other side, white. “You ain’t gonna let one of
these go by!” he said.

The boy guffawed and looked at the other people gathered around. He had
yellow hair and a fox-shaped face.

“What’s yer name?” the peeler man asked.

“Name Enoch Emery,” the boy said and snuffled.

“Boy with a pretty name like that ought to have one of these,” the man
said, rolling his eyes, trying to warm up the others. Nobody laughed but
the boy. Then a man standing across from Hazel Motes laughed, not a
pleasant laugh but one that had a sharp edge. He was a tall cadaverous
man with a black suit and a black hat on. He had on dark glasses and his
cheeks were streaked with lines that looked as if they had been painted
on and had faded. They gave him the expression of a grinning mandrill.
As soon as he laughed, he began to move forward in a deliberate way,
jiggling a tin cup in one hand and tapping a white cane in front of him
with the other. Just behind him there came a child, handing out
leaflets. She had on a black dress and a black knitted cap pulled down
low on her forehead; there was a fringe of brown hair sticking out from
it on either side; she had a long face and a short sharp nose. The man
selling peelers was irritated when he saw the people looking at this
pair instead of him. “How about you, you there,” he said, pointing at
Haze. “You’ll never be able to get a bargain like this in any store.”

Haze was looking at the blind man and the child. “Hey!” Enoch Emery
said, reaching across a woman and punching his arm. “He’s talking to
you! He’s talking to you!” Enoch had to punch him again before he looked
at the peeler man.

“Whyn’t you take one of these home to yer wife?” the peeler man was
saying.

“Don’t have one,” Haze muttered, looking back at the blind man again.

“Well, you got a dear old mother, ain’t you?”

“No.”

“Well pshaw,” the man said, with his hand cupped to the people, “he
needs one theseyer just to keep him company.”

Enoch Emery thought that was so funny that he doubled over and slapped
his knee, but Hazel Motes didn’t look as if he had heard it yet. “I’m
going to give away a half a dozen peeled potatoes to the first person
purchasing one theseyer machines,” the man said. “Who’s gonna step up
first? Only a dollar and a half for a machine’d cost you three dollars
in any store!” Enoch Emery began fumbling in his pockets. “You’ll thank
the day you ever stopped here,” the man said, “you’ll never forget it.
Ever’ one of you people purchasing one theseyer machines’ll never forget
it!”

The blind man was moving forward slowly, saying in a kind of garbled
mutter, “Help a blind preacher. If you won’t repent, give up a nickel. I
can use it as good as you. Help a blind unemployed preacher. Wouldn’t
you rather have me beg than preach? Come on and give a nickel if you
won’t repent.”

There were not many people gathered around but the ones who were began
to move off. When the machine-seller saw this, he leaned, glaring over
the card table. “Hey you!” he yelled at the blind man. “What you think
you doing? Who you think you are, running people off from here?” The
blind man didn’t pay any attention to him. He kept on rattling the cup
and the child kept on handing out the pamphlets. He passed Enoch Emery
and came on toward Haze, hitting the white cane out at an angle from his
leg. Haze leaned forward and saw that the lines on his face were not
painted on; they were scars.

“What the hell you think you doing?” the man selling peelers yelled. “I
got these people together, how you think you can horn in?”

The child held one of the pamphlets out to Haze and he grabbed it. The
words on the outside of it said, “Jesus Calls You.”

“I’d like to know who the hell you think you are!” the man with the
peelers was yelling. The child went back to where he was and handed him
a tract. He looked at it for an instant with his lip curled and then he
charged around the card table, upsetting the bucket of potatoes. “These
damn Jesus fanatics,” he yelled, glaring around, trying to find the
blind man. New people gathered, hoping to see a disturbance. “These
goddam Communist foreigners!” the peeler man screamed. “I got this crowd
together!” He stopped, realizing there was a crowd.

“Listen folks,” he said, “one at a time, there’s plenty to go around,
just don’t push, a half a dozen peeled potatoes to the first person
stepping up to buy.” He got back behind the card table quietly and
started holding up the peeler boxes. “Step on up, plenty to go around,”
he said, “no need to crowd.”

Haze didn’t open his tract. He looked at the outside of it and then he
tore it across. He put the two pieces together and tore them across
again. He kept re-stacking the pieces and tearing them again until he
had a little handful of confetti. He turned his hand over and let the
shredded leaflet sprinkle to the ground. Then he looked up and saw the
blind man’s child not three feet away, watching him. Her mouth was open
and her eyes glittered on him like two chips of green bottle glass. She
had a white gunny sack hung over her shoulder. Haze scowled and began
rubbing his sticky hands on his pants.

“I seen you,” she said. Then she moved quickly over to where the blind
man was standing now, beside the card table, and turned her head and
looked at Haze from there. Most of the people had moved off.

The peeler man leaned over the card table and said, “Hey!” to the blind
man. “I reckon that showed you. Trying to horn in.”

“Lookerhere,” Enoch Emery said, “I ain’t got but a dollar sixteen cent
but I . . .”

“Yah,” the man said, “I reckon that’ll show you you can’t muscle in on
me. Sold eight peelers, sold . . .”

“Give me one of them,” the blind man’s child said, pointing to the
peelers.

“Hanh,” he said.

She was untying a handkerchief. She untied two fifty-cent pieces out of
the knotted corner of it. “Give me one of them,” she said, holding out
the money.

The man eyed it with his mouth hiked to one side. “A buck fifty,
sister,” he said.

She pulled her hand in quickly and all at once glared at Hazel Motes as
if he had made a noise at her. The blind man was moving on. She stood a
second glaring at Haze, and then she turned and followed the blind man.
Haze started.

“Listen,” Enoch Emery said, “I ain’t got but a dollar sixteen cent and I
want me one of them . . .”

“You can keep it,” the man said, taking the bucket off the card table.
“This ain’t no cut-rate joint.”

Haze could see the blind man moving down the street some distance away.
He stood staring after him, jerking his hands in and out of his pockets
as if he were trying to move forward and backward at the same time. Then
suddenly he thrust two dollars at the man selling peelers and snatched a
box off the card table and started running down the street. In a second
Enoch Emery was panting at his elbow. “My, I reckon you got a heap of
money,” Enoch Emery said.

Haze saw the child catch up with the blind man and take him by the
elbow. They were about a block ahead of him. He slowed down some and saw
Enoch Emery there. Enoch had on a yellowish white suit and a pinkish
white shirt and his tie was the color of green peas. He was smiling. He
looked like a friendly hound dog with light mange. “How long you been
here?” he inquired.

“Two days,” Haze muttered.

“I been here two months,” Enoch said. “I work for the city. Where you
work?”

“Not working,” Haze said.

“That’s too bad,” Enoch said. “I work for the city.” He skipped a step
to get in line with Haze, then he said, “I’m eighteen year old and I
ain’t been here but two months and I already work for the city.”

“That’s fine,” Haze said. He pulled his hat down farther on the side
Enoch Emery was on and walked very fast. The blind man up ahead began to
make mock bows to the right and left.

“I didn’t ketch your name good,” Enoch said.

Haze said his name.

“You look like you might be follerin’ them hicks,” Enoch remarked. “You
go in for a lot of Jesus business?”

“No,” Haze said.

“No, me neither, not much,” Enoch agreed. “I went to thisyer Rodemill
Boys’ Bible Academy for four weeks. Thisyer woman that traded me from my
daddy she sent me. She was a Welfare woman. Jesus, four weeks and I
thought I was going to be sanctified crazy.”

Haze walked to the end of the block and Enoch stayed at his elbow,
panting and talking. When Haze started across the street, Enoch yelled,
“Don’t you see theter light! That means you got to wait!” A cop blew a
whistle and a car blasted its horn and stopped short. Haze went on
across, keeping his eyes on the blind man in the middle of the block.
The policeman kept on blowing his whistle. He crossed the street to
where Haze was and stopped him. He had a thin face and oval-shaped
yellow eyes.

“You know what that little thing hanging up there is for?” he asked,
pointing to the traffic light over the intersection.

“I didn’t see it,” Haze said.

The policeman looked at him without saying anything. A few people
stopped. He rolled his eyes at them. “Maybe you thought the red ones was
for white folks and the green ones for niggers,” he said.

“Yeah I thought that,” Haze said. “Take your hand off me.”

The policeman took his hand off and put it on his hip. He backed one
step away and said, “You tell all your friends about these lights. Red
is to stop, green is to go—men and women, white folks and niggers, all
go on the same light. You tell all your friends so when they come to
town, they’ll know.” The people laughed.

“I’ll look after him,” Enoch Emery said, pushing in by the policeman.
“He ain’t been here but only two days. I’ll look after him.”

“How long you been here?” the cop asked.

“I was born and raised here,” Enoch said. “This is my ol’ home town.
I’ll take care of him for you. Hey wait!” he yelled at Haze. “Wait on
me!” He pushed out of the crowd and caught up with him. “I reckon I
saved you that time,” he said.

“I’m obliged,” Haze said.

“It wasn’t nothing,” Enoch said. “Whyn’t we go in Walgreen’s and get us
a soda? Ain’t no night clubs open this early.”

“I don’t like drug stores,” Haze said. “Good-by.”

“That’s all right,” Enoch said. “I reckon I’ll go along and keep you
company for a while.” He looked up ahead at the blind man and the child
and said, “I sho wouldn’t want to get messed up with no hicks this time
of night, particularly the Jesus kind. I done had enough of them myself.
Thisyer Welfare woman that traded me from my daddy didn’t do nothing but
pray. Me and daddy we moved around with a sawmill where we worked and it
set up outside Boonville one summer and here come thisyer woman.” He
caught hold of Haze’s coat. “Only objection I got to Taulkinham is
there’s too many people on the streets,” he said confidentially. “Look
like all they want to do is knock you down—well here she come and I
reckon she took a fancy to me. I was twelve year old and I could sing
some hymns good I learnt off a nigger. So here she comes taking a fancy
to me and traded me off my daddy and took me to Boonville to live with
her. She had a brick house but it was Jesus all day long.” A little man
lost in a pair of faded overalls jostled him. “Whyn’t you look wher you
going?” Enoch growled.

The little man stopped and raised his arm in a vicious gesture and a
nasty-dog look came on his face. “Who you tellin’ what?” he snarled.

“You see,” Enoch said, jumping to catch up with Haze, “all they want to
do is knock you down. I ain’t never been to such a unfriendly place
before. Even with that woman. I stayed with her for two months in that
house of hers,” he went on, “and then come fall she sent me to the
Rodemill Boys’ Bible Academy and I thought that sho was going to be some
relief. This woman was hard to get along with—she wasn’t old, I reckon
she was forty year old—but she sho was ugly. She had theseyer brown
glasses and her hair was so thin it looked like ham gravy trickling over
her skull. I thought it was going to be some certain relief to get to
theter Academy. I had run away oncet on her and she got me back and come
to find out she had papers on me and she could send me to the
penitentiary if I didn’t stay with her so I sho was glad to get to
theter Academy. You ever been to a academy?”

Haze didn’t seem to hear the question.

“Well, it won’t no relief,” Enoch said. “Good Jesus, it won’t no relief.
I run away from there after four weeks and durn if she didn’t get me
back and brought me to that house of hers again. I got out though.” He
waited a minute. “You want to know how?”

After a second he said, “I scared hell out of that woman, that’s how. I
studied on it and studied on it. I even prayed. I said, ‘Jesus, show me
the way to get out of here without killing thisyer woman and getting
sent to the penitentiary,’ and durn if He didn’t. I got up one morning
at just daylight and I went in her room without my pants on and pulled
the sheet off her and giver a heart attact. Then I went back to my daddy
and we ain’t seen hide of her since.

“Your jaw just crawls,” he observed, watching the side of Haze’s face.
“You don’t never laugh. I wouldn’t be surprised if you wasn’t a real
wealthy man.”

Haze turned down a side street. The blind man and the girl were on the
corner a block ahead. “Well, I reckon we going to ketch up with them
after all,” Enoch said. “You know many people here?”

“No,” Haze said.

“You ain’t gonna know none neither. This is one more hard place to make
friends in. I been here two months and I don’t know nobody. Look like
all they want to do is knock you down. I reckon you got a right heap of
money,” he said. “I ain’t got none. Had, I’d sho know what to do with
it.” The blind man and his child stopped on the corner and turned up the
left side of the street. “We ketchin’ up,” he said. “I bet we’ll be at
some meeting singing hymns with her and her daddy if we don’t watch
out.”

Up in the next block there was a large building with columns and a dome.
The blind man and the girl were going toward it. There was a car parked
in every space around the building and on the other side of the street
and up and down the streets near it. “That ain’t no picture show,” Enoch
said. The blind man and the girl turned up the steps to the building.
The steps went all the way across the front, and on either side there
were stone lions sitting on pedestals. “Ain’t no church,” Enoch said.
Haze stopped at the steps. He looked as if he were trying to settle his
face into an expression. He pulled the black hat forward at a sharp
angle and started toward the two, who had sat down in the corner by one
of the lions. He came up to where the blind man was without saying
anything and stood leaning forward in front of him as if he were trying
to see through the black glasses. The child stared at him.

The blind man’s mouth thinned slightly. “I can smell the sin on your
breath,” he said.

Haze drew back.

“What’d you follow me for?”

“I never followed you,” Haze said.

“She said you were following,” the blind man said, jerking his thumb in
the direction of the child.

“I ain’t followed you,” Haze said. He felt the peeler box in his hand
and looked at the girl. Her black knitted cap made a straight line
across her forehead. She grinned suddenly and then quickly drew her
expression back together as if she smelled something bad. “I ain’t
followed you nowhere,” Haze said. “I followed her.” He stuck the peeler
out at her.

At first she looked as if she were going to grab it, but she didn’t. “I
don’t want that thing,” she said. “What you think I want with that
thing? Take it. It ain’t mine. I don’t want it!”

“You take it,” the blind man said. “You put it in your sack and shut up
before I hit you.”

Haze thrust the peeler at her again.

“I won’t have it,” she muttered.

“You take it like I told you,” the blind man said. “He never followed
you.”

She took it and shoved it in the sack where the tracts were. “It ain’t
mine,” she said. “I got it but it ain’t mine.”

“I followed her to say I ain’t beholden for none of her fast eye like
she gave me back there,” Haze said, looking at the blind man.

“What you mean?” she shouted. “I never looked at you with no fast eye. I
only watched you tearing up that tract. He tore it up in little pieces,”
she said, pushing the blind man’s shoulder. “He tore it up and sprinkled
it all over the ground like salt and wiped his hands on his pants.”

“He followed me,” the blind man said. “Nobody would follow you. I can
hear the urge for Jesus in his voice.”

“Jesus,” Haze muttered. “My Jesus.” He sat down by the girl’s leg and
set his hand on the step next to her foot. She had on sneakers and black
cotton stockings.

“Listen at him cursing,” she said in a low tone. “He never followed you,
Papa.”

The blind man gave his edgy laugh. “Listen boy,” he said, “you can’t run
away from Jesus. Jesus is a fact.”

“I know a whole heap about Jesus,” Enoch said. “I attended thisyer
Rodemill Boys’ Bible Academy that a woman sent me to. If it’s anything
you want to know about Jesus, just ast me.” He had got up on the lion’s
back and he was sitting there sideways, cross-legged.

“I come a long way,” Haze said, “since I would believe anything. I come
halfway around the world.”

“Me too,” Enoch Emery said.

“You ain’t come so far that you could keep from following me,” the blind
man said. He reached out suddenly and his hands covered Haze’s face. For
a second Haze didn’t move or make any sound. Then he knocked the hands
off.

“Quit it,” he said in a faint voice. “You don’t know anything about me.”

“My daddy looks just like Jesus,” Enoch remarked from the lion’s back.
“His hair hangs to his shoulders. Only difference is he’s got a scar
acrost his chin. I ain’t never seen who my mother is.”

“Some preacher has left his mark on you,” the blind man said with a kind
of snicker. “Did you follow for me to take it off or give you another
one?”

“Listen here, there’s nothing for your pain but Jesus,” the child said
suddenly. She tapped Haze on the shoulder. He sat there with his black
hat tilted forward over his face. “Listen,” she said in a louder voice,
“this here man and woman killed this little baby. It was her own child
but it was ugly and she never give it any love. This child had Jesus and
this woman didn’t have nothing but good looks and a man she was living
in sin with. She sent the child away and it come back and she sent it
away again and it come back again and ever’ time she sent it away, it
come back to where her and this man was living in sin. They strangled it
with a silk stocking and hung it up in the chimney. It didn’t give her
any peace after that, though. Everything she looked at was that child.
Jesus made it beautiful to haunt her. She couldn’t lie with that man
without she saw it, staring through the chimney at her, shining through
the brick in the middle of the night.”

“My Jesus,” Haze muttered.

“She didn’t have nothing but good looks,” she said in the loud fast
voice. “That ain’t enough. No sirree.”

“I hear them scraping their feet inside there,” the blind man said. “Get
out the tracts, they’re fixing to come out.”

“It ain’t enough,” she repeated.

“What we gonna do?” Enoch asked. “What’s inside theter building?”

“A program letting out,” the blind man said. “My congregation.”

The child took the tracts out of the gunny sack and gave him two bunches
of them, tied with a string. “You and the other boy go over on that side
and give out,” he said to her. “Me and the one that followed me’ll stay
over here.”

“He don’t have no business touching them,” she said. “He don’t want to
do anything but shred them up.”

“Go like I told you,” the blind man said.

She stood there a second, scowling. Then she said, “You come on if
you’re coming,” to Enoch Emery and Enoch jumped off the lion and
followed her over to the other side.

Haze ducked down a step but the blind man’s hand shot out and clamped
him around the arm. He said in a fast whisper, “Repent! Go to the head
of the stairs and renounce your sins and distribute these tracts to the
people!” and he thrust a stack of pamphlets into Haze’s hand.

Haze jerked his arm away but he only pulled the blind man nearer.
“Listen,” he said, “I’m as clean as you are.”

“Fornication and blasphemy and what else?” the blind man said.

“They ain’t nothing but words,” Haze said. “If I was in sin I was in it
before I ever committed any. There’s no change come in me.” He was
trying to pry the fingers off from around his arm but the blind man kept
wrapping them tighter. “I don’t believe in sin,” Haze said, “take your
hand off me.”

“Jesus loves you,” the blind man said in a flat mocking voice, “Jesus
loves you, Jesus loves you . . .”

“Nothing matters but that Jesus don’t exist,” Haze said, pulling his arm
free.

“Go to the head of the stairs and distribute these tracts and . . .”

“I’ll take them up there and throw them over into the bushes!” Haze
shouted. “You be watching and see can you see.”

“I can see more than you!” the blind man yelled, laughing. “You got eyes
and see not, ears and hear not, but you’ll have to see some time.”

“You be watching if you can see!” Haze said, and started running up the
steps. A crowd of people were already coming out the auditorium doors
and some were halfway down the steps. He pushed through them with his
elbows out like sharp wings and when he got to the top, a new surge of
them pushed him back almost to where he had started up. He fought
through them again until somebody shouted, “Make room for this idiot!”
and people got out of his way. He rushed to the top and pushed his way
over to the side and stood there, glaring and panting.

“I never followed him,” he said aloud. “I wouldn’t follow a blind fool
like that. My Jesus.” He stood against the building, holding the stack
of leaflets by the string. A fat man stopped near him to light a cigar
and Haze pushed his shoulder. “Look down yonder,” he said. “See that
blind man down there? He’s giving out tracts and begging. Jesus. You
ought to see him and he’s got this here ugly child dressed up in woman’s
clothes, giving them out too. My Jesus.”

“There’s always fanatics,” the fat man said, moving on.

“My Jesus,” Haze said. He leaned forward near an old woman with blue
hair and a collar of red wooden beads. “You better get on the other
side, lady,” he said. “There’s a fool down there giving out tracts.” The
crowd behind the old woman pushed her on, but she looked at him for an
instant with two bright flea eyes. He started toward her through the
people but she was already too far away and he pushed back to where he
had been standing against the wall. “Sweet Jesus Christ Crucified,” he
said, “I want to tell you people something. Maybe you think you’re not
clean because you don’t believe. Well you are clean, let me tell you
that. Every one of you people are clean and let me tell you why if you
think it’s because of Jesus Christ Crucified you’re wrong. I don’t say
he wasn’t crucified but I say it wasn’t for you. Listenhere, I’m a
preacher myself and I preach the truth.” The crowd was moving fast. It
was like a large spread raveling and the separate threads disappeared
down the dark streets. “Don’t I know what exists and what don’t?” he
cried. “Don’t I have eyes in my head? Am I a blind man? Listenhere,” he
called, “I’m going to preach a new church—the church of truth without
Jesus Christ Crucified. It won’t cost you nothing to join my church.
It’s not started yet but it’s going to be.” The few people who were left
glanced at him once or twice. There were tracts scattered below over the
sidewalk and out on the street. The blind man was sitting on the bottom
step. Enoch Emery was on the other side, standing on the lion’s head,
trying to balance himself, and the child was standing near him, watching
Haze. “I don’t need Jesus,” Haze said. “What do I need with Jesus? I got
Leora Watts.”

He went down the stairs quietly to where the blind man was and stopped.
He stood there a second and the blind man laughed. Haze moved away, and
started across the street. He was on the other side before the voice
pierced after him. He turned and saw the blind man standing in the
middle of the street, shouting, “Hawks, Hawks, my name is Asa Hawks when
you try to follow me again!” A car had to swerve to the side to keep
from hitting him. “Repent!” He shouted and laughed and ran forward a
little way, pretending he was going to come after Haze and grab him.

Haze drew his head down nearer his hunched shoulders and went on
quickly. He didn’t look back until he heard other footsteps coming
behind him.

“Now that we got shut of them,” Enoch Emery panted, “whyn’t we go
somewher and have us some fun?”

“Listen,” Haze said roughly, “I got business of my own. I seen all of
you I want.” He began walking very fast.

Enoch kept skipping steps to keep up. “I been here two months,” he said,
“and I don’t know nobody. People ain’t friendly here. I got me a room
and there ain’t never nobody in it but me. My daddy said I had to come.
I wouldn’t never have come but he made me. I think I seen you sommers
before. You ain’t from Stockwell, are you?”

“No.”

“Melsy?”

“No.”

“Sawmill set up there oncet,” Enoch said. “Look like you had a kind of
familer face.”

They walked on without saying anything until they got on the main street
again. It was almost deserted. “Good-by,” Haze said.

“I’m going thisaway too,” Enoch said in a sullen voice. On the left
there was a movie house where the electric bill was being changed. “We
hadn’t got tied up with them hicks we could have gone to a show,” he
muttered. He strode along at Haze’s elbow, talking in a half mumble,
half whine. Once he caught at his sleeve to slow him down and Haze
jerked it away. “My daddy made me come,” he said in a cracked voice.
Haze looked at him and saw he was crying, his face seamed and wet and a
purple-pink color. “I ain’t but eighteen year old,” he cried, “an’ he
made me come and I don’t know nobody, nobody here’ll have nothing to do
with nobody else. They ain’t friendly. He done gone off with a woman and
made me come but she ain’t going to stay for long, he’ll beat hell out
of her before she gets herself stuck to a chair. You the first familer
face I seen in two months. I seen you sommers before. I know I seen you
sommers before.”

Haze looked straight ahead with his face set and Enoch kept up the half
mumble, half blubber. They passed a church and a hotel and an antique
shop and turned up Mrs. Watts’s street.

“If you want you a woman you don’t have to be follering nothing looked
like that kid you give a peeler to,” Enoch said. “I heard about where
there’s a house where we could have us some fun. I could pay you back
next week.”

“Look,” Haze said, “I’m going where I’m going—two doors from here. I
got a woman. I got a woman, see? And that’s where I’m going—to visit
her. I don’t need to go with you.”

“I could pay you back next week,” Enoch said. “I work at the city zoo. I
guard a gate and I get paid ever’ week.”

“Get away from me,” Haze said.

“People ain’t friendly here. You ain’t from here but you ain’t friendly
neither.”

Haze didn’t answer him. He went on with his neck drawn close to his
shoulder blades as if he were cold.

“You don’t know nobody neither,” Enoch said. “You ain’t got no woman nor
nothing to do. I knew when I first seen you you didn’t have nobody nor
nothing but Jesus. I seen you and I knew it.”

“This is where I’m going in at,” Haze said, and he turned up the walk
without looking back at Enoch.

Enoch stopped. “Yeah,” he cried, “oh yeah,” and he ran his sleeve under
his nose to stop the snivel. “Yeah,” he cried, “go on where you goin’
but lookerhere.” He slapped at his pocket and ran up and caught Haze’s
sleeve and rattled the peeler box at him. “She give me this. She give it
to me and there ain’t nothing you can do about it. She told me where
they lived and ast me to visit them and bring you—not you bring me, me
bring you—and it was you follerin’ them.” His eyes glinted through his
tears and his face stretched in an evil crooked grin. “You act like you
think you got wiser blood than anybody else,” he said, “but you ain’t!
I’m the one has it. Not you. _Me._”

Haze didn’t say anything. He stood there for an instant, small in the
middle of the steps, and then he raised his arm and hurled the stack of
tracts he had been carrying. It hit Enoch in the chest and knocked his
mouth open. He stood looking, with his mouth hanging open, at where it
had hit his front, and then he turned and tore off down the street; and
Haze went into the house.

Since the night before was the first time he had slept with any woman,
he had not been very successful with Mrs. Watts. When he finished, he
was like something washed ashore on her, and she had made obscene
comments about him, which he remembered off and on during the day. He
was uneasy in the thought of going to her again. He didn’t know what she
would say when he opened the door and she saw him there.

When he opened the door and she saw him there, she said, “Ha ha.”

The black hat sat on his head squarely. He came in with it on and when
it knocked the electric light bulb that hung down from the middle of the
ceiling, he took it off. Mrs. Watts was in bed, applying a grease to her
face. She rested her chin on her hand and watched him. He began to move
around the room, examining this and that. His throat got dryer and his
heart began to grip him like a little ape clutching the bars of its
cage. He sat down on the edge of her bed, with his hat in his hand.

Mrs. Watts’s grin was as curved and sharp as the blade of a sickle. It
was plain that she was so well-adjusted that she didn’t have to think
any more. Her eyes took everything in whole, like quicksand. “That
Jesus-seeing hat!” she said. She sat up and pulled her nightgown from
under her and took it off. She reached for his hat and put it on her
head and sat with her hands on her hips, walling her eyes in a comical
way. Haze stared for a minute, then he made three quick noises that were
laughs. He jumped for the electric light cord and took off his clothes
in the dark.

Once when he was small, his father took him to a carnival that stopped
in Melsy. There was one tent that cost more money a little off to one
side. A dried-up man with a horn voice was barking it. He didn’t say
what was inside. He said it was so SINsational that it would cost any
man that wanted to see it thirty-five cents, and it was so EXclusive,
only fifteen could get in at a time. His father sent him to a tent where
two monkeys danced, and then he made for it, moving close to the walls
of things like he moved. Haze left the monkeys and followed him, but he
didn’t have thirty-five cents. He asked the barker what was inside.

“Beat it,” the man said. “There ain’t no pop and there ain’t no
monkeys.”

“I already seen them,” he said.

“That’s fine,” the man said, “beat it.”

“I got fifteen cents,” he said. “Whyn’t you lemme in and I could see
half of it?” It’s something about a privy, he was thinking. It’s some
men in a privy. Then he thought, maybe it’s a man and a woman in a
privy. She wouldn’t want me in there. “I got fifteen cents,” he said.

“It’s more than half over,” the man said, fanning with his straw hat.
“You run along.”

“That’ll be fifteen cents worth then,” Haze said.

“Scram,” the man said.

“Is it a nigger?” Haze asked. “Are they doing something to a nigger?”

The man leaned off his platform and his dried-up face drew into a glare.
“Where’d you get that idear?” he said.

“I don’t know,” Haze said.

“How old are you?” the man asked.

“Twelve,” Haze said. He was ten.

“Gimme that fifteen cents,” the man said, “and get in there.”

He slid the money on the platform and scrambled to get in before it was
over. He went through the flap of the tent and inside there was another
tent and he went through that. All he could see were the backs of the
men. He climbed up on a bench and looked over their heads. They were
looking down into a lowered place where something white was lying,
squirming a little, in a box lined with black cloth. For a second he
thought it was a skinned animal and then he saw it was a woman. She was
fat and she had a face like an ordinary woman except there was a mole on
the corner of her lip, that moved when she grinned, and one on her side.

“Had one of themther built into ever’ casket,” his father, up toward the
front, said, “be a heap ready to go sooner.”

Haze recognized the voice without looking. He slid down off the bench
and scrambled out of the tent. He crawled out under the side of the
outside one because he didn’t want to pass the barker. He got in the
back of a truck and sat down in the far corner of it. The carnival was
making a tin roar outside.

His mother was standing by the washpot in the yard, looking at him, when
he got home. She wore black all the time and her dresses were longer
than other women’s. She was standing there straight, looking at him. He
moved behind a tree and got out of her view, but in a few minutes, he
could feel her watching him through the tree. He saw the lowered place
and the casket again and a thin woman in the casket who was too long for
it. Her head stuck up at one end and her knees were raised to make her
fit. She had a cross-shaped face and hair pulled close to her head. He
stood flat against the tree, waiting. She left the washpot and came
toward him with a stick. She said, “What you seen?

“What you seen?” she said.

“What you seen,” she said, using the same tone of voice all the time.
She hit him across the legs with the stick, but he was like part of the
tree. “Jesus died to redeem you,” she said.

“I never ast him,” he muttered.

She didn’t hit him again but she stood looking at him, shut-mouthed, and
he forgot the guilt of the tent for the nameless unplaced guilt that was
in him. In a minute she threw the stick away from her and went back to
the washpot, still shut-mouthed.

The next day he took his shoes in secret out into the woods. He didn’t
wear them except for revivals and in the winter. He took them out of the
box and filled the bottoms of them with stones and small rocks and then
he put them on. He laced them up tight and walked in them through the
woods for what he knew to be a mile, until he came to a creek, and then
he sat down and took them off and eased his feet in the wet sand. He
thought, that ought to satisfy Him. Nothing happened. If a stone had
fallen he would have taken it as a sign. After a while he drew his feet
out of the sand and let them dry, and then he put the shoes on again
with the rocks still in them and he walked a half-mile back before he
took them off.




                               CHAPTER 4


He got out of Mrs. Watts’s bed early in the morning before any light
came in the room. When he woke up, her arm was flung across him. He
leaned up and lifted it off and eased it down by her side, but he didn’t
look at her. There was only one thought in his mind: he was going to buy
a car. The thought was full grown in his head when he woke up, and he
didn’t think of anything else. He had never thought before of buying a
car; he had never even wanted one before. He had driven one only a
little in his life and he didn’t have any license. He had only fifty
dollars but he thought he could buy a car for that. He got stealthily
out the bed, without disturbing Mrs. Watts, and put his clothes on
silently. By six-thirty, he was down town, looking for used-car lots.

Used-car lots were scattered among the blocks of old buildings that
separated the business section from the railroad yards. He wandered
around in a few of them before they were open. He could tell from the
outside of the lot if it would have a fifty-dollar car in it. When they
began to be open for business, he went through them quickly, paying no
attention to anyone who tried to show him the stock. His black hat sat
on his head with a careful, placed expression and his face had a fragile
look as if it might have been broken and stuck together again, or like a
gun no one knows is loaded.

It was a wet glary day. The sky was like a piece of thin polished silver
with a dark sour-looking sun in one corner of it. By ten o’clock he had
canvassed all the better lots and was nearing the railroad yards. Even
here, the lots were full of cars that cost more than fifty dollars.
Finally he came to one between two deserted warehouses. A sign over the
entrance said: SLADE’S FOR THE LATEST.

There was a gravel road going down the middle of the lot and over to one
side near the front, a tin shack with the word, OFFICE, painted on the
door. The rest of the lot was full of old cars and broken machinery. A
white boy was sitting on a gasoline can in front of the office. He had
the look of being there to keep people out. He wore a black raincoat and
his face was partly hidden under a leather cap. There was a cigarette
hanging out of one corner of his mouth and the ash on it was about an
inch long.

Haze started off toward the back of the lot where he saw a particular
car. “Hey!” the boy yelled. “You don’t just walk in here like that. I’ll
show you what I got to show,” but Haze didn’t pay any attention to him.
He went on toward the back of the lot where he saw the car. The boy came
huffing behind him, cursing. The car he saw was on the last row of cars.
It was a high rat-colored machine with large thin wheels and bulging
headlights. When he got up to it, he saw that one door was tied on with
a rope and that it had an oval window in the back. This was the car he
was going to buy.

“Lemme see Slade,” he said.

“What you want to see him for?” the boy asked in a testy voice. He had a
wide mouth and when he talked he used one side only of it.

“I want to see him about this car,” Haze said.

“I’m him,” the boy said. His face under the cap was like a thin picked
eagle’s. He sat down on the running board of a car across the gravel
road and kept on cursing.

Haze walked around the car. Then he looked through the window at the
inside of it. Inside it was a dull greenish dust-color. The back seat
was missing but it had a two-by-four stretched across the seat frame to
sit on. There were dark green fringed window shades on the two side-back
windows. He looked through the two front windows and he saw the boy
sitting on the running board of the car across the gravel road. He had
one trouser leg hitched up and he was scratching his ankle that stuck up
out of a pulp of yellow sock. He cursed far down in his throat as if he
were trying to get up phlegm. The two window glasses made him a yellow
color and distorted his shape. Haze moved quickly from the far side of
the car and came around in front. “How much is it?” he asked.

“Jesus on the cross,” the boy said, “Christ nailed.”

“How much is it?” Haze growled, paling a little.

“How much do you think it’s worth?” the boy said. “Give us a estimit.”

“It ain’t worth what it would take to cart it off. I wouldn’t have it.”

The boy gave all his attention to his ankle where there was a scab. Haze
looked up and saw a man coming from between two cars over on the boy’s
side. As he came closer, he saw that the man looked exactly like the boy
except that he was two heads taller and he had on a sweat-stained brown
felt hat. He was coming up behind the boy, between a row of cars. When
he got just behind him, he stopped and waited a second. Then he said in
a sort of controlled roar, “Get your butt off that running board!”

The boy snarled and disappeared, scrambling between two cars.

The man stood looking at Haze. “What you want?” he asked.

“This car here,” Haze said.

“Seventy-fi’ dollars,” the man said.

On either side of the lot there were two old buildings, reddish with
black empty windows, and behind there was another without any windows.
“I’m obliged,” Haze said, and he started back toward the office.

When he got to the entrance, he glanced back and saw the man about four
feet behind him. “We might argue it some,” he said.

Haze followed him back to where the car was.

“You won’t find a car like that ever’ day,” the man said. He sat down on
the running board that the boy had been sitting on. Haze didn’t see the
boy but he was there, sitting up on the hood of a car two cars over. He
was sitting huddled up as if he were freezing but his face had a sour
composed look. “All new tires,” the man said.

“They were new when it was built,” Haze said.

“They was better cars built a few years ago,” the man said. “They don’t
make no more good cars.”

“What you want for it?” Haze asked again.

The man stared off, thinking. After a while he said, “I might could let
you have it for sixty-fi’.”

Haze leaned against the car and started to roll a cigarette but he
couldn’t get it rolled. He kept spilling the tobacco and then the
papers.

“Well, what you want to pay for it?” the man asked. “I wouldn’t trade me
a Chrysler for a Essex like that. That car yonder ain’t been built by a
bunch of niggers.

“All the niggers are living in Detroit now, putting cars together,” he
said, making conversation. “I was up there a while myself and I seen. I
come home.”

“I wouldn’t pay over thirty dollars for it,” Haze said.

“They got one nigger up there,” the man said, “is almost as light as you
or me.” He took off his hat and ran his finger around the sweat band
inside it. He had a little bit of carrot-colored hair.

“We’ll drive it around,” the man said, “or would you like to get under
and look up it?”

“No,” Haze said.

The man gave him a half look. “You pay when you leave,” he said easily.
“You don’t find what you looking for in one there’s others for the same
price obliged to have it.” Two cars over the boy began to curse again.
It was like a hacking cough. Haze turned suddenly and kicked his foot
into the front tire. “I done tole you them tires won’t bust,” the man
said.

“How much?” Haze said.

“I might could make it fifty dollar,” the man offered.

Before Haze bought the car, the man put some gas in it and drove him
around a few blocks to prove it would run. The boy sat hunched up in the
back on the two-by-four, cursing. “Something’s wrong with him howcome he
curses so much,” the man said. “Just don’t listen at him.” The car rode
with a high growling noise. The man put on the brakes to show how well
they worked and the boy was thrown off the two-by-four at their heads.
“Goddam you,” the man roared, “quit jumping at us thataway. Keep your
butt on the board.” The boy didn’t say anything. He didn’t even curse.
Haze looked back and he was sitting huddled up in the black raincoat
with the black leather cap pulled down almost to his eyes. The only
thing different was that the ash had been knocked off his cigarette.

He bought the car for forty dollars and then he paid the man extra for
five gallons of gasoline. The man had the boy go in the office and bring
out a five-gallon can of gas to fill up the tank with. The boy came
cursing and lugging the yellow gas can, bent over almost double. “Give
it here,” Haze said, “I’ll do it myself.” He was in a terrible hurry to
get away in the car. The boy jerked the can away from him and
straightened up. It was only half full but he held it over the tank
until five gallons would have spilled out slowly. All the time he kept
saying, “Sweet Jesus, sweet Jesus, sweet Jesus.”

“Why don’t he shut up?” Haze said suddenly. “What’s he keep talking like
that for?”

“I don’t never know what ails him,” the man said and shrugged.

When the car was ready the man and the boy stood by to watch him drive
it off. He didn’t want anybody watching him because he hadn’t driven a
car in four or five years. The man and the boy didn’t say anything while
he tried to start it. They only stood there, looking in at him. “I
wanted this car mostly to be a house for me,” he said to the man. “I
ain’t got any place to be.”

“You ain’t took the brake off yet,” the man said.

He took off the brake and the car shot backward because the man had left
it in reverse. In a second he got it going forward and he drove off
crookedly, past the man and the boy still standing there watching. He
kept going forward, thinking nothing and sweating. For a long time he
stayed on the street he was on. He had a hard time holding the car in
the road. He went past railroad yards for about a half-mile and then
warehouses. When he tried to slow the car down, it stopped altogether
and then he had to start it again. He went past long blocks of gray
houses and then blocks of better, yellow houses. It began to drizzle
rain and he turned on the windshield wipers; they made a great clatter
like two idiots clapping in church. He went past blocks of white houses,
each sitting with an ugly dog face on a square of grass. Finally he went
over a viaduct and found the highway.

He began going very fast.

The highway was ragged with filling stations and trailer camps and
roadhouses. After a while there were stretches where red gulleys dropped
off on either side of the road and behind them there were patches of
field buttoned together with 666 posts. The sky leaked over all of it
and then it began to leak into the car. The head of a string of pigs
appeared snout-up over the ditch and he had to screech to a stop and
watch the rear of the last pig disappear shaking into the ditch on the
other side. He started the car again and went on. He had the feeling
that everything he saw was a broken-off piece of some giant blank thing
that he had forgotten had happened to him. A black pick-up truck turned
off a side road in front of him. On the back of it an iron bed and a
chair and table were tied, and on top of them, a crate of barred-rock
chickens. The truck went very slowly, with a rumbling sound, and in the
middle of the road. Haze started pounding his horn and he had hit it
three times before he realized it didn’t make any sound. The crate was
stuffed so full of wet barred-rock chickens that the ones facing him had
their heads outside the bars. The truck didn’t go any faster and he was
forced to drive slowly. The fields stretched sodden on either side until
they hit the scrub pines.

The road turned and went down hill and a high embankment appeared on one
side with pines standing on it, facing a gray boulder that jutted out of
the opposite gulley wall. White letters on the boulder said, WOE TO THE
BLASPHEMER AND WHOREMONGER! WILL HELL SWALLOW YOU UP? The pick-up truck
slowed even more as if it were reading the sign and Haze pounded his
empty horn. He beat on it and beat on it but it didn’t make any sound.
The pick-up truck went on, bumping the glum barred-rock chickens over
the edge of the next hill. Haze’s car was stopped and his eyes were
turned toward the two words at the bottom of the sign. They said in
smaller letters, “Jesus Saves.”

He sat looking at the sign and he didn’t hear the horn. An oil truck as
long as a railroad car was behind him. In a second a red square face was
at his car window. It watched the back of his neck and hat for a minute
and then a hand came in and sat on his shoulder. “What you doing parked
in the middle of the road?” the truck driver asked.

Haze turned his fragile placed-looking face toward him. “Take your hand
off me,” he said. “I’m reading the sign.”

The driver’s expression and his hand stayed exactly the way they were,
as if he didn’t hear very well.

“There’s no person a whoremonger, who wasn’t something worse first,”
Haze said. “That’s not the sin, nor blasphemy. The sin came before
them.”

The truck driver’s face remained exactly the same.

“Jesus is a trick on niggers,” Haze said.

The driver put both his hands on the window and gripped it. He looked as
if he intended to pick up the car. “Will you get your goddam outhouse
off the middle of the road?” he said.

“I don’t have to run from anything because I don’t believe in anything,”
Haze said. He and the driver looked at each other for about a minute.
Haze’s look was the more distant; another plan was forming in his mind.
“Which direction is the zoo in?” he asked.

“Back around the other way,” the driver said. “Did you exscape from
there?”

“I got to see a boy that works in it,” Haze said. He started the car up
and left the driver standing there, in front of the letters painted on
the boulder.




                               CHAPTER 5


That morning Enoch Emery knew when he woke up that today the person he
could show it to was going to come. He knew by his blood. He had wise
blood like his daddy.

At two o’clock that afternoon, he greeted the second-shift gate guard.
“You ain’t but only fifteen minutes late,” he said irritably. “But I
stayed. I could of went on but I stayed.” He wore a green uniform with
yellow piping on the neck and sleeves and a yellow stripe down the
outside of each leg. The second-shift guard, a boy with a jutting
shale-textured face and a toothpick in his mouth, wore the same. The
gate they were standing by was made of iron bars and the concrete arch
that held it was fashioned to look like two trees; branches curved to
form the top of it where twisted letters said, CITY FOREST PARK. The
second-shift guard leaned against one of the trunks and began prodding
between his teeth with the pick.

“Ever’ day,” Enoch complained; “look like ever’ day I lose fifteen good
minutes standing here waiting for you.”

Every day when he got off duty, he went into the park, and every day
when he went in, he did the same things. He went first to the swimming
pool. He was afraid of the water but he liked to sit up on the bank
above it if there were any women in the pool, and watch them. There was
one woman who came every Monday who wore a bathing suit that was split
on each hip. At first he thought she didn’t know it, and instead of
watching openly on the bank, he had crawled into some bushes, snickering
to himself, and had watched from there. There had been no one else in
the pool—the crowds didn’t come until four o’clock—to tell her about
the splits and she had splashed around in the water and then lain up on
the edge of the pool asleep for almost an hour, all the time without
suspecting there was somebody in the bushes looking at her. Then on
another day when he stayed a little later, he saw three women, all with
their suits split, the pool full of people, and nobody paying them any
mind. That was how the city was—always surprising him. He visited a
whore when he felt like it but he was always being shocked by the
looseness he saw in the open. He crawled into the bushes out of a sense
of propriety. Very often the women would pull the suit straps down off
their shoulders and lie stretched out.

The park was the heart of the city. He had come to the city and—with a
knowing in his blood—he had established himself at the heart of it.
Every day he looked at the heart of it; every day; and he was so stunned
and awed and overwhelmed that just to think about it made him sweat.
There was something, in the center of the park, that he had discovered.
It was a mystery, although it was right there in a glass case for
everybody to see and there was a typewritten card over it telling all
about it. But there was something the card couldn’t say and what it
couldn’t say was inside him, a terrible knowledge without any words to
it, a terrible knowledge like a big nerve growing inside him. He could
not show the mystery to just anybody; but he had to show it to somebody.
Who he had to show it to was a special person. This person could not be
from the city but he didn’t know why. He knew he would know him when he
saw him and he knew that he would have to see him soon or the nerve
inside him would grow so big that he would be forced to steal a car or
rob a bank or jump out of a dark alley onto a woman. His blood all
morning had been saying the person would come today.

He left the second-shift guard and approached the pool from a discreet
footpath that led behind the ladies’ end of the bath house to a small
clearing where the entire pool could be seen at once. There was nobody
in it—the water was bottle-green and motionless—but he saw, coming up
the other side and heading for the bath house, the woman with the two
little boys. She came every other day or so and brought the two
children. She would go in the water with them and swim down the pool and
then she would lie up on the side in the sun. She had a stained white
bathing suit that fit her like a sack, and Enoch had watched her with
pleasure on several occasions. He moved from the clearing up a slope to
some abelia bushes. There was a nice tunnel under them and he crawled
into it until he came to a slightly wider place where he was accustomed
to sit. He settled himself and adjusted the abelia so that he could see
through it properly. His face was always very red in the bushes. Anyone
who parted the abelia sprigs at just that place, would think he saw a
devil and would fall down the slope and into the pool. The woman and the
two little boys entered the bath house.

Enoch never went immediately to the dark secret center of the park. That
was the peak of the afternoon. The other things he did built up to it.
When he left the bushes, he would go to the FROSTY BOTTLE, a hotdog
stand in the shape of an Orange Crush with frost painted in blue around
the top of it. Here he would have a chocolate malted milkshake and would
make some suggestive remarks to the waitress, whom he believed to be
secretly in love with him. After that he would go to see the animals.
They were in a long set of steel cages like Alcatraz Penitentiary in the
movies. The cages were electrically heated in the winter and
air-conditioned in the summer and there were six men hired to wait on
the animals and feed them T-bone steaks. The animals didn’t do anything
but lie around. Enoch watched them every day, full of awe and hate. Then
he went _there_.

The two little boys ran out the bath house and dived into the water, and
simultaneously a grating noise issued from the driveway on the other
side of the pool. Enoch’s head pierced out of the bushes. He saw a high
rat-colored car passing, which sounded as if its motor were dragging out
the back. The car passed and he could hear it rattle around the turn in
the drive and on away. He listened carefully, trying to hear if it would
stop. The noise receded and then gradually grew louder. The car passed
again. Enoch saw this time that there was only one person in it, a man.
The sound of it died away again and then grew louder. The car came
around a third time and stopped almost directly opposite Enoch across
the pool. The man in the car looked out the window and down the grass
slope to the water where the two little boys were splashing and
screaming. Enoch’s head was as far out of the bushes as it would come
and he was squinting. The door by the man was tied on with a rope. The
man got out the other door and walked in front of the car and came
halfway down the slope to the pool. He stood there a minute as if he
were looking for somebody and then he sat down stiffly on the grass. He
had on a blue suit and a black hat. He sat with his knees drawn up.
“Well, I’ll be dog,” Enoch said. “Well, I’ll be dog.”

He began crawling out of the bushes immediately, his heart moving so
fast it was like one of those motorcycles at fairs that the fellow
drives around the walls of a pit. He even remembered the man’s name—Mr.
Hazel Motes. In a second he appeared on all fours at the end of the
abelia and looked across the pool. The blue figure was still sitting
there in the same position. He had the look of being held there, as if
by an invisible hand, as if, if the hand lifted up, the figure would
spring across the pool in one leap without the expression on his face
changing once.

The woman came out of the bath house and went to the diving board. She
spread her arms out and began to bounce, making a big flapping sound
with the board. Then suddenly she swirled backward and disappeared below
the water. Mr. Hazel Motes’s head turned very slowly, following her down
the pool.

Enoch got up and went down the path behind the bath house. He came
stealthily out on the other side and started walking toward Haze. He
stayed on the top of the slope, moving softly in the grass just off the
sidewalk, and making no noise. When he was directly behind him, he sat
down on the edge of the sidewalk. If his arms had been ten feet long, he
could have put his hands on Haze’s shoulders. He studied him quietly.

The woman was climbing out of the pool, chinning herself up on the side.
First her face appeared, long and cadaverous, with a bandage-like
bathing cap coming down almost to her eyes, and sharp teeth protruding
from her mouth. Then she rose on her hands until a large foot and leg
came up from behind her and another on the other side and she was out,
squatting there, panting. She stood up loosely and shook herself, and
stamped in the water dripping off her. She was facing them and she
grinned. Enoch could see part of Hazel Motes’s face watching the woman.
It didn’t grin in return but it kept on watching her as she padded over
to a spot of sun almost directly under where they were sitting. Enoch
had to move a little closer to see.

The woman sat down in the spot of sun and took off her bathing cap. Her
hair was short and matted and all colors, from deep rust to a greenish
yellow. She shook her head and then she looked up at Hazel Motes again,
grinning through her pointed teeth. She stretched herself out in the
spot of sun, raising her knees and settling her backbone down against
the concrete. The two little boys, at the other end of the water, were
knocking each other’s heads against the side of the pool. She settled
herself until she was flat against the concrete and then she reached up
and pulled the bathing suit straps off her shoulders.

“King Jesus!” Enoch whispered and before he could get his eyes off the
woman, Hazel Motes had sprung up and was almost to his car. The woman
was sitting straight up with the suit half off her in front, and Enoch
was looking both ways at once.

He wrenched his attention loose from the woman and darted after Hazel
Motes. “Wait on me!” he shouted and waved his arms in front of the car
which was already rattling and starting to go. Hazel Motes cut off the
motor. His face behind the windshield was sour and frog-like; it looked
as if it had a shout closed up in it; it looked like one of those closet
doors in gangster pictures where someone is tied to a chair behind it
with a towel in his mouth.

“Well,” Enoch said, “I declare if it ain’t Hazel Motes. How are you,
Hazel?”

“The guard said I’d find you at the swimming pool,” Hazel Motes said.
“He said you hid in the bushes and watched the swimming.”

Enoch blushed. “I allus have admired swimming,” he said. Then he stuck
his head farther through the window. “You were looking for me?” he
exclaimed.

“That blind man,” Haze said, “that blind man named Hawks—did his child
tell you where they lived?”

Enoch didn’t seem to hear. “You came out here special to see me?” he
said.

“Asa Hawks. His child gave you the peeler. Did she tell you where they
lived?”

Enoch eased his head out of the car. He opened the door and climbed in
beside Haze. For a minute he only looked at him, wetting his lips. Then
he whispered, “I got to show you something.”

“I’m looking for those people,” Haze said. “I got to see that man. Did
she tell you where they lived?”

“I got to show you this thing,” Enoch said. “I got to show it to you,
here, this afternoon. I got to.” He gripped Hazel Motes’s arm and Haze
shook him off.

“Did she tell you where they live?” he said again.

Enoch kept wetting his lips. They were pale except for his fever
blister, which was purple. “Cert’nly,” he said. “Ain’t she invited me to
come to see her and bring my mouth organ? I got to show you this thing,
then I’ll tell you.”

“What thing?” Haze muttered.

“This thing I got to show you,” Enoch said. “Drive straight on ahead and
I’ll tell you where to stop.”

“I don’t want to see anything of yours,” Haze Motes said. “I want that
address.”

Enoch didn’t look at Hazel Motes. He looked out the window. “I won’t be
able to remember it unless you come,” he said. In a minute the car
started. Enoch’s blood was beating fast. He knew he had to go to the
FROSTY BOTTLE and the zoo before there, and he foresaw a terrible
struggle with Hazel Motes. He would have to get him there, even if he
had to hit him over the head with a rock and carry him on his back up to
it.

Enoch’s brain was divided into two parts. The part in communication with
his blood did the figuring but it never said anything in words. The
other part was stocked up with all kinds of words and phrases. While the
first part was figuring how to get Hazel Motes through the =Frosty
Bottle= and the zoo, the second inquired, “Where’d you git thisyer
fine car? You ought to paint you some signs on the outside it, like
‘Step-in, baby’—I seen one with that on it, then I seen another, said
. . .”

Hazel Motes’s face might have been cut out of the side of a rock.

“My daddy once owned a yeller Ford automobile he won on a ticket,” Enoch
murmured. “It had a roll-top and two aerials and a squirrel tail all
come with it. He swapped it off. Stop here! Stop here!” he yelled—they
were passing the FROSTY BOTTLE.

“Where is it?” Hazel Motes said as soon as they were inside. They were
in a dark room with a counter across the back of it and brown stools
like toadstools in front of the counter. On the wall facing the door
there was a large advertisement for ice cream, showing a cow dressed up
like a housewife.

“It ain’t here,” Enoch said. “We have to stop here on the way and get
something to eat. What you want?”

“Nothing,” Haze said. He stood stiffly in the middle of the room with
his hands in his pockets.

“Well, sit down,” Enoch said. “I have to have a little drink.”

Something stirred behind the counter and a woman with bobbed hair like a
man’s got up from a chair where she had been reading the newspaper, and
came forward. She looked sourly at Enoch. She had on a once-white
uniform clotted with brown stains. “What you want?” she said in a loud
voice, leaning close to his ear. She had a man’s face and big muscled
arms.

“I want a chocolate malted milkshake, baby girl,” Enoch said softly. “I
want a lot of ice cream in it.”

She turned fiercely from him and glared at Haze.

“He says he don’t want nothing but to sit down and look at you for a
while,” Enoch said. “He ain’t hungry but for just to see you.”

Haze looked woodenly at the woman and she turned her back on him and
began mixing the milkshake. He sat down on the last stool in the row and
started cracking his knuckles.

Enoch watched him carefully. “I reckon you done changed some,” he said
after a few minutes.

Haze got up. “Give me those people’s address. Right now,” he said.

It came to Enoch in an instant—the police. His face was suddenly
suffused with secret knowledge. “I reckon you ain’t as uppity as you was
last night,” he said. “I reckon maybe,” he said, “you ain’t got so much
cause now as you had then.” Stole theter automobile, he thought.

Hazel Motes sat back down.

“Howcome you jumped up so fast down yonder by the pool?” Enoch asked.
The woman turned around to him with the malted milk in her hand. “Of
course,” he said evilly, “I wouldn’t have had no truck with a ugly dish
like that neither.”

The woman thumped the malted milk on the counter in front of him.
“Fifteen cents,” she roared.

“You’re worth more than that, baby girl,” Enoch said. He snickered and
began gassing his malted milk through the straw.

The woman strode over to where Haze was. “What you come in here with a
son of a bitch like that for?” she shouted. “A nice quiet boy like you
to come in here with a son of a bitch. You ought to mind the company you
keep.” Her name was Maude and she drank whisky all day from a fruit jar
under the counter. “Jesus,” she said, wiping her hand under her nose.
She sat down in a straight chair in front of Haze but facing Enoch, and
folded her arms across her chest. “Ever’ day,” she said to Haze, looking
at Enoch, “ever’ day that son of a bitch comes in here.”

Enoch was thinking about the animals. They had to go next to see the
animals. He hated them; just thinking about them made his face turn a
chocolate purple color as if the malted milk were rising in his head.

“You’re a nice boy,” she said. “I can see, you got a clean nose, well
keep it clean, don’t go messin’ with a son a bitch like that yonder. I
always know a clean boy when I see one.” She was shouting at Enoch, but
Enoch watched Hazel Motes. It was as if something inside Hazel Motes was
winding up, although he didn’t move on the outside. He only looked
pressed down in that blue suit, as if inside it, the thing winding was
getting tighter and tighter. Enoch’s blood told him to hurry. He raced
the milkshake up the straw.

“Yes sir,” she said, “there ain’t anything sweeter than a clean boy. God
for my witness. And I know a clean one when I see him and I know a son a
bitch when I see him and there’s a heap of difference and that
pus-marked bastard zlurping through that straw is a goddamned son a
bitch and you a clean boy had better mind how you keep him company. I
know a clean boy when I see one.”

Enoch screeched in the bottom of his glass. He fished fifteen cents from
his pocket and laid it on the counter and got up. But Hazel Motes was
already up; he was leaning over the counter toward the woman. She didn’t
see him right away because she was looking at Enoch. He leaned on his
hands over the counter until his face was just a foot from hers. She
turned around and stared at him.

“Come on,” Enoch started, “we don’t have no time to be sassing around
with her. I got to show you this right away, I got . . .”

“I AM clean,” Haze said.

It was not until he said it again that Enoch caught the words.

“I AM clean,” he said again, without any expression on his face or in
his voice, just looking at the woman as if he were looking at a wall.
“If Jesus existed, I wouldn’t be clean,” he said.

She stared at him, startled and then outraged. “What do you think I
care!” she yelled. “Why should I give a goddam what you are!”

“Come on,” Enoch whined, “come on or I won’t tell you where them people
live.” He caught Haze’s arm and pulled him back from the counter and
toward the door.

“You bastard!” the woman screamed, “what do you think I care about any
of you filthy boys?”

Hazel Motes pushed the door open quickly and went out. He got back in
his car and Enoch climbed in behind him. “Okay,” Enoch said, “drive
straight on ahead down this road.”

“What you want for telling me?” Haze said. “I’m not staying here. I have
to go. I can’t stay here any longer.”

Enoch shuddered. He began wetting his lips. “I got to show it to you,”
he said hoarsely. “I can’t show it to nobody but you. I had a sign it
was you when I seen you drive up at the pool. I knew all morning
somebody was going to come and then when I saw you at the pool, I had
thisyer sign.”

“I don’t care about your signs,” Haze said.

“I go to see it ever’ day,” Enoch said. “I go ever’ day but I ain’t ever
been able to take nobody else with me. I had to wait on the sign. I’ll
tell you them people’s address just as soon as you see it. You got to
see it,” he said. “When you see it, something’s going to happen.”

“Nothing’s going to happen,” Haze said.

He started the car again and Enoch sat forward on the seat. “Them
animals,” he muttered. “We got to walk by them first. It won’t take long
for that. It won’t take a minute.” He saw the animals waiting evil-eyed
for him, ready to throw him off time. He thought what if the police were
screaming out here now with sirens and squad cars and they got Hazel
Motes just before he showed it to him.

“I got to see those people,” Haze said.

“Stop here! Stop here!” Enoch yelled.

There was a long shining row of steel cages over to the left and behind
the bars, black shapes were sitting or pacing. “Get out,” Enoch said.
“This won’t take one second.”

Haze got out. Then he stopped. “I got to see those people,” he said.

“Okay, okay, come on,” Enoch whined.

“I don’t believe you know the address.”

“I do! I do!” Enoch cried. “It begins with a three, now come on!” He
pulled Haze toward the cages. Two black bears sat in the first one,
facing each other like two matrons having tea, their faces polite and
self-absorbed. “They don’t do nothing but sit there all day and stink,”
Enoch said. “A man comes and washes them cages out ever’ morning with a
hose and it stinks just as much as if he’d left it.” He went past two
more cages of bears, not looking at them, and then he stopped at the
next cage where there were two yellow-eyed wolves nosing around the
edges of the concrete. “Hyenas,” he said. “I ain’t got no use for
hyenas.” He leaned closer and spit into the cage, hitting one of the
wolves on the leg. It shuttled to the side, giving him a slanted evil
look. For a second he forgot Hazel Motes. Then he looked back quickly to
make sure he was still there. He was right behind him. He was not
looking at the animals. Thinking about them police, Enoch thought. He
said, “Come on, we don’t have time to look at all theseyer monkeys that
come next.” Usually he stopped at every cage and made an obscene comment
aloud to himself, but today the animals were only a form he had to get
through. He hurried past the cages of monkeys, looking back two or three
times to make sure Hazel Motes was behind him. At the last of the monkey
cages, he stopped as if he couldn’t help himself.

“Look at that ape,” he said, glaring. The animal had its back to him,
gray except for a small pink seat. “If I had a ass like that,” he said
prudishly, “I’d sit on it. I wouldn’t be exposing it to all these people
come to this park. Come on, we don’t have to look at theseyer birds that
come next.” He ran past the cages of birds and then he was at the end of
the zoo. “Now we don’t need the car,” he said, going on ahead, “we’ll go
right down that hill yonder through them trees.” Haze had stopped at the
last cage for birds. “Oh Jesus,” Enoch groaned. He stood and waved his
arms wildly and shouted, “Come on!” but Haze didn’t move from where he
was looking into the cage.

Enoch ran back to him and grabbed him by the arm but Haze pushed him off
and kept on looking in the cage. It was empty. Enoch stared. “It’s
empty!” he shouted. “What you have to look in that ole empty cage for?
You come on!” He stood there, sweating and purple. “It’s empty!” he
shouted. And then he saw it wasn’t empty. Over in one corner on the
floor of the cage, there was an eye. The eye was in the middle of
something that looked like a piece of mop sitting on an old rag. He
squinted close to the wire and saw that the piece of mop was an owl with
one eye open. It was looking directly at Hazel Motes. “That ain’t
nothing but a ole hoot owl,” he moaned. “You seen them things before.”

“I AM clean,” Haze said to the eye. He said it just the way he said it
to the woman in the FROSTY BOTTLE. The eye shut softly and the owl
turned its face to the wall.

He’s done murdered somebody, Enoch thought. “Oh sweet Jesus, come on!”
he wailed. “I got to show you this right now.” He pulled him away but a
few feet from the cage, Haze stopped again, looking at something in the
distance. Enoch’s eyesight was very poor. He squinted and made out a
figure far down the road behind them. There were two smaller figures
jumping on either side of it.

Hazel Motes turned back to him suddenly and said, “Where’s this thing?
Let’s see it right now and get it over with. Come on.”

“Ain’t that where I been trying to take you?” Enoch said. He felt the
perspiration drying on him and stinging and his skin was pin-pointed,
even in his scalp. “We got to cross this road and go down this hill. We
got to go on foot,” he said.

“Why?” Haze muttered.

“I don’t know,” Enoch said. He knew something was going to happen to
him. His blood stopped beating. All the time it had been beating like
drum noises and now it had stopped. They started down the hill. It was a
steep hill, full of trees painted white from the ground up four feet.
They looked as if they had on ankle-socks. He gripped Hazel Motes’s arm.
“It gets damp as you go down,” he said, looking around vaguely. Hazel
Motes shook him off. In a second, Enoch gripped his arm again and
stopped him. He pointed down through the trees. “Muvseevum,” he said.
The strange word made him shiver. That was the first time he had ever
said it aloud. A piece of gray building was showing where he pointed. It
grew larger as they went down the hill, then as they came to the end of
the wood and stepped out on the gravel driveway, it seemed to shrink
suddenly. It was round and soot-colored. There were columns at the front
of it and in between each column there was an eyeless stone woman
holding a pot on her head. A concrete band was over the columns and the
letters, M V S E V M, were cut into it. Enoch was afraid to pronounce
the word again.

“We got to go up the steps and through the front door,” he whispered.
There were ten steps up to the porch. The door was wide and black. Enoch
pushed it in cautiously and inserted his head in the crack. In a minute
he brought it out again and said, “All right, go on in and walk easy. I
don’t want to wake up theter ole guard. He ain’t very friendly with me.”
They went into a dark hall. It was heavy with the odor of linoleum and
creosote and another odor behind these two. The third one was an
undersmell and Enoch couldn’t name it as anything he had ever smelled
before. There was nothing in the hall but two urns and an old man asleep
in a straight chair against the wall. He had on the same kind of uniform
as Enoch and he looked like a dried-up spider stuck there. Enoch looked
at Hazel Motes to see if he was smelling the undersmell. He looked as if
he were. Enoch’s blood began to beat again, urging him forward. He
gripped Haze’s arm and tiptoed through the hall to another black door at
the end of it. He cracked it a little and inserted his head in the
crack. Then in a second he drew it out and crooked his finger in a
gesture for Haze to follow him. They went into another hall, like the
last one, but running crosswise. “It’s in that first door yonder,” Enoch
said in a small voice. They went into a dark room full of glass cases.
The glass cases covered the walls and there were three coffin-like ones
in the middle of the floor. The ones on the walls were full of birds
tilted on varnished sticks and looking down with dried piquant
expressions.

“Come on,” Enoch whispered. He went past the two cases in the middle of
the floor and toward the third one. He went to the farthest end of it
and stopped. He stood looking down with his neck thrust forward and his
hands clutched together; Hazel Motes moved up beside him.

The two of them stood there, Enoch rigid and Hazel Motes bent slightly
forward. There were three bowls and a row of blunt weapons and a man in
the case. It was the man Enoch was looking at. He was about three feet
long. He was naked and a dried yellow color and his eyes were drawn
almost shut as if a giant block of steel were falling down on top of
him.

“See theter notice,” Enoch said in a church whisper, pointing to a
typewritten card at the man’s foot, “it says he was once as tall as you
or me. Some A-rabs did it to him in six months.” He turned his head
cautiously to see Hazel Motes.

All he could tell was that Hazel Motes’s eyes were on the shrunken man.
He was bent forward so that his face was reflected on the glass top of
the case. The reflection was pale and the eyes were like two clean
bullet holes. Enoch waited, rigid. He heard footsteps in the hall. Oh
Jesus, he prayed, let him hurry up and do whatever he’s going to do! The
woman with the two little boys came in the door. She had one by each
hand, and she was grinning. Hazel Motes had not raised his eyes once
from the shrunken man. The woman came toward them. She stopped on the
other side of the case and looked down into it and the reflection of her
face appeared grinning on the glass, over Hazel Motes’s.

She snickered and put two fingers in front of her teeth. The little
boys’ faces were like pans set on either side to catch the grins that
overflowed from her. When Haze saw her face on the glass, his neck
jerked back and he made a noise. It might have come from the man inside
the case. In a second Enoch knew it had. “Wait!” he screamed, and tore
out of the room after Hazel Motes.

He overtook him halfway up the hill. He caught him by the arm and swung
him around and then he stood there, suddenly weak and light as a
balloon, and stared. Hazel Motes grabbed him by the shoulders and shook
him. “What is that address!” he shouted. “Give me that address!”

Even if Enoch had been sure what the address was, he couldn’t have
thought of it then. He could not even stand up. As soon as Hazel Motes
let him go, he fell backward and landed against one of the white-socked
trees. He rolled over and lay stretched out on the ground, with an
exalted look on his face. He thought he was floating. A long way off he
saw the blue figure spring and pick up a rock, and he saw the wild face
turn, and the rock hurtle toward him; he shut his eyes tight and the
rock hit him on the forehead.

When he came to again, Hazel Motes was gone. He lay there a minute. He
put his fingers to his forehead and then held them in front of his eyes.
They were streaked with red. He turned his head and saw a drop of blood
on the ground and as he looked at it, he thought it widened like a
little spring. He sat straight up, frozen-skinned, and put his finger in
it, and very faintly he could hear his blood beating, his secret blood,
in the center of the city.

Then he knew that whatever was expected of him was only just beginning.




                               CHAPTER 6


That evening Haze drove his car around the streets until he found the
blind man and the child again. They were standing on a corner, waiting
for the light to change. He drove the Essex at some distance behind them
for about four blocks up the main street and then turned it after them
down a side street. He followed them on into a dark section past the
railroad yards and watched them go up on the porch of a box-like
two-story house. When the blind man opened the door a shaft of light
fell on him and Haze craned his neck to see him better. The child turned
her head, slowly, as if it worked on a screw, and watched his car pass.
His face was so close to the glass that it looked like a paper face
pasted there. He noted the number of the house and a sign on it that
said, ROOMS FOR RENT.

Then he drove back down town and parked the Essex in front of a movie
house where he could catch the drain of people coming out from the
picture show. The lights around the marquee were so bright that the
moon, moving overhead with a small procession of clouds behind it,
looked pale and insignificant. Haze got out of the Essex and climbed up
on the nose of it.

A thin little man with a long upper lip was at the glass ticket box,
buying tickets for three portly women who were behind him. “Gotta get
these girls some refreshments too,” he said to the woman in the ticket
box. “Can’t have ’em starve right before my eyes.”

“Ain’t he a card?” one of the women hollered. “He keeps me in stitches!”

Three boys in red satin lumberjackets came out of the foyer. Haze raised
his arms. “Where has the blood you think you been redeemed by touched
you?” he cried.

The women all turned around at once and stared at him.

“A wise guy,” the little thin man said, and glared as if someone were
about to insult him.

The three boys moved up, pushing each other’s shoulders.

Haze waited a second and then he cried again. “Where has the blood you
think you been redeemed by touched you?”

“Rabble rouser,” the little man said. “One thing I can’t stand it’s a
rabble rouser.”

“What church you belong to, you boy there?” Haze asked, pointing at the
tallest boy in the red satin lumberjacket.

The boy giggled.

“You then,” he said impatiently, pointing at the next one. “What church
you belong to?”

“Church of Christ,” the boy said in a falsetto to hide the truth.

“Church of Christ!” Haze repeated. “Well, I preach the Church Without
Christ. I’m member and preacher to that church where the blind don’t see
and the lame don’t walk and what’s dead stays that way. Ask me about
that church and I’ll tell you it’s the church that the blood of Jesus
don’t foul with redemption.”

“He’s a preacher,” one of the women said. “Let’s go.”

“Listen, you people, I’m going to take the truth with me wherever I go,”
Haze called. “I’m going to preach it to whoever’ll listen at whatever
place. I’m going to preach there was no Fall because there was nothing
to fall from and no Redemption because there was no Fall and no Judgment
because there wasn’t the first two. Nothing matters but that Jesus was a
liar.”

The little man herded his girls into the picture show quickly and the
three boys left but more people came out and he began over and said the
same thing again. They left and some more came and he said it a third
time. Then they left and no one else came out; there was no one there
but the woman in the glass box. She had been glaring at him all the time
but he had not noticed her. She wore glasses with rhinestones in the
bows and she had white hair stacked in sausages around her head. She
stuck her mouth to a hole in the glass and shouted, “Listen, if you
don’t have a church to do it in, you don’t have to do it in front of
this show.”

“My church is the Church Without Christ, lady,” he said. “If there’s no
Christ, there’s no reason to have a set place to do it in.”

“Listen,” she said, “if you don’t get from in front of this show, I’ll
call the police.”

“There’s plenty of shows,” he said and got down and got back in the
Essex and drove off. That night he preached in front of three other
picture shows before he went to Mrs. Watts.

In the morning he drove back to the house where the blind man and the
child had gone in the night before. It was yellow clapboard, the second
one in a block of them, all alike. He went up to the front door and rang
the bell. After a few minutes a woman with a mop opened it. He said he
wanted to rent a room.

“What you do?” she asked. She was a tall bony woman, resembling the mop
she carried upside-down.

He said he was a preacher.

The woman looked at him thoroughly and then she looked behind him at his
car. “What church?” she asked.

He said the Church Without Christ.

“Protestant?” she asked suspiciously, “or something foreign?”

He said no ma’m, it was Protestant.

After a minute she said, “Well, you can look at it,” and he followed her
into a white plastered hall and up some steps at the side of it. She
opened a door into a back room that was a little larger than his car,
with a cot and a chest of drawers and a table and straight chair in it.
There were two nails on the wall to hang clothes on. “Three dollars a
week in advance,” she said. There was one window and another door
opposite the door they had come in by. Haze opened the extra door,
expecting it to be a closet. It opened out onto a drop of about thirty
feet and looked down into a narrow bare back yard where the garbage was
collected. There was a plank nailed across the door frame at knee level
to keep anyone from falling out. “A man named Hawks lives here, don’t
he?” Haze asked quickly.

“Downstairs in the front room,” she said, “him and his child.” She was
looking down into the drop too. “It used to be a fire-escape there,” she
said, “but I don’t know what happened to it.”

He paid her three dollars and took possession of the room, and as soon
as she was out of the way, he went down the stairs and knocked on the
Hawks’ door.

The blind man’s child opened it a crack and stood looking at him. She
seemed at once to have to balance her face so that her expression would
be the same on both sides. “It’s that boy, Papa,” she said in a low
tone. “The one that keeps following me.” She held the door close to her
head so he couldn’t see in past her. The blind man came to the door but
he didn’t open it any wider. His look was not the same as it had been
two nights before; it was sour and unfriendly, and he didn’t speak, he
only stood there.

Haze had got what he had to say in mind before he left his room. “I live
here,” he said. “I thought if your girl wanted to give me so much eye, I
might return her some of it.” He wasn’t looking at the girl; he was
staring at the black glasses and the curious scars that started
somewhere behind them and ran down the blind man’s cheeks.

“What I give you the other night,” she said, “was a looker indignation
for what I seen you do. It was you give me the eye. You should have seen
him, Papa,” she said, “looked me up and down.”

“I’ve started my own church,” Haze said. “The Church Without Christ. I
preach on the street.”

“You can’t let me alone, can you?” Hawks said. His voice was flat,
nothing like it had been the other time. “I didn’t ask you to come here
and I ain’t asking you to hang around,” he said.

Haze had expected a secret welcome. He waited, trying to think of
something to say. “What kind of a preacher are you?” he heard himself
murmur, “not to see if you can save my soul?” The blind man pushed the
door shut in his face. Haze stood there a second facing the blank door,
and then he ran his sleeve across his mouth and went out.

Inside, Hawks took off his dark glasses and, from a hole in the window
shade, watched him get in his car and drive off. The eye he put to the
hole was slightly rounder and smaller than his other one, but it was
obvious he could see out of both of them. The child watched from a lower
crack. “Howcome you don’t like him, Papa?” she asked, “—because he’s
after me?”

“If he was after you, that would be enough to make me welcome him,” he
said.

“I like his eyes,” she observed. “They don’t look like they see what
he’s looking at but they keep on looking.”

Their room was the same size as Haze’s but there were two cots and an
oil cooking stove and a wash basin in it and a trunk that they used for
a table. Hawks sat down on one of the cots and put a cigarette in his
mouth. “Goddam Jesus-hog,” he muttered.

“Well, look what you used to be,” she said. “Look what you tried to do.
You got over it and so will he.”

“I don’t want him hanging around,” he said. “He makes me nervous.”

“Listen here,” she said, sitting down on the cot with him, “you help me
to get him and then you go away and do what you please and I can live
with him.”

“He don’t even know you exist,” Hawks said.

“Even if he don’t,” she said, “that’s all right. That’s howcome I can
get him easy. I want him and you ought to help and then you could go on
off like you want to.”

He lay down on the cot and finished the cigarette; his face was
thoughtful and evil. Once while he was lying there, he laughed and then
his expression constricted again. “Well, that might be fine,” he said
after a while. “That might be the oil on Aaron’s beard.”

“Listen here,” she said, “it would be the nuts! I’m just crazy about
him. I never seen a boy that I liked the looks of any better. Don’t run
him off. Tell him how you blinded yourself for Jesus and show him that
clipping you got.”

“Yeah, the clipping,” he said.

Haze had gone out in his car to think and he had decided that he would
seduce Hawks’ child. He thought that when the blind preacher saw his
daughter ruined, he would realize that he was in earnest when he said he
preached The Church Without Christ. Besides this reason, there was
another: he didn’t want to go back to Mrs. Watts. The night before,
after he was asleep, she had got up and cut the top of his hat out in an
obscene shape. He felt that he should have a woman, not for the sake of
the pleasure in her, but to prove that he didn’t believe in sin since he
practiced what was called it; but he had had enough of her. He wanted
someone he could teach something to and he took it for granted that the
blind man’s child, since she was so homely, would also be innocent.

Before he went back to his room, he went to a dry-goods store to buy a
new hat. He wanted one that was completely opposite to the old one. This
time he was sold a white panama with a red and green and yellow band
around it. The man said they were really the thing and particularly if
he was going to Florida.

“I ain’t going to Florida,” he said. “This hat is opposite from the one
I used to have is all.”

“You can use it anywheres,” the man said; “it’s new.”

“I know that,” Haze said. He went outside and took the red and green and
yellow band off it and thumped out the crease in the top and turned down
the brim. When he put it on, it looked just as fierce as the other one
had.

He didn’t go back to the Hawks’ door until late in the afternoon, when
he thought they would be eating their supper. It opened almost at once
and the child’s head appeared in the crack. He pushed the door out of
her hand and went in without looking at her directly. Hawks was sitting
at the trunk. The remains of his supper were in front of him but he
wasn’t eating. He had barely got the black glasses on in time.

“If Jesus cured blind men, howcome you don’t get Him to cure you?” Haze
asked. He had prepared this sentence in his room.

“He blinded Paul,” Hawks said.

Haze sat down on the edge of one of the cots. He looked around him and
then back at Hawks. He crossed and uncrossed his knees and then he
crossed them again. “Where’d you get them scars?” he asked.

The fake blind man leaned forward and smiled. “You still have a chance
to save yourself if you repent,” he said. “I can’t save you but you can
save yourself.”

“That’s what I’ve already done,” Haze said. “Without the repenting. I
preach how I done it every night on the . . .”

“Look at this,” Hawks said. He took a yellow newspaper clipping from his
pocket and handed it to him, and his mouth twisted out of the smile.
“This is how I got the scars,” he muttered. The child made a sign to him
from the door to smile and not look sour. As he waited for Haze to
finish reading, the smile slowly returned.

The headline on the clipping said, =Evangelist promises to blind
self=. The rest of it said that Asa Hawks, an evangelist of the
Free Church of Christ, had promised to blind himself to justify his
belief that Christ Jesus had redeemed him. It said he would do it at a
revival on Saturday night at eight o’clock, the fourth of October. The
date on it was more than ten years before. Over the headline was a
picture of Hawks, a scarless, straight-mouthed man of about thirty, with
one eye a little smaller and rounder than the other. The mouth had a
look that might have been either holy or calculating, but there was a
wildness in the eyes that suggested terror.

Haze sat staring at the clipping after he had read it. He read it three
times. He took his hat off and put it on again and got up and stood
looking around the room as if he were trying to remember where the door
was.

“He did it with lime,” the child said, “and there was hundreds
converted. Anybody that blinded himself for justification ought to be
able to save you—or even somebody of his blood,” she added, inspired.

“Nobody with a good car needs to be justified,” Haze murmured. He
scowled at her and hurried out the door, but as soon as it was shut
behind him, he remembered something. He turned around and opened it and
handed her a piece of paper, folded up several times into a small pellet
shape; then he hurried out to his car.

Hawks took the note away from her and opened it up. It said, =Babe,
I never saw anybody that looked as good as you before is why I came
here=. She read it over his arm, coloring pleasantly.

“Now you got the written proof for it, Papa,” she said.

“That bastard got away with my clipping,” Hawks muttered.

“Well you got another clipping, ain’t you?” she asked, with a little
smirk.

“Shut your mouth,” he said and flung himself down on the cot. The other
clipping was one that said, =Evangelist’s nerve fails=.

“I can get it for you,” she offered, standing close to the door so that
she could run if she disturbed him too much, but he had turned toward
the wall as if he were going to sleep.

Ten years ago at a revival he had intended to blind himself and two
hundred people or more were there, waiting for him to do it. He had
preached for an hour on the blindness of Paul, working himself up until
he saw himself struck blind by a Divine flash of lightning and, with
courage enough then, he had thrust his hands into the bucket of wet lime
and streaked them down his face; but he hadn’t been able to let any of
it get into his eyes. He had been possessed of as many devils as were
necessary to do it, but at that instant, they disappeared, and he saw
himself standing there as he was. He fancied Jesus, Who had expelled
them, was standing there too, beckoning to him; and he had fled out of
the tent into the alley and disappeared.

“Okay, Pa,” she said, “I’ll go out for a while and leave you in peace.”

Haze had driven his car immediately to the nearest garage where a man
with black bangs and a short expressionless face had come out to wait on
him. He told the man he wanted the horn made to blow and the leaks taken
out of the gas tank, the starter made to work smoother and the
windshield wipers tightened.

The man lifted the hood and glanced inside and then shut it again. Then
he walked around the car, stopping to lean on it here and there, and
thumping it in one place and another. Haze asked him how long it would
take to put it in the best order.

“It can’t be done,” the man said.

“This is a good car,” Haze said. “I knew when I first saw it that it was
the car for me, and since I’ve had it, I’ve had a place to be that I can
always get away in.”

“Was you going some place in this?” the man asked.

“To another garage,” Haze said, and he got in the Essex and drove off.
At the other garage he went to, there was a man who said he could put
the car in the best shape overnight, because it was such a good car to
begin with, so well put together and with such good materials in it, and
because, he added, he was the best mechanic in town, working in the
best-equipped shop. Haze left it with him, certain that it was in honest
hands.




                               CHAPTER 7


The next afternoon when he got his car back, he drove it out into the
country to see how well it worked on the open road. The sky was just a
little lighter blue than his suit, clear and even, with only one cloud
in it, a large blinding white one with curls and a beard. He had gone
about a mile out of town when he heard a throat cleared behind him. He
slowed down and turned his head and saw Hawks’ child getting up off the
floor onto the two-by-four that stretched across the seat frame. “I been
here all the time,” she said, “and you never known it.” She had a bunch
of dandelions in her hair and a wide red mouth on her pale face.

“What do you want to hide in my car for?” he said angrily. “I got
business before me. I don’t have time for foolishness.” Then he checked
his ugly tone and stretched his mouth a little, remembering that he was
going to seduce her. “Yeah sure,” he said, “glad to see you.”

She swung one thin black-stockinged leg over the back of the front seat
and then let the rest of herself over. “Did you mean ‘good to look at’
in that note, or only ‘good’?” she asked.

“The both,” he said stiffly.

“My name is Sabbath,” she said. “Sabbath Lily Hawks. My mother named me
that just after I was born because I was born on the Sabbath and then
she turned over in her bed and died and I never seen her.”

“Unh,” Haze said. His jaw tightened and he entrenched himself behind it
and drove on. He had not wanted any company. His sense of pleasure in
the car and in the afternoon was gone.

“Him and her wasn’t married,” she continued, “and that makes me a
bastard, but I can’t help it. It was what he done to me and not what I
done to myself.”

“A bastard?” he murmured. He couldn’t see how a preacher who had blinded
himself for Jesus could have a bastard. He turned his head and looked at
her with interest for the first time.

She nodded and the corners of her mouth turned up. “A real bastard,” she
said, catching his elbow, “and do you know what? A bastard shall not
enter the kingdom of heaven!” she said.

Haze was driving his car toward the ditch while he stared at her. “How
could you be . . . ,” he started and saw the red embankment in front of
him and pulled the car back on the road.

“Do you read the papers?” she asked.

“No,” he said.

“Well, there’s this woman in it named Mary Brittle that tells you what
to do when you don’t know. I wrote her a letter and ast her what I was
to do.”

“How could you be a bastard when he blinded him . . . ,” he started
again.

“I says, ‘Dear Mary, I am a bastard and a bastard shall not enter the
kingdom of heaven as we all know, but I have this personality that makes
boys follow me. Do you think I should neck or not? I shall not enter the
kingdom of heaven anyway so I don’t see what difference it makes.’”

“Listen here,” Haze said, “if he blinded himself how . . .”

“Then she answered my letter in the paper. She said, ‘Dear Sabbath,
Light necking is acceptable, but I think your real problem is one of
adjustment to the modern world. Perhaps you ought to re-examine your
religious values to see if they meet your needs in Life. A religious
experience can be a beautiful addition to living if you put it in the
proper prespective and do not let it warf you. Read some books on
Ethical Culture.’”

“You couldn’t be a bastard,” Haze said, getting very pale. “You must be
mixed up. Your daddy blinded himself.”

“Then I wrote her another letter,” she said, scratching his ankle with
the toe of her sneaker, and smiling, “I says, ‘Dear Mary, What I really
want to know is should I go the whole hog or not? That’s my real
problem. I’m adjusted okay to the modern world.’”

“Your daddy blinded himself,” Haze repeated.

“He wasn’t always as good as he is now,” she said. “She never answered
my second letter.”

“You mean in his youth he didn’t believe but he came to?” he asked. “Is
that what you mean or ain’t it?” and he kicked her foot roughly away
from his.

“That’s right,” she said. Then she drew herself up a little. “Quit that
feeling my leg with yours,” she said.

The blinding white cloud was a little ahead of them, moving to the left.
“Why don’t you turn down that dirt road?” she asked. The highway forked
off onto a clay road and he turned onto it. It was hilly and shady and
the country showed to advantage on either side. One side was dense
honeysuckle and the other was open and slanted down to a telescoped view
of the city. The white cloud was directly in front of them.

“How did he come to believe?” Haze asked. “What changed him into a
preacher for Jesus?”

“I do like a dirt road,” she said, “particularly when it’s hilly like
this one here. Why don’t we get out and sit under a tree where we could
get better acquainted?”

After a few hundred feet Haze stopped the car and they got out. “Was he
a very evil-seeming man before he came to believe,” he asked, “or just
part way evil-seeming?”

“All the way evil,” she said, going under the barbed wire fence on the
side of the road. Once under it she sat down and began to take off her
shoes and stockings. “How I like to walk in a field is barefooted,” she
said with gusto.

“Listenhere,” Haze muttered, “I got to be going back to town. I don’t
have time to walk in any field,” but he went under the fence and on the
other side he said, “I suppose before he came to believe he didn’t
believe at all.”

“Let’s us go over that hill yonder and sit under the trees,” she said.

They climbed the hill and went down the other side of it, she a little
ahead of Haze. He saw that sitting under a tree with her might help him
to seduce her, but he was in no hurry to get on with it, considering her
innocence. He felt it was too hard a job to be done in an afternoon. She
sat down under a large pine and patted the ground close beside her for
him to sit on, but he sat about five feet away from her on a rock. He
rested his chin on his knees and looked straight ahead.

“I can save you,” she said. “I got a church in my heart where Jesus is
King.”

He leaned in her direction, glaring. “I believe in a new kind of jesus,”
he said, “one that can’t waste his blood redeeming people with it,
because he’s all man and ain’t got any God in him. My church is the
Church Without Christ!”

She moved up closer to him. “Can a bastard be saved in it?” she asked.

“There’s no such thing as a bastard in the Church Without Christ,” he
said. “Everything is all one. A bastard wouldn’t be any different from
anybody else.”

“That’s good,” she said.

He looked at her irritably, for something in his mind was already
contradicting him and saying that a bastard couldn’t, that there was
only one truth—that Jesus was a liar—and that her case was hopeless.
She pulled open her collar and lay down on the ground full length.
“Ain’t my feet white, though?” she asked raising them slightly.

Haze didn’t look at her feet. The thing in his mind said that the truth
didn’t contradict itself and that a bastard couldn’t be saved in the
Church Without Christ. He decided he would forget it, that it was not
important.

“There was this child once,” she said, turning over on her stomach,
“that nobody cared if it lived or died. Its kin sent it around from one
to another of them and finally to its grandmother who was a very evil
woman and she couldn’t stand to have it around because the least good
thing made her break out in these welps. She would get all itching and
swoll. Even her eyes would itch her and swell up and there wasn’t
nothing she could do but run up and down the road, shaking her hands and
cursing and it was twice as bad when this child was there so she kept
the child locked up in a chicken crate. It seen its granny in hell-fire,
swoll and burning, and it told her everything it seen and she got so
swoll until finally she went to the well and wrapped the well rope
around her neck and let down the bucket and broke her neck.

“Would you guess me to be fifteen years old?” she asked.

“There wouldn’t be any sense to the word, bastard, in the Church Without
Christ,” Haze said.

“Why don’t you lie down and rest yourself?” she inquired.

Haze moved a few feet away and lay down. He put his hat over his face
and folded his arms across his chest. She lifted herself up on her hands
and knees and crawled over to him and gazed at the top of his hat. Then
she lifted it off like a lid and peered into his eyes. They stared
straight upward. “It don’t make any difference to me,” she said softly,
“how much you like me.”

He trained his eyes into her neck. Gradually she lowered her head until
the tips of their noses almost touched but still he didn’t look at her.
“I see you,” she said in a playful voice.

“Git away!” he said, jumping violently.

She scrambled up and ran around behind the tree. Haze put his hat back
on and stood up, shaken. He wanted to get back in the Essex. He realized
suddenly that it was parked on a country road, unlocked, and that the
first person passing would drive off in it.

“I see you,” a voice said from behind the tree.

He walked off quickly in the opposite direction toward the car. The
jubilant expression on the face that looked from around the tree,
flattened.

He got in his car and went through the motions of starting it but it
only made a noise like water lost somewhere in the pipes. A panic took
him and he began to pound the starter. There were two instruments on the
dashboard with needles that pointed dizzily in first one direction and
then another, but they worked on a private system, independent of the
whole car. He couldn’t tell if it was out of gas or not. Sabbath Hawks
came running up to the fence. She got down on the ground and rolled
under the barbed wire and then stood at the window of the car, looking
in at him. He turned his head at her fiercely and said, “What did you do
to my car?” Then he got out and started walking down the road, without
waiting for her to answer. After a second, she followed him, keeping her
distance.

Where the highway had forked off onto the dirt road, there had been a
store with a gas pump in front of it. It was about a half-mile back;
Haze kept up a steady fast pace until he reached it. It had a deserted
look, but after a few minutes a man appeared from out of the woods
behind it, and Haze told him what he wanted. While the man got out his
pick-up truck to drive them back to the Essex, Sabbath Hawks arrived and
went over to a cage about six feet high that was at the side of the
shack. Haze had not noticed it until she came up. He saw that there was
something alive in it, and went near enough to read a sign that said,
=Two deadly enemies. Have a look free.=

There was a black bear about four feet long and very thin, resting on
the floor of the cage; his back was spotted with bird lime that had been
shot down on him by a small chicken hawk that was sitting on a perch in
the upper part of the same apartment. Most of the hawk’s tail was gone;
the bear had only one eye.

“Come on here if you don’t want to get left,” Haze said roughly,
grabbing her by the arm. The man had his truck ready and the three of
them drove back in it to the Essex. On the way Haze told him about the
Church Without Christ; he explained its principles and said there was no
such thing as a bastard in it. The man didn’t comment. When they got out
at the Essex, he put a can of gas in the tank and Haze got in and tried
to start it but nothing happened. The man opened up the hood and studied
the inside for a while. He was a one-armed man with two sandy-colored
teeth and eyes that were slate-blue and thoughtful. He had not spoken
more than two words yet. He looked for a long time under the hood while
Haze stood by, but he didn’t touch anything. After a while he shut it
and blew his nose.

“What’s wrong in there?” Haze asked in an agitated voice. “It’s a good
car, ain’t it?”

The man didn’t answer him. He sat down on the ground and eased under the
Essex. He wore hightop shoes and gray socks. He stayed under the car a
long time. Haze got down on his hands and knees and looked under to see
what he was doing but he wasn’t doing anything. He was just lying there,
looking up, as if he were contemplating; his good arm was folded on his
chest. After a while, he eased himself out and wiped his face and neck
with a piece of flannel rag he had in his pocket.

“Listenhere,” Haze said, “that’s a good car. You just give me a push,
that’s all. That car’ll get me anywhere I want to go.”

The man didn’t say anything but he got back in the truck and Haze and
Sabbath Hawks got in the Essex and he pushed them. After a few hundred
yards the Essex began to belch and gasp and jiggle. Haze stuck his head
out the window and motioned for the truck to come alongside. “Ha!” he
said. “I told you, didn’t I? This car’ll get me anywhere I want to go.
It may stop here and there but it won’t stop permanent. What do I owe
you?”

“Nothing,” the man said, “not a thing.”

“But the gas,” Haze said, “how much for the gas?”

“Nothing,” the man said with the same level look. “Not a thing.”

“All right, I thank you,” Haze said and drove on. “I don’t need no
favors from him,” he said.

“It’s a grand auto,” Sabbath Hawks said. “It goes as smooth as honey.”

“It ain’t been built by a bunch of foreigners or niggers or one-arm
men,” Haze said. “It was built by people with their eyes open that knew
where they were at.”

When they came to the end of the dirt road and were facing the paved
one, the pick-up truck pulled alongside again and while the two cars
paused side by side, Haze and the slate-eyed man looked at each other
out of their two windows. “I told you this car would get me anywhere I
wanted to go,” Haze said sourly.

“Some things,” the man said, “’ll get some folks somewheres,” and he
turned the truck up the highway.

Haze drove on. The blinding white cloud had turned into a bird with long
thin wings and was disappearing in the opposite direction.




                               CHAPTER 8


Enoch Emery knew now that his life would never be the same again,
because the thing that was going to happen to him had started to happen.
He had always known that something was going to happen but he hadn’t
known what. If he had been much given to thought, he might have thought
that now was the time for him to justify his daddy’s blood, but he
didn’t think in broad sweeps like that, he thought what he would do
next. Sometimes he didn’t think, he only wondered; then before long he
would find himself doing this or that, like a bird finds itself building
a nest when it hasn’t actually been planning to.

What was going to happen to him had started to happen when he showed
what was in the glass case to Haze Motes. That was a mystery beyond his
understanding, but he knew that what was going to be expected of him was
something awful. His blood was more sensitive than any other part of
him; it wrote doom all through him, except possibly in his brain, and
the result was that his tongue, which edged out every few minutes to
test his fever blister, knew more than he did.

The first thing that he found himself doing that was not normal was
saving his pay. He was saving all of it, except what his landlady came
to collect every week and what he had to use to buy something to eat
with. Then to his surprise, he found he wasn’t eating very much and he
was saving that money too. He had a fondness for Supermarkets; it was
his custom to spend an hour or so in one every afternoon after he left
the city park, browsing around among the canned goods and reading the
cereal stories. Lately he had been compelled to pick up a few things
here and there that would not be bulky in his pockets, and he wondered
if this could be the reason he was saving so much money on food. It
could have been, but he had the suspicion that saving the money was
connected with some larger thing. He had always been given to stealing
but he had never saved before.

At the same time, he began cleaning up his room. It was a little green
room, or it had once been green, in the attic of an elderly rooming
house. There was a mummified look and feel to this residence, but Enoch
had never thought before of brightening the part (corresponding to the
head) that he lived in. Then he simply found himself doing it.

First, he removed the rug from the floor and hung it out the window.
This was a mistake because when he went to pull it back in, there were
only a few long strings left with a carpet tack caught in one of them.
He imagined that it must have been a very old rug and he decided to
handle the rest of the furniture with more care. He washed the bed frame
with soap and water and found that under the second layer of dirt, it
was pure gold, and this affected him so strongly that he washed the
chair. It was a low round chair that bulged around the legs so that it
seemed to be in the act of squatting. The gold began to appear with the
first touch of water but it disappeared with the second and with a
little more, the chair sat down as if this were the end of long years of
inner struggle. Enoch didn’t know if it was for him or against him. He
had a nasty impulse to kick it to pieces, but he let it stay there,
exactly in the position it had sat down in, because for the time anyway,
he was not a foolhardy boy who took chances on the meanings of things.
For the time, he knew that what he didn’t know was what mattered.

The only other piece of furniture in the room was a washstand. This was
built in three parts and stood on bird legs six inches high. The legs
had clawed feet that were each one gripped around a small cannon ball.
The lowest part was a tabernacle-like cabinet which was meant to contain
a slop-jar. Enoch didn’t own a slop-jar but he had a certain reverence
for the purpose of things and since he didn’t have the right thing to
put in it, he left it empty. Directly over this place for the treasure,
there was a gray marble slab and coming up from behind it was a wooden
trellis-work of hearts, scrolls and flowers, extending into a hunched
eagle wing on either side, and containing in the middle, just at the
level of Enoch’s face when he stood in front of it, a small oval mirror.
The wooden frame continued again over the mirror and ended in a crowned,
horned headpiece, showing that the artist had not lost faith in his
work.

As far as Enoch was concerned, this piece had always been the center of
the room and the one that most connected him with what he didn’t know.
More than once after a big supper, he had dreamed of unlocking the
cabinet and getting in it and then proceeding to certain rites and
mysteries that he had a very vague idea about in the morning. In his
cleaning up, his mind was on the washstand from the first, but as was
usual with him, he began with the least important thing and worked
around and in toward the center where the meaning was. So before he
tackled the washstand, he took care of the pictures in the room.

These were three, one belonging to his landlady (who was almost totally
blind but moved about by an acute sense of smell) and two of his own.
Hers was a brown portrait of a moose standing in a small lake. The look
of superiority on this animal’s face was so insufferable to Enoch that,
if he hadn’t been afraid of him, he would have done something about it a
long time ago. As it was, he couldn’t do anything in his room but what
the smug face was watching, not shocked because nothing better could be
expected and not amused because nothing was funny. If he had looked all
over for one, he couldn’t have found a roommate that irritated him more.
He kept up a constant stream of inner comment, uncomplimentary to the
moose, though when he said anything aloud, he was more guarded. The
moose was in a heavy brown frame with leaf designs on it and this added
to his weight and his self-satisfied look. Enoch knew the time had come
when something had to be done; he didn’t know what was going to happen
in his room, but when it happened, he didn’t want to have the feeling
that the moose was running it. The answer came to him fully prepared: he
realized with a sudden intuition that taking the frame off him would be
equal to taking the clothes off him (although he didn’t have on any) and
he was right because when he had done it, the animal looked so reduced
that Enoch could only snicker and look at him out the corner of his eye.

After this success he turned his attention to the other two pictures.
They were over calendars and had been sent him by the Hilltop Funeral
Home and the American Rubber Tire Company. One showed a small boy in a
pair of blue Doctor Denton sleepers, kneeling at his bed, saying, “And
bless daddy,” while the moon looked in at the window. This was Enoch’s
favorite painting and it hung directly over his bed. The other pictured
a lady wearing a rubber tire and it hung directly across from the moose
on the opposite wall. He left it where it was, pretty certain that the
moose only pretended not to see it. Immediately after he finished with
the pictures, he went out and bought chintz curtains, a bottle of gilt,
and a paint brush with all the money he had saved.

This was a disappointment to him because he had hoped that the money
would be for some new clothes for him, and here he saw it going into a
set of drapes. He didn’t know what the gilt was for until he got home
with it; when he got home with it, he sat down in front of the slop-jar
cabinet in the washstand, unlocked it, and painted the inside of it with
the gilt. Then he realized that the cabinet was to be used FOR
something.

Enoch never nagged his blood to tell him a thing until it was ready. He
wasn’t the kind of a boy who grabs at any possibility and runs off,
proposing this or that preposterous thing. In a large matter like this,
he was always willing to wait for a certainty, and he waited for this
one, certain at least that he would know in a few days. Then for about a
week his blood was in secret conference with itself every day, only
stopping now and then to shout some order at him.

On the following Monday, he was certain when he woke up that today was
the day he was going to know on. His blood was rushing around like a
woman who cleans up the house after the company has come, and he was
surly and rebellious. When he realized that today was the day, he
decided not to get up. He didn’t want to justify his daddy’s blood, he
didn’t want to be always having to do something that something else
wanted him to do, that he didn’t know what it was and that was always
dangerous.

Naturally, his blood was not going to put up with any attitude like
this. He was at the zoo by nine-thirty, only a half-hour later than he
was supposed to be. All morning his mind was not on the gate he was
supposed to guard but was chasing around after his blood, like a boy
with a mop and a bucket, beating something here and sloshing down
something there, without a second’s rest. As soon as the second-shift
guard came, Enoch headed toward town.

Town was the last place he wanted to be because anything could happen
there. All the time his mind had been chasing around it had been
thinking how as soon as he got off duty he was going to sneak off home
and go to bed.

By the time he got into the center of the business district he was
exhausted and he had to lean against Walgreen’s window and cool off.
Sweat crept down his back and provoked him to itch so that in just a few
minutes he appeared to be working his way across the glass by his
muscles, against a background of alarm clocks, toilet waters, candies,
sanitary pads, fountain pens, and pocket flashlights, displayed in all
colors to twice his height. He appeared to be working his way to a
rumbling noise which came from the center of a small alcove that formed
the entrance to the drug store. Here was a yellow and blue, glass and
steel machine, belching popcorn into a cauldron of butter and salt.
Enoch approached, already with his purse out, sorting his money. His
purse was a long gray leather pouch, tied at the top with a drawstring.
It was one he had stolen from his daddy and he treasured it because it
was the only thing he owned now that his daddy had touched (besides
himself). He sorted out two nickels and handed them to a pasty boy in a
white apron who was there to serve the machine. The boy felt around in
its vitals and filled a white paper bag with the corn, not taking his
eye off Enoch’s purse the while. On any other day Enoch would have tried
to make friends with him but today he was too preoccupied even to see
him. He took the bag and began stuffing the pouch back where it had come
from. The youth’s eye followed to the very edge of the pocket. “That
thang looks like a hawg bladder,” he observed enviously.

“I got to go now,” Enoch murmured and hurried into the drug store.
Inside, he walked abstractedly to the back of the store, and then up to
the front again by the other aisle as if he wanted any person who might
be looking for him to see he was there. He paused in front of the soda
fountain to see if he would sit down and have something to eat. The
fountain counter was pink and green marble linoleum and behind it there
was a red-headed waitress in a lime-colored uniform and a pink apron.
She had green eyes set in pink and they resembled a picture behind her
of a Lime-Cherry Surprise, a special that day for ten cents. She
confronted Enoch while he studied the information over her head. After a
minute she laid her chest on the counter and surrounded it by her folded
arms, to wait. Enoch couldn’t decide which of several concoctions was
the one for him to have until she ended it by moving one arm under the
counter and bringing out a Lime-Cherry Surprise. “It’s okay,” she said,
“I fixed it this morning after breakfast.”

“Something’s going to happen to me today,” Enoch said.

“I told you it was okay,” she said. “I fixed it today.”

“I seen it this morning when I woke up,” he said, with the look of a
visionary.

“God,” she said, and jerked it from under his face. She turned around
and began slapping things together; in a second she slammed
another—exactly like it, but fresh—in front of him.

“I got to go now,” Enoch said, and hurried out. An eye caught at his
pocket as he passed the popcorn machine but he didn’t stop. I don’t want
to do it, he was saying to himself. Whatever it is, I don’t want to do
it. I’m going home. It’ll be something I don’t want to do. It’ll be
something I ain’t got no business doing. And he thought of how he had
had to spend all his money on drapes and gilt when he could have bought
him a shirt and a phosphorescent tie. It’ll be something against the
law, he said. It’s always something against the law. I ain’t going to do
it, he said, and stopped. He had stopped in front of a movie house where
there was a large illustration of a monster stuffing a young woman into
an incinerator.

I ain’t going in no picture show like that, he said, giving it a nervous
look. I’m going home. I ain’t going to wait around in no picture show. I
ain’t got the money to buy a ticket, he said, taking out his purse
again. I ain’t even going to count thisyer change.

It ain’t but forty-three cent here, he said, that ain’t enough. A sign
said the price of a ticket for adults was forty-five cents, balcony,
thirty-five. I ain’t going to sit in no balcony, he said, buying a
thirty-five cent ticket.

I ain’t going in, he said.

Two doors flew open and he found himself moving down a long red foyer
and then up a darker tunnel and then up a higher, still darker tunnel.
In a few minutes he was up in a high part of the maw, feeling around,
like Jonah, for a seat. I ain’t going to look at it, he said furiously.
He didn’t like any picture shows but colored musical ones.

The first picture was about a scientist named The Eye who performed
operations by remote control. You would wake up in the morning and find
a slit in your chest or head or stomach and something you couldn’t do
without would be gone. Enoch pulled his hat down very low and drew his
knees up in front of his face; only his eyes looked at the screen. That
picture lasted an hour.

The second picture was about life at Devil’s Island Penitentiary. After
a while, Enoch had to grip the two arms of his seat to keep himself from
falling over the rail in front of him.

The third picture was called, “Lonnie Comes Home Again.” It was about a
baboon named Lonnie who rescued attractive children from a burning
orphanage. Enoch kept hoping Lonnie would get burned up but he didn’t
appear to get even hot. In the end a nice-looking girl gave him a medal.
It was more than Enoch could stand. He made a dive for the aisle, fell
down the two higher tunnels, and raced out the red foyer and into the
street. He collapsed as soon as the air hit him.

When he recovered himself, he was sitting against the wall of the
picture show building and he was not thinking any more about escaping
his duty. It was night and he had the feeling that the knowledge he
couldn’t avoid was almost on him. His resignation was perfect. He leaned
against the wall for about twenty minutes and then he got up and began
to walk down the street as if he were led by a silent melody or by one
of those whistles that only dogs hear. At the end of two blocks he
stopped, his attention directed across the street. There, facing him
under a street light, was a high rat-colored car and up on the nose of
it, a dark figure with a fierce white hat on. The figure’s arms were
working up and down and he had thin, gesticulating hands, almost as pale
as the hat. “Hazel Motes!” Enoch breathed, and his heart began to slam
from side to side like a wild bell clapper.

There were a few people standing on the sidewalk near the car. Enoch
didn’t know that Hazel Motes had started the Church Without Christ and
was preaching it every night on the street; he hadn’t seen him since
that day at the park when he had showed him the shriveled man in the
glass case.

“If you had been redeemed,” Hazel Motes was shouting, “you would care
about redemption but you don’t. Look inside yourselves and see if you
hadn’t rather it wasn’t if it was. There’s no peace for the redeemed,”
he shouted, “and I preach peace, I preach the Church Without Christ, the
church peaceful and satisfied!”

Two or three people who had stopped near the car started walking off the
other way. “Leave!” Hazel Motes cried. “Go ahead and leave! The truth
don’t matter to you. Listen,” he said, pointing his finger at the rest
of them, “the truth don’t matter to you. If Jesus had redeemed you, what
difference would it make to you? You wouldn’t do nothing about it. Your
faces wouldn’t move, neither this way nor that, and if it was three
crosses there and Him hung on the middle one, that one wouldn’t mean no
more to you and me than the other two. Listen here. What you need is
something to take the place of Jesus, something that would speak plain.
The Church Without Christ don’t have a Jesus but it needs one! It needs
a new jesus! It needs one that’s all man, without blood to waste, and it
needs one that don’t look like any other man so you’ll look at him. Give
me such a jesus, you people. Give me such a new jesus and you’ll see how
far the Church Without Christ can go!”

One of the people watching walked off so there were only two left. Enoch
was standing in the middle of the street, paralyzed.

“Show me where this new jesus is,” Hazel Motes cried, “and I’ll set him
up in the Church Without Christ and then you’ll see the truth. Then
you’ll know once and for all that you haven’t been redeemed. Give me
this new jesus, somebody, so we’ll all be saved by the sight of him!”

Enoch began shouting without a sound. He shouted that way for a full
minute while Hazel Motes went on.

“Look at me!” Hazel Motes cried, with a tare in his throat, “and you
look at a peaceful man! Peaceful because my blood has set me free. Take
counsel from your blood and come into the Church Without Christ and
maybe somebody will bring us a new jesus and we’ll all be saved by the
sight of him!”

An unintelligible sound spluttered out of Enoch. He tried to bellow, but
his blood held him back. He whispered, “Listenhere, I got him! I mean I
can get him! You know! Him! Him I shown you to. You seen him yourself!”

His blood reminded him that the last time he had seen Haze Motes was
when Haze Motes had hit him over the head with a rock. And he didn’t
even know yet how he would steal it out of the glass case. The only
thing he knew was that he had a place in his room prepared to keep it in
until Haze was ready to take it. His blood suggested he just let it come
as a surprise to Haze Motes. He began to back away. He backed across the
street and over a piece of sidewalk and out into the other street and a
taxi had to stop short to keep from hitting him. The driver put his head
out the window and asked him how he got around so well when God had made
him by putting two backs together instead of a back and a front.

Enoch was too preoccupied to think about it. “I got to go now,” he
murmured, and hurried off.




                               CHAPTER 9


Hawks kept his door bolted and whenever Haze knocked on it, which he did
two or three times a day, the ex-evangelist sent his child out to him
and bolted the door again behind her. It infuriated him to have Haze
lurking in the house, thinking up some excuse to get in and look at his
face; and he was often drunk and didn’t want to be discovered that way.

Haze couldn’t understand why the preacher didn’t welcome him and act
like a preacher should when he sees what he believes is a lost soul. He
kept trying to get into the room again; the window he could have reached
was kept locked and the shade pulled down. He wanted to see, if he
could, _behind_ the black glasses.

Every time he went to the door, the girl came out and the bolt shut
inside; then he couldn’t get rid of her. She followed him out to his car
and climbed in and spoiled his rides or she followed him up to his room
and sat. He abandoned the notion of seducing her and tried to protect
himself. He hadn’t been in the house a week before she appeared in his
room one night after he had gone to bed. She was holding a candle
burning in a jelly glass and wore, hanging onto her thin shoulders, a
woman’s nightgown that dragged on the floor behind her. Haze didn’t wake
up until she was almost up to his bed, and when he did, he sprang from
under his cover into the middle of the room.

“What you want?” he said.

She didn’t say anything and her grin widened in the candle light. He
stood glowering at her for an instant and then he picked up the straight
chair and raised it as if he were going to bring it down on her. She
lingered only a fraction of a second. His door didn’t bolt so he propped
the chair under the knob before he went back to bed.

“Listen,” she said when she got back to their room, “nothing works. He
would have hit me with a chair.”

“I’m leaving out of here in a couple of days,” Hawks said, “you better
make it work if you want to eat after I’m gone.” He was drunk but he
meant it.

Nothing was working the way Haze had expected it to. He had spent every
evening preaching, but the membership of the Church Without Christ was
still only one person: himself. He had wanted to have a large following
quickly to impress the blind man with his powers, but no one had
followed him. There had been a sort of follower but that had been a
mistake. That had been a boy about sixteen years old who had wanted
someone to go to a whorehouse with him because he had never been to one
before. He knew where the place was but he didn’t want to go without a
person of experience, and when he heard Haze, he hung around until he
stopped preaching and then asked him to go. But it was all a mistake
because after they had gone and got out again and Haze had asked him to
be a member of the Church Without Christ, or more than that, a disciple,
an apostle, the boy said he was sorry but he couldn’t be a member of
that church because he was a Lapsed Catholic. He said that what they had
just done was a mortal sin, and that should they die unrepentant of it
they would suffer eternal punishment and never see God. Haze had not
enjoyed the whorehouse anywhere near as much as the boy had and he had
wasted half his evening. He shouted that there was no such thing as sin
or judgment, but the boy only shook his head and asked him if he would
like to go again the next night.

If Haze had believed in praying, he would have prayed for a disciple,
but as it was all he could do was worry about it a lot. Then two nights
after the boy, the disciple appeared.

That night he preached outside of four different picture shows and every
time he looked up, he saw the same big face smiling at him. The man was
plumpish, and he had curly blond hair that was cut with showy sideburns.
He wore a black suit with a silver stripe in it and a wide-brimmed white
hat pushed onto the back of his head, and he had on tight-fitting black
pointed shoes and no socks. He looked like an ex-preacher turned cowboy,
or an ex-cowboy turned mortician. He was not handsome but under his
smile, there was an honest look that fitted into his face like a set of
false teeth.

Every time Haze looked at him, the man winked.

At the last picture show he preached in front of, there were three
people listening to him besides the man. “Do you people care anything
about the truth?” he asked. “The only way to the truth is through
blasphemy, but do you care? Are you going to pay any attention to what
I’ve been saying or are you just going to walk off like everybody else?”

There were two men and a woman with a cat-faced baby sprawled over her
shoulder. She had been looking at Haze as if he were in a booth at the
fair. “Well, come on,” she said, “he’s finished. We got to be going.”
She turned away and the two men fell in behind her.

“Go ahead and go,” Haze said, “but remember that the truth don’t lurk
around every street corner.”

The man who had been following reached up quickly and pulled Haze’s
pantsleg and gave him a wink. “Come on back heah, you folks,” he said.
“I want to tell you all about _me_.”

The woman turned around again and he smiled at her as if he had been
struck all along with her good looks. She had a square red face and her
hair was freshly set. “I wisht I had my gittarr here,” the man said,
“’cause I just somehow can say sweet things to music bettern plain. And
when you talk about Jesus you need a little music, don’t you, friends?”
He looked at the two men as if he were appealing to the good judgment
that was impressed on their faces. They had on brown felt hats and black
town suits, and they looked like older and younger brother. “Listen,
friends,” the disciple said confidentially, “two months ago before I met
the Prophet here, you wouldn’t know me for the same man. I didn’t have a
friend in the world. Do you know what it’s like not to have a friend in
the world?”

“It ain’t no worsen havinum that would put a knife in your back when you
wasn’t looking,” the older man said, barely parting his lips.

“Friend, you said a mouthful when you said that,” the man said. “If we
had time, I would have you repeat that just so ever’body could hear it
like I did.” The picture show was over and more people were coming up.
“Friends,” the man said, “I know you’re all interested in the Prophet
here,” pointing to Haze on the nose of the car, “and if you’ll just give
me time I’m going to tell you what him and his idears’ve done for me.
Don’t crowd because I’m willing to stay here all night and tell you if
it takes that long.”

Haze stood where he was, motionless, with his head slightly forward, as
if he weren’t sure what he was hearing.

“Friends,” the man said, “lemme innerduce myself. My name is Onnie Jay
Holy and I’m telling it to you so you can check up and see I don’t tell
you any lie. I’m a preacher and I don’t mind who knows it but I wouldn’t
have you believe nothing you can’t feel in your own hearts. You people
coming up on the edge push right on up in here where you can hear good,”
he said. “I’m not selling a thing, I’m giving something away!” A
considerable number of people had stopped.

“Friends,” he said, “two months ago you wouldn’t know me for the same
man. I didn’t have a friend in the world. Do you know what it’s like not
to have a friend in the world?”

A loud voice said, “It ain’t no worsen havinum that would put . . .”

“Why, friends,” Onnie Jay Holy said, “not to have a friend in the world
is just about the most miserable and lonesome thing that can happen to a
man or woman! And that’s the way it was with me. I was ready to hang
myself or to despair completely. Not even my own dear old mother loved
me, and it wasn’t because I wasn’t sweet inside, it was because I never
known how to make the natural sweetness inside me show. Every person
that comes onto this earth,” he said, stretching out his arms, “is born
sweet and full of love. A little child loves ever’body, friends, and its
nature is sweetness—until something happens. Something happens,
friends, I don’t need to tell people like you that can think for
theirselves. As that little child gets bigger, its sweetness don’t show
so much, cares and troubles come to perplext it, and all its sweetness
is driven inside it. Then it gets miserable and lonesome and sick,
friends. It says, ‘Where is all my sweetness gone? where are all the
friends that loved me?’ and all the time, that little beat-up rose of
its sweetness is inside, not a petal dropped, and on the outside is just
a mean lonesomeness. It may want to take its own life or yours or mine,
or to despair completely, friends.” He said it in a sad nasal voice but
he was smiling all the time so that they could tell he had been through
what he was talking about and come out on top. “That was the way it was
with me, friends. I know what of I speak,” he said, and folded his hands
in front of him. “But all the time that I was ready to hang myself or to
despair completely, I was sweet inside, like ever’body else, and I only
needed something to bring it out. I only needed a little help, friends.

“Then I met this Prophet here,” he said, pointing at Haze on the nose of
the car. “That was two months ago, folks, that I heard how he was out to
help me, how he was preaching the Church of Christ Without Christ, the
church that was going to get a new jesus to help me bring my sweet
nature into the open where ever’body could enjoy it. That was two months
ago, friends, and now you wouldn’t know me for the same man. I love
ever’one of you people and I want you to listen to him and me and join
our church, the Holy Church of Christ Without Christ, the new church
with the new jesus, and then you’ll all be helped like me!”

Haze leaned forward. “This man is not true,” he said. “I never saw him
before tonight. I wasn’t preaching this church two months ago and the
name of it ain’t the Holy Church of Christ Without Christ!”

The man ignored this and so did the people. There were ten or twelve
gathered around. “Friends,” Onnie Jay Holy said, “I’m mighty glad you’re
seeing me now instead of two months ago because then I couldn’t have
testified to this new church and this Prophet here. If I had my gittarr
with me I could say all this better but I’ll just have to do the best I
can by myself.” He had a winning smile and it was evident that he didn’t
think he was any better than anybody else even though he was.

“Now I just want to give you folks a few reasons why you can trust this
church,” he said. “In the first place, friends, you can rely on it that
it’s nothing foreign connected with it. You don’t have to believe
nothing you don’t understand and approve of. If you don’t understand it,
it ain’t true, and that’s all there is to it. No jokers in the deck,
friends.”

Haze leaned forward. “Blasphemy is the way to the truth,” he said, “and
there’s no other way whether you understand it or not!”

“Now, friends,” Onnie Jay said, “I want to tell you a second reason why
you can absolutely trust this church—it’s based on the Bible. Yes sir!
It’s based on your own personal interpitation of the Bible, friends. You
can sit at home and interpit your own Bible however you feel in your
heart it ought to be interpited. That’s right,” he said, “just the way
Jesus would have done it. Gee, I wisht I had my gittarr here,” he
complained.

“This man is a liar,” Haze said. “I never saw him before tonight. I
never . . .”

“That ought to be enough reasons, friends,” Onnie Jay Holy said, “but
I’m going to tell you one more, just to show I can. This church is
up-to-date! When you’re in this church you can know that there’s nothing
or nobody ahead of you, nobody knows nothing you don’t know, all the
cards are on the table, friends, and that’s a fack!”

Haze’s face under the white hat began to take on a look of fierceness.
Just as he was about to open his mouth again, Onnie Jay Holy pointed in
astonishment to the baby in the blue bonnet who was sprawled limp over
the woman’s shoulder. “Why yonder is a little babe,” he said, “a little
bundle of helpless sweetness. Why, I know you people aren’t going to let
that little thing grow up and have all his sweetness pushed inside him
when it could be on the outside to win friends and make him loved.
That’s why I want ever’ one of you people to join the Holy Church of
Christ Without Christ. It’ll cost you each a dollar but what is a
dollar? A few dimes! Not too much to pay to unlock that little rose of
sweetness inside you!”

“Listen!” Haze shouted. “It don’t cost you any money to know the truth!
You can’t know it for money!”

“You hear what the Prophet says, friends,” Onnie Jay Holy said, “a
dollar is not too much to pay. No amount of money is too much to learn
the truth! Now I want each of you people that are going to take
advantage of this church to sign on this little pad I have in my pocket
here and give me your dollar personally and let me shake your hand!”

Haze slid down from the nose of his car and got in it and slammed his
foot on the starter.

“Hey wait! Wait!” Onnie Jay Holy shouted, “I ain’t got any of these
friends’ names yet!”

The Essex had a tendency to develop a tic by nightfall. It would go
forward about six inches and then back about four; it did that now a
succession of times rapidly; otherwise Haze would have shot off in it
and been gone. He had to grip the steering wheel with both hands to keep
from being thrown either out the windshield or into the back. It stopped
this after a few seconds and slid about twenty feet and then began it
again.

Onnie Jay Holy’s face showed a great strain; he put his hand to the side
of it as if the only way he could keep his smile on was to hold it. “I
got to go now, friends,” he said quickly, “but I’ll be at this same spot
tomorrow night, I got to go catch the Prophet now,” and he ran off just
as the Essex began to slide again. He wouldn’t have caught it, except
that it stopped before it had gone ten feet farther. He jumped on the
running board and got the door open and plumped in, panting, beside
Haze. “Friend,” he said, “we just lost ten dollars. What you in such a
hurry for?” His face showed that he was in some kind of genuine pain
even though he looked at Haze with a smile that revealed all his upper
teeth and the tops of his lowers.

Haze turned his head and looked at him long enough to see the smile
before it was thrown forward at the windshield. After that the Essex
began running smoothly. Onnie Jay took out a lavender handkerchief and
held it in front of his mouth for some time. When he removed it, the
smile was back on his face. “Friend,” he said, “you and me have to get
together on this thing. I said when I first heard you open your mouth,
‘Why, yonder is a great man with great idears.’”

Haze didn’t turn his head.

Onnie Jay took in a long breath. “Why, do you know who you put me in
mind of when I first saw you?” he asked. After a minute of waiting, he
said in a soft voice, “Jesus Christ and Abraham Lincoln, friend.”

Haze’s face was suddenly swamped with outrage. All the expression on it
was obliterated. “You ain’t true,” he said in a barely audible voice.

“Friend, how can you say that?” Onnie Jay said. “Why I was on the radio
for three years with a program that give real religious experiences to
the whole family. Didn’t you ever listen to it—called, Soulsease, a
quarter hour of Mood, Melody, and Mentality? I’m a real preacher,
friend.”

Haze stopped the Essex. “You get out,” he said.

“Why friend!” Onnie Jay said. “You ought not to say such a thing! That’s
the absolute truth that I’m a preacher and a radio star.”

“Get out,” Haze said, reaching across and opening the door for him.

“I never thought you would treat a friend thisaway,” Onnie Jay said.
“All I wanted to ast you about was this new jesus.”

“Get out,” Haze said, and began to push him toward the door. He pushed
him to the edge of the seat and gave him a shove and Onnie Jay fell out
the door and into the road.

“I never thought a friend would treat me thisaway,” he complained. Haze
kicked his leg off the running board and shut the door again. He put his
foot on the starter but nothing happened except a noise somewhere
underneath him that sounded like a person gargling without water. Onnie
Jay got up off the pavement and stood at the window. “If you would just
tell me where this new jesus is you was mentioning,” he began.

Haze put his foot on the starter a succession of times but nothing
happened.

“Pull out the choke,” Onnie Jay advised, getting up on the running
board.

“There’s no choke on it,” Haze snarled.

“Maybe it’s flooded,” Onnie Jay said. “While we’re waiting, you and me
can talk about the Holy Church of Christ Without Christ.”

“My church is the Church Without Christ,” Haze said. “I’ve seen all of
you I want to.”

“It don’t make any difference how many Christs you add to the name if
you don’t add none to the meaning, friend,” Onnie Jay said in a hurt
tone. “You ought to listen to me because I’m not just an amateur. I’m an
artist-type. If you want to get anywheres in religion, you got to keep
it sweet. You got good idears but what you need is an artist-type to
work with you.”

Haze rammed his foot on the gas and then on the starter and then on the
starter and then on the gas. Nothing happened. The street was
practically deserted. “Me and you could get behind it and push it over
to the curb,” Onnie Jay suggested.

“I ain’t asked for your help,” Haze said.

“You know, friend, I certainly would like to see this new jesus,” Onnie
Jay said. “I never heard a idear before that had more in it than that
one. All it would need is a little promotion.”

Haze tried to start the car by forcing his weight forward on the
steering wheel, but that didn’t work. He got out and got behind it and
began to push it over to the curb. Onnie Jay got behind with him and
added his weight. “I kind of have had that idear about a new jesus
myself,” he remarked. “I seen how a new one would be more up-to-date.”

“Where you keeping him, friend?” he asked. “Is he somebody you see ever’
day? I certainly would like to meet him and hear some of his idears.”

They pushed the car into a parking space. There was no way to lock it
and Haze was afraid that if he left it out all night so far away from
where he lived someone would be able to steal it. There was nothing for
him to do but sleep in it. He got in the back and began to pull down the
fringed shades. Onnie Jay had his head in the front, however. “You
needn’t to be afraid that if I seen this new jesus I would cut you out
of anything,” he said. “Why friend, it would just mean a lot to me for
the good of my spirit.”

Haze moved the two-by-four off the seat frame to make more room to fix
up his pallet. He kept a pillow and an army blanket back there and he
had a sterno stove and a coffee pot up on the shelf under the back oval
window. “Friend, I would even be glad to pay you a little something to
see him,” Onnie Jay suggested.

“Listen here,” Haze said, “you get away from here. I’ve seen all of you
I want to. There’s no such thing as any new jesus. That ain’t anything
but a way to say something.”

The smile more or less slithered off Onnie Jay’s face. “What you mean by
that?” he asked.

“That there’s no such thing or person,” Haze said. “It wasn’t nothing
but a way to say a thing.” He put his hand on the door handle and began
to close it in spite of Onnie Jay’s head. “No such thing exists!” he
shouted.

“That’s the trouble with you innerleckchuls,” Onnie Jay muttered, “you
don’t never have nothing to show for what you’re saying.”

“Get your head out my car door, Holy,” Haze said.

“My name is Hoover Shoats,” the man with his head in the door growled.
“I known when I first seen you that you wasn’t nothing but a crackpot.”

Haze opened the door enough to be able to slam it. Hoover Shoats got his
head out the way but not his thumb. A howl arose that would have rended
almost any heart. Haze opened the door and released the thumb and then
slammed the door again. He pulled down the front shades and lay down in
the back of the car on the army blanket. Outside he could hear Hoover
Shoats jumping around on the pavement and howling. When the howls died
down, Haze heard a few steps up to the car and then an impassioned,
breathless voice say through the tin, “You watch out, friend. I’m going
to run you out of business. I can get my own new jesus and I can get
Prophets for peanuts, you hear? Do you hear me, friend?” the hoarse
voice said.

Haze didn’t answer.

“Yeah and I’ll be out there doing my own preaching tomorrow night. What
you need is a little competition,” the voice said. “Do you hear me,
friend?”

Haze got up and leaned over the front seat and banged his hand down on
the horn of the Essex. It made a sound like a goat’s laugh cut off with
a buzz saw. Hoover Shoats jumped back as if a charge of electricity had
gone through him. “All right, friend,” he said, standing about fifteen
feet away, trembling, “you just wait, you ain’t heard the last of me
yet,” and he turned and went off down the quiet street.

Haze stayed in his car about an hour and had a bad experience in it: he
dreamed he was not dead but only buried. He was not waiting on the
Judgment because there was no Judgment, he was waiting on nothing.
Various eyes looked through the back oval window at his situation, some
with considerable reverence, like the boy from the zoo, and some only to
see what they could see. There were three women with paper sacks who
looked at him critically as if he were something—a piece of fish—they
might buy, but they passed on after a minute. A man in a canvas hat
looked in and put his thumb to his nose and wiggled his fingers. Then a
woman with two little boys on either side of her stopped and looked in,
grinning. After a second, she pushed the boys out of view and indicated
that she would climb in and keep him company for a while, but she
couldn’t get through the glass and finally she went off. All this time
Haze was bent on getting out but since there was no use to try, he
didn’t make any move one way or the other. He kept expecting Hawks to
appear at the oval window with a wrench, but the blind man didn’t come.

Finally he shook off the dream and woke up. He thought it should be
morning but it was only midnight. He pulled himself over into the front
of the car and eased his foot on the starter and the Essex rolled off
quietly as if nothing were the matter with it. He drove back to the
house and let himself in but instead of going upstairs to his room, he
stood in the hall, looking at the blind man’s door. He went over to it
and put his ear to the keyhole and heard the sound of snoring; he turned
the knob gently but the door didn’t move.

For the first time, the idea of picking the lock occurred to him. He
felt in his pockets for an instrument and came on a small piece of wire
that he sometimes used for a toothpick. There was only a dim light in
the hall but it was enough for him to work by and he knelt down at the
keyhole and inserted the wire into it carefully, trying not to make a
noise.

After a while when he had tried the wire five or six different ways,
there was a slight click in the lock. He stood up, trembling, and opened
the door. His breath came short and his heart was palpitating as if he
had run all the way here from a great distance. He stood just inside the
room until his eyes got accustomed to the darkness and then he moved
slowly over to the iron bed and stood there. Hawks was lying across it.
His head was hanging over the edge. Haze squatted down by him and struck
a match close to his face and he opened his eyes. The two sets of eyes
looked at each other as long as the match lasted; Haze’s expression
seemed to open onto a deeper blankness and reflect something and then
close again.

“Now you can get out,” Hawks said in a short thick voice, “now you can
leave me alone,” and he made a jab at the face over him without touching
it. It moved back, expressionless under the white hat, and was gone in a
second.




                               CHAPTER 10


The next night, Haze parked the Essex in front of the Odeon Theater and
climbed up on it and began to preach. “Let me tell you what I and this
church stand for!” he called from the nose of the car. “Stop one minute
to listen to the truth because you may never hear it again.” He stood
there with his neck thrust forward, moving one arm upward in a vague
arc. Two women and a boy stopped.

“I preach there are all kinds of truth, your truth and somebody else’s,
but behind all of them, there’s only one truth and that is that there’s
no truth,” he called. “No truth behind all truths is what I and this
church preach! Where you come from is gone, where you thought you were
going to never was there, and where you are is no good unless you can
get away from it. Where is there a place for you to be? No place.

“Nothing outside you can give you any place,” he said. “You needn’t to
look at the sky because it’s not going to open up and show no place
behind it. You needn’t to search for any hole in the ground to look
through into somewhere else. You can’t go neither forwards nor backwards
into your daddy’s time nor your children’s if you have them. In yourself
right now is all the place you’ve got. If there was any Fall, look
there, if there was any Redemption, look there, and if you expect any
Judgment, look there, because they all three will have to be in your
time and your body and where in your time and your body can they be?

“Where in your time and your body has Jesus redeemed you?” he cried.
“Show me where because I don’t see the place. If there was a place where
Jesus had redeemed you that would be the place for you to be, but which
of you can find it?”

Another trickle of people came out of the Odeon and two stopped to look
at him. “Who is that that says it’s your conscience?” he cried, looking
around with a constricted face as if he could smell the particular
person who thought that. “Your conscience is a trick,” he said, “it
don’t exist though you may think it does, and if you think it does, you
had best get it out in the open and hunt it down and kill it, because
it’s no more than your face in the mirror is or your shadow behind you.”

He was preaching with such concentration that he didn’t notice a high
rat-colored car that had been driven around the block three times
already, while the two men in it hunted a place to park. He didn’t see
it when it pulled in two cars over from him in a space that another car
had just pulled out of, and he didn’t see Hoover Shoats and a man in a
glare-blue suit and white hat get out of it, but after a few seconds,
his head turned that way and he saw the man in the glare-blue suit and
white hat up on the nose of it. He was so struck with how gaunt and thin
he looked in the illusion that he stopped preaching. He had never
pictured himself that way before. The man he saw was hollow-chested and
carried his neck thrust forward and his arms down by his side; he stood
there as if he were waiting for some signal he was afraid he might not
catch.

Hoover Shoats was walking about on the sidewalk, striking a few chords
on his guitar. “Friends,” he called, “I want to innerduce you to the
True Prophet here and I want you all to listen to his words because I
think they’re going to make you happy like they’ve made me!” If Haze had
noticed Hoover he might have been impressed by how happy he looked, but
his attention was fixed on the man on the nose of the car. He slid down
from his own car and moved up closer, never taking his eyes from the
bleak figure. Hoover Shoats raised his hand with two fingers pointed and
the man suddenly cried out in a high nasal singsong voice. “The
unredeemed are redeeming theirselves and the new jesus is at hand! Watch
for this miracle! Help yourself to salvation in the Holy Church of
Christ Without Christ!” He called it over again in exactly the same tone
of voice, but faster. Then he began to cough. He had a loud consumptive
cough that started somewhere deep in him and finished with a long
wheeze. He expectorated a white fluid at the end of it.

Haze was standing next to a fat woman who after a minute turned her head
and stared at him and then turned it again and stared at the True
Prophet. Finally she touched his elbow with hers and grinned at him.
“Him and you twins?” she asked.

“If you don’t hunt it down and kill it, it’ll hunt you down and kill
you,” Haze answered.

“Huh? Who?” she said.

He turned away and she stared at him as he got back in his car and drove
off. Then she touched the elbow of a man on the other side of her. “He’s
nuts,” she said. “I never seen no twins that hunted each other down.”

When he got back to his room, Sabbath Hawks was in his bed. She was
pushed over into one corner of it, sitting with one arm drawn around her
knees and one hand holding onto the sheet as if she meant to hang on by
it. Her face was sullen and apprehensive. Haze sat down on the bed but
he barely glanced at her. “I don’t care if you hit me with the table,”
she said. “I’m not going. There’s no place for me to go. He’s run off on
me and it was you run him off. I was watching last night and I seen you
come in and hold that match to his face. I thought anybody would have
seen what he was before that without having to strike no match. He’s
just a crook. He ain’t even a big crook, just a little one, and when he
gets tired of that, he begs on the street.”

Haze leaned down and began untying his shoes. They were old army shoes
that he had painted black to get the government off. He untied them and
eased his feet out and sat there looking down, while she watched him
cautiously.

“Are you going to hit me or not?” she asked. “If you are, go ahead and
do it right now because I’m not going. I ain’t got any place to go.” He
didn’t look as if he were going to hit anything; he looked as if he were
going to sit there until he died. “Listen,” she said, with a quick
change of tone, “from the minute I set eyes on you I said to myself,
that’s what I got to have, just give me some of him! I said look at
those pee-can eyes and go crazy, girl! That innocent look don’t hide a
thing, he’s just pure filthy right down to the guts, like me. The only
difference is I like being that way and he don’t. Yes sir!” she said. “I
like being that way, and I can teach you how to like it. Don’t you want
to learn how to like it?”

He turned his head slightly and just over his shoulder he saw a pinched
homely little face with bright green eyes and a grin. “Yeah,” he said
with no change in his stony expression, “I want to.” He stood up and
took off his coat and his trousers and his drawers and put them on the
straight chair. Then he turned off the light and sat down on the cot
again and pulled off his socks. His feet were big and white and damp to
the floor and he sat there, looking at the two white shapes they made.

“Come on! Make haste,” she said, knocking his back with her knee.

He unbuttoned his shirt and took it off and wiped his face with it and
dropped it on the floor. Then he slid his legs under the cover by her
and sat there as if he were waiting to remember one more thing.

She was breathing very quickly. “Take off your hat, king of the beasts,”
she said gruffly and her hand came up behind his head and snatched the
hat off and sent it flying across the room in the dark.




                               CHAPTER 11


The next morning toward noon a person in a long black raincoat, with a
lightish hat pulled down low on his face and the brim of it turned down
to meet the turned-up collar of the raincoat, was moving rapidly along
certain back streets, close to the walls of the buildings. He was
carrying something about the size of a baby, wrapped up in newspapers,
and he carried a dark umbrella too, as the sky was an unpredictable
surly gray like the back of an old goat. He had on a pair of dark
glasses and a black beard which a keen observer would have said was not
a natural growth but was pinned onto his hat on either side with safety
pins. As he walked along, the umbrella kept slipping from under his arm
and getting tangled in his feet, as if it meant to keep him from going
anywhere.

He had not gone half a block before large putty-colored drops began to
splatter on the pavement and there was an ugly growl in the sky behind
him. He began to run, clutching the bundle in one arm and the umbrella
in the other. In a second, the storm overtook him and he ducked between
two show-windows into the blue and white tiled entrance of a drug store.
He lowered his dark glasses a little. The pale eyes that looked over the
rims belonged to Enoch Emery. Enoch was on his way to Hazel Motes’s
room.

He had never been to Hazel Motes’s place before but the instinct that
was guiding him was very sure of itself. What was in the bundle was what
he had shown Hazel at the museum. He had stolen it the day before.

He had darkened his face and hands with brown shoe polish so that if he
were seen in the act, he would be taken for a colored person; then he
had sneaked into the museum while the guard was asleep and had broken
the glass case with a wrench he’d borrowed from his landlady; then,
shaking and sweating, he had lifted the shriveled man out and thrust him
in a paper sack, and had crept out again past the guard, who was still
asleep. He realized as soon as he got out of the museum that since no
one had seen him to think he was a colored boy, he would be suspected
immediately and would have to disguise himself. That was why he had on
the black beard and dark glasses.

When he’d got back to his room, he had taken the new jesus out of the
sack and, hardly daring to look at him, had laid him in the gilted
cabinet; then he had sat down on the edge of his bed to wait. He was
waiting for something to happen, he didn’t know what. He knew something
was going to happen and his entire system was waiting on it. He thought
it was going to be one of the supreme moments in his life but apart from
that, he didn’t have the vaguest notion what it might be. He pictured
himself, after it was over, as an entirely new man, with an even better
personality than he had now. He sat there for about fifteen minutes and
nothing happened.

He sat there for about five more.

Then he realized that he had to make the first move. He got up and
tiptoed to the cabinet and squatted down at the door of it; in a second
he opened it a crack and looked in. After a while, very slowly, he
broadened the crack and inserted his head into the tabernacle.

Some time passed.

From directly behind him, only the soles of his shoes and the seat of
his trousers were visible. The room was absolutely silent; there was no
sound even from the street; the Universe might have been shut off; not a
flea jumped. Then without any warning, a loud liquid noise burst from
the cabinet and there was the thump of bone cracked once against a piece
of wood. Enoch staggered backward, clutching his head and his face. He
sat on the floor for a few minutes with a shocked expression on his
whole figure. At the first instant, he had thought it was the shriveled
man who had sneezed, but after a second, he perceived the condition of
his own nose. He wiped it off with his sleeve and then he sat there on
the floor for some time longer. His expression had showed that a deep
unpleasant knowledge was breaking on him slowly. After a while he had
kicked the ark door shut in the new jesus’ face, and then he had got up
and begun to eat a candy bar very rapidly. He had eaten it as if he had
something against it.

The next morning he had not got up until ten o’clock—it was his day
off—and he had not set out until nearly noon to look for Hazel Motes.
He remembered the address Sabbath Hawks had given him and that was where
his instinct was leading him. He was very sullen and disgruntled at
having to spend his day off in such a way as this, and in bad weather,
but he wanted to get rid of the new jesus so that if the police had to
catch anybody for the robbery, they could catch Hazel Motes instead of
him. He couldn’t understand at all why he had let himself risk his skin
for a dead shriveled-up part-nigger dwarf that had never done anything
but get himself embalmed and then lain stinking in a museum the rest of
his life. It was far beyond his understanding. He was very sullen. So
far as he was now concerned, one jesus was as bad as another.

He had borrowed his landlady’s umbrella and he discovered as he stood in
the entrance of the drug store, trying to open it, that it was at least
as old as she was. When he finally got it hoisted, he pushed his dark
glasses back on his eyes and re-entered the downpour.

The umbrella was one his landlady had stopped using fifteen years before
(which was the only reason she had lent it to him) and as soon as the
rain touched the top of it, it came down with a shriek and stabbed him
in the back of the neck. He ran a few feet with it over his head and
then backed into another store entrance and removed it. Then to get it
up again, he had to place the tip of it on the ground and ram it open
with his foot. He ran out again, holding his hand up near the spokes to
keep them open and this allowed the handle, which was carved to
represent the head of a fox terrier, to jab him every few seconds in the
stomach. He proceeded for another quarter of a block this way before the
back half of the silk stood up off the spokes and allowed the storm to
sweep down his collar. Then he ducked under the marquee of a movie
house. It was Saturday and there were a lot of children standing more or
less in a line in front of the ticket box.

Enoch was not very fond of children but children always seemed to like
to look at him. The line turned and twenty or thirty eyes began to
observe him with a steady interest. The umbrella had assumed an ugly
position, half up and half down, and the half that was up was about to
come down and spill more water under his collar. When this happened the
children laughed and jumped up and down. Enoch glared at them and turned
his back and lowered his dark glasses. He found himself facing a
life-size four-color picture of a gorilla. Over the gorilla’s head,
written in red letters was, “GONGA! Giant Jungle Monarch and a Great
Star! HERE IN PERSON!!!” At the level of the gorilla’s knee, there was
more that said, “Gonga will appear in person in front of this theater at
12 A.M. _TODAY!_ A free pass to the first ten brave enough to step up
and shake his hand!”

Enoch was usually thinking of something else at the moment that Fate
began drawing back her leg to kick him. When he was four years old, his
father had brought him home a tin box from the penitentiary. It was
orange and had a picture of some peanut brittle on the outside of it and
green letters that said, A NUTTY SURPRISE! When Enoch had opened it, a
coiled piece of steel had sprung out at him and broken off the ends of
his two front teeth. His life was full of so many happenings like that
that it would seem he should have been more sensitive to his times of
danger. He stood there and read the poster twice through carefully. To
his mind, an opportunity to insult a successful ape came from the hand
of Providence. He suddenly regained all his reverence for the new jesus.
He saw that he was going to be rewarded after all and have the supreme
moment he had expected.

He turned around and asked the nearest child what time it was. The child
said it was twelve-ten and that Gonga was already ten minutes late.
Another child said that maybe the rain had delayed him. Another said, no
not the rain, his director was taking a plane from Hollywood. Enoch
gritted his teeth. The first child said that if he wanted to shake the
star’s hand, he would have to get in line like the rest of them and wait
his turn. Enoch got in line. A child asked him how old he was. Another
observed that he had funny-looking teeth. He ignored all this as best he
could and began to straighten out the umbrella.

In a few minutes a black truck turned around the corner and came slowly
up the street in the heavy rain. Enoch pushed the umbrella under his arm
and began to squint through his dark glasses. As the truck approached, a
phonograph inside it began to play “Tarara Boom Di Aye,” but the music
was almost drowned out by the rain. There was a large illustration of a
blonde on the outside of the truck, advertising some picture other than
the gorilla’s.

The children held their line carefully as the truck stopped in front of
the movie house. The back door of it was constructed like a paddy wagon,
with a grate, but the ape was not at it. Two men in raincoats got out of
the cab part, cursing, and ran around to the back and opened the door.
One of them stuck his head in and said, “Okay, make it snappy, willya?”
The other jerked his thumb at the children and said, “Get back willya,
willya get back?”

A voice on the record inside the truck said, “Here’s Gonga, folks,
Roaring Gonga and a Great Star! Give Gonga a big hand, folks!” The voice
was barely a mumble in the rain.

The man who was waiting by the door of the truck stuck his head in
again. “Okay willya get out?” he said.

There was a faint thump somewhere inside the van. After a second a dark
furry arm emerged just enough for the rain to touch it and then drew
back inside.

“Goddam,” the man who was under the marquee said; he took off his
raincoat and threw it to the man by the door, who threw it into the
wagon. After two or three minutes more, the gorilla appeared at the
door, with the raincoat buttoned up to his chin and the collar turned
up. There was an iron chain hanging from around his neck; the man
grabbed it and pulled him down and the two of them bounded under the
marquee together. A motherly-looking woman was in the glass ticket box,
getting the passes ready for the first ten children brave enough to step
up and shake hands.

The gorilla ignored the children entirely and followed the man over to
the other side of the entrance where there was a small platform raised
about a foot off the ground. He stepped up on it and turned facing the
children and began to growl. His growls were not so much loud as
poisonous; they appeared to issue from a black heart. Enoch was
terrified and if he had not been surrounded by the children, he would
have run away.

“Who’ll step up first?” the man said. “Come on come on, who’ll step up
first? A free pass to the first kid stepping up.”

There was no movement from the group of children. The man glared at
them. “What’s the matter with you kids?” he barked. “You yellow? He
won’t hurt you as long as I got him by this chain.” He tightened his
grip on the chain and jangled it at them to show he was holding it
securely.

After a minute a little girl separated herself from the group. She had
long wood-shaving curls and a fierce triangular face. She moved up to
within four feet of the star.

“Okay okay,” the man said, rattling the chain, “make it snappy.”

The ape reached out and gave her hand a quick shake. By this time there
was another little girl ready and then two boys. The line re-formed and
began to move up.

The gorilla kept his hand extended and turned his head away with a bored
look at the rain. Enoch had got over his fear and was trying frantically
to think of an obscene remark that would be suitable to insult him with.
Usually he didn’t have any trouble with this kind of composition but
nothing came to him now. His brain, both parts, was completely empty. He
couldn’t think even of the insulting phrases he used every day.

There were only two children in front of him by now. The first one shook
hands and stepped aside. Enoch’s heart was beating violently. The child
in front of him finished and stepped aside and left him facing the ape,
who took his hand with an automatic motion.

It was the first hand that had been extended to Enoch since he had come
to the city. It was warm and soft.

For a second he only stood there, clasping it. Then he began to stammer.
“My name is Enoch Emery,” he mumbled. “I attended the Rodemill Boys’
Bible Academy. I work at the city zoo. I seen two of your pictures. I’m
only eighteen year old but I already work for the city. My daddy made me
com . . .” and his voice cracked.

The star leaned slightly forward and a change came in his eyes: an ugly
pair of human ones moved closer and squinted at Enoch from behind the
celluloid pair. “You go to hell,” a surly voice inside the ape-suit
said, low but distinctly, and the hand was jerked away.

Enoch’s humiliation was so sharp and painful that he turned around three
times before he realized which direction he wanted to go in. Then he ran
off into the rain as fast as he could.

By the time he reached Sabbath Hawks’ house, he was soaked through and
so was his bundle. He held it in a fierce grip but all he wanted was to
get rid of it and never see it again. Haze’s landlady was out on the
porch, looking distrustfully into the storm. He found out from her where
Haze’s room was and went up to it. The door was ajar and he stuck his
head in the crack. Haze was lying on his cot, with a washrag over his
eyes; the exposed part of his face was ashen and set in a grimace, as if
he were in some permanent pain. Sabbath Hawks was sitting at the table
by the window, studying herself in a pocket mirror. Enoch scratched on
the wall and she looked up. She put the mirror down and tiptoed out into
the hall and shut the door behind her.

“My man is sick today and sleeping,” she said, “because he didn’t sleep
none last night. What you want?”

“This is for him, it ain’t for you,” Enoch said, handing her the wet
bundle. “A friend of his give it to me to give to him. I don’t know
what’s in it.”

“I’ll take care of it,” she said. “You needn’t to worry none.”

Enoch had an urgent need to insult somebody immediately; it was the only
thing that could give his feelings even a temporary relief. “I never
known he would have nothing to do with you,” he remarked, giving her one
of his special looks.

“He couldn’t leave off following me,” she said. “Sometimes it’s thataway
with them. You don’t know what’s in this package?”

“Lay-overs to catch meddlers,” he said. “You just give it to him and
he’ll know what it is and you can tell him I’m glad to get shut of it.”
He started down the stairs and halfway he turned and gave her another
special look. “I see why he has to put theter washrag over his eyes,” he
said.

“You keep your beeswax in your ears,” she said. “Nobody asked you.” When
she heard the front door slam behind him, she turned the bundle over and
began to examine it. There was no telling from the outside what was in
it; it was too hard to be clothes and too soft to be a machine. She tore
a hole in the paper at one end and saw what looked like five dried peas
in a row but the hall was too dark for her to see clearly what they
were. She decided to take the package to the bathroom, where there was a
good light, and open it up before she gave it to Haze. If he was so sick
as he said he was, he wouldn’t want to be bothered with any bundle.

Early that morning he had claimed to have a terrible pain in his chest.
He had begun to cough during the night—a hard hollow cough that sounded
as if he were making it up as he went along. She was certain he was only
trying to drive her off by letting her think he had a catching disease.

He’s not really sick, she said to herself going down the hall, he just
ain’t used to me yet. She went in and sat down on the edge of a large
green claw-footed tub and ripped the string off the package. “But he’ll
get used to me,” she muttered. She pulled off the wet paper and let it
fall on the floor; then she sat with a stunned look, staring at what was
in her lap.

Two days out of the glass case had not improved the new jesus’
condition. One side of his face had been partly mashed in and on the
other side, his eyelid had split and a pale dust was seeping out of it.
For a while her face had an empty look, as if she didn’t know what she
thought about him or didn’t think anything. She might have sat there for
ten minutes, without a thought, held by whatever it was that was
familiar about him. She had never known anyone who looked like him
before, but there was something in him of everyone she had ever known,
as if they had all been rolled into one person and killed and shrunk and
dried.

She held him up and began to examine him and after a minute her hands
grew accustomed to the feel of his skin. Some of his hair had come
undone and she brushed it back where it belonged, holding him in the
crook of her arm and looking down into his squinched face. His mouth had
been knocked a little to one side so that there was just a trace of a
grin covering his terrified look. She began to rock him a little in her
arm and a slight reflection of the same grin appeared on her own face.
“Well I declare,” she murmured, “you’re right cute, ain’t you?”

His head fitted exactly into the hollow of her shoulder. “Who’s your
momma and daddy?” she asked.

An answer came into her mind at once and she let out a short little bark
and sat grinning, with a pleased expression in her eyes. “Well, let’s go
give him a jolt,” she said after a while.

Haze had already been jolted awake when the front door slammed behind
Enoch Emery. He had sat up and seeing she was not in the room, he had
jumped up and begun to put on his clothes. He had one thought in mind
and it had come to him, like his decision to buy a car, out of his sleep
and without any indication of it beforehand: he was going to move
immediately to some other city and preach the Church Without Christ
where they had never heard of it. He would get another room there and
another woman and make a new start with nothing on his mind. The entire
possibility of this came from the advantage of having a car—of having
something that moved fast, in privacy, to the place you wanted to be. He
looked out the window at the Essex. It sat high and square in the
pouring rain. He didn’t notice the rain, only the car; if asked he would
not have been able to say that it was raining. He was charged with
energy and he left the window and finished putting on his clothes.
Earlier that morning, when he had waked up for the first time, he had
felt as if he were about to be caught by a complete consumption in his
chest; it had seemed to be growing hollow all night and yawning
underneath him, and he had kept hearing his coughs as if they came from
a distance. After a while he had been sucked down into a strengthless
sleep, but he had waked up with this plan, and with the energy to carry
it out right away.

He snatched his duffel bag from under the table and began plunging his
extra belongings into it. He didn’t have much and a quarter of what he
had was already in. His hand managed the packing so that it never
touched the Bible that had sat like a rock in the bottom of the bag for
the last few years, but as he rooted out a place for his second shoes,
his fingers clutched around a small oblong object and he pulled it out.
It was the case with his mother’s glasses in it. He had forgotten that
he had a pair of glasses. He put them on and the wall that he was facing
moved up closer and wavered. There was a small white-framed mirror hung
on the back of the door and he made his way to it and looked at himself.
His blurred face was dark with excitement and the lines in it were deep
and crooked. The little silver-rimmed glasses gave him a look of
deflected sharpness, as if they were hiding some dishonest plan that
would show in his naked eyes. His fingers began to snap nervously and he
forgot what he had been going to do. He saw his mother’s face in his,
looking at the face in the mirror. He moved back quickly and raised his
hand to take off the glasses but the door opened and two more faces
floated into his line of vision; one of them said, “Call me Momma now.”

The smaller dark one, just under the other, only squinted as if it were
trying to identify an old friend who was going to kill it.

Haze stood motionless with one hand still on the bow of the glasses and
the other arrested in the air at the level of his chest; his head was
thrust forward as if he had to use his whole face to see with. He was
about four feet from them but they seemed just under his eyes.

“Ask your daddy yonder where he was running off to—sick as he is?”
Sabbath said. “Ask him isn’t he going to take you and me with him?”

The hand that had been arrested in the air moved forward and plucked at
the squinting face but without touching it; it reached again, slowly,
and plucked at nothing and then it lunged and snatched the shriveled
body and threw it against the wall. The head popped and the trash inside
sprayed out in a little cloud of dust.

“You’ve broken him!” Sabbath shouted, “and he was mine!”

Haze snatched the skin off the floor. He opened the outside door where
the landlady thought there had once been a fire-escape, and flung out
what he had in his hand. The rain blew in his face and he jumped back
and stood, with a cautious look, as if he were bracing himself for a
blow.

“You didn’t have to throw him out,” she yelled. “I might have fixed
him!”

He moved up closer and hung out the door, staring into the gray blur
around him. The rain fell on his hat with loud splatters as if it were
falling on tin.

“I knew when I first seen you you were mean and evil,” a furious voice
behind him said. “I seen you wouldn’t let nobody have nothing. I seen
you were mean enough to slam a baby against a wall. I seen you wouldn’t
never have no fun or let anybody else because you didn’t want nothing
but Jesus!”

He turned and raised his arm in a vicious gesture, almost losing his
balance in the door. Drops of rain water were splattered over the front
of the glasses and on his red face and here and there they hung
sparkling from the brim of his hat. “I don’t want nothing but the
truth!” he shouted, “and what you see is the truth and I’ve seen it!”

“Preacher talk,” she said. “Where were you going to run off to?”

“I’ve seen the only truth there is!” he shouted.

“Where were you going to run off to?”

“To some other city,” he said in a loud hoarse voice, “to preach the
truth. The Church Without Christ! And I got a car to get there in, I got
. . .” but he was stopped by a cough. It was not much of a cough—it
sounded like a little yell for help at the bottom of a canyon—but the
color and the expression drained out of his face until it was as
straight and blank as the rain falling down behind him.

“And when were you going?” she asked.

“After I get some more sleep,” he said, and pulled off the glasses and
threw them out the door.

“You ain’t going to get none,” she said.




                               CHAPTER 12


In spite of himself, Enoch couldn’t get over the expectation that the
new jesus was going to do something for him in return for his services.
This was the virtue of Hope, which was made up, in Enoch, of two parts
suspicion and one part lust. It operated on him all the rest of the day
after he left Sabbath Hawks. He had only a vague idea how he wanted to
be rewarded, but he was not a boy without ambition: he wanted to become
something. He wanted to better his condition until it was the best. He
wanted to be THE young man of the future, like the ones in the insurance
ads. He wanted, some day, to see a line of people waiting to shake his
hand.

All afternoon, he fidgeted and fooled in his room, biting his nails and
shredding what was left of the silk off the landlady’s umbrella. Finally
he denuded it entirely and broke off the spokes. What was left was a
black stick with a sharp steel point at one end and a dog’s head at the
other. It might have been an instrument for some specialized kind of
torture that had gone out of fashion. Enoch walked up and down his room
with it under his arm and realized that it would distinguish him on the
sidewalk.

About seven o’clock in the evening, he put on his coat and took the
stick and headed for a little restaurant two blocks away. He had the
sense that he was setting off to get some honor, but he was very
nervous, as if he were afraid he might have to snatch it instead of
receive it.

He never set out for anything without eating first. The restaurant was
called the Paris Diner; it was a tunnel about six feet wide, located
between a shoe shine parlor and a dry-cleaning establishment. Enoch slid
in and climbed up on the far stool at the counter and said he would have
a bowl of split-pea soup and a chocolate malted milkshake.

The waitress was a tall woman with a big yellow dental plate and the
same color hair done up in a black hairnet. One hand never left her hip;
she filled orders with the other one. Although Enoch came in every
night, she had never learned to like him.

Instead of filling his order, she began to fry bacon; there was only one
other customer in the place and he had finished his meal and was reading
a newspaper; there was no one to eat the bacon but her. Enoch reached
over the counter and prodded her hip with his stick. “Listenhere,” he
said, “I got to go. I’m in a hurry.”

“Go then,” she said. Her jaw began to work and she stared into the
skillet with a fixed attention.

“Lemme just have a piece of theter cake yonder,” he said, pointing to a
half of pink and yellow cake on a round glass stand. “I think I got
something to do. I got to be going. Set it up there next to him,” he
said, indicating the customer reading the newspaper. He slid over the
stools and began reading the outside sheet of the man’s paper.

The man lowered the paper and looked at him. Enoch smiled. The man
raised the paper again. “Could I borrow some part of your paper that you
ain’t studying?” Enoch asked. The man lowered it again and stared at
him; he had muddy unflinching eyes. He leafed deliberately through the
paper and shook out the sheet with the comic strips and handed it to
Enoch. It was Enoch’s favorite part. He read it every evening like an
office. While he ate the cake that the waitress had torpedoed down the
counter at him, he read and felt himself surge with kindness and courage
and strength.

When he finished one side, he turned the sheet over and began to scan
the advertisements for movies, that filled the other side. His eye went
over three columns without stopping; then it came to a box that
advertised Gonga, Giant Jungle Monarch, and listed the theaters he would
visit on his tour and the hours he would be at each one. In thirty
minutes he would arrive at the Victory on 57th Street and that would be
his last appearance in the city.

If anyone had watched Enoch read this, he would have seen a certain
transformation in his countenance. It still shone with the inspiration
he had absorbed from the comic strips, but something else had come over
it: a look of awakening.

The waitress happened to turn around to see if he hadn’t gone. “What’s
the matter with you?” she said. “Did you swallow a seed?”

“I know what I want,” Enoch murmured.

“I know what I want too,” she said with a dark look.

Enoch felt for his stick and laid his change on the counter. “I got to
be going.”

“Don’t let me keep you,” she said.

“You may not see me again,” he said, “—the way I am.”

“Any way I don’t see you will be all right with me,” she said.

Enoch left. It was a pleasant damp evening. The puddles on the sidewalk
shone and the store windows were steamy and bright with junk. He
disappeared down a side street and made his way rapidly along the darker
passages of the city, pausing only once or twice at the end of an alley
to dart a glance in each direction before he ran on. The Victory was a
small theater, suited to the needs of the family, in one of the closer
subdivisions; he passed through a succession of lighted areas and then
on through more alleys and back streets until he came to the business
section that surrounded it. Then he slowed up. He saw it about a block
away, glittering in its darker setting. He didn’t cross the street to
the side it was on but kept on the far side, moving forward with his
squint fixed on the glary spot. He stopped when he was directly across
from it and hid himself in a narrow stair cavity that divided a
building.

The truck that carried Gonga was parked across the street and the star
was standing under the marquee, shaking hands with an elderly woman. She
moved aside and a gentleman in a polo shirt stepped up and shook hands
vigorously, like a sportsman. He was followed by a boy of about three
who wore a tall Western hat that nearly covered his face; he had to be
pushed ahead by the line. Enoch watched for some time, his face working
with envy. The small boy was followed by a lady in shorts, she by an old
man who tried to draw extra attention to himself by dancing up instead
of walking in a dignified way. Enoch suddenly darted across the street
and slipped noiselessly into the open back door of the truck.

The handshaking went on until the feature picture was ready to begin.
Then the star got back in the van and the people filed into the theater.
The driver and the man who was master of ceremonies climbed in the cab
part and the truck rumbled off. It crossed the city rapidly and
continued on the highway, going very fast.

There came from the van certain thumping noises, not those of the normal
gorilla, but they were drowned out by the drone of the motor and the
steady sound of wheels against the road. The night was pale and quiet,
with nothing to stir it but an occasional complaint from a hoot owl and
the distant muted jarring of a freight train. The truck sped on until it
slowed for a crossing, and as the van rattled over the tracks, a figure
slipped from the door and almost fell, and then limped hurriedly off
toward the woods.

Once in the darkness of a pine thicket, he laid down a pointed stick he
had been clutching and something bulky and loose that he had been
carrying under his arm, and began to undress. He folded each garment
neatly after he had taken it off and then stacked it on top of the last
thing he had removed. When all his clothes were in the pile, he took up
the stick and began making a hole in the ground with it.

The darkness of the pine grove was broken by paler moonlit spots that
moved over him now and again and showed him to be Enoch. His natural
appearance was marred by a gash that ran from the corner of his lip to
his collarbone and by a lump under his eye that gave him a dulled
insensitive look. Nothing could have been more deceptive for he was
burning with the intensest kind of happiness.

He dug rapidly until he had made a trench about a foot long and a foot
deep. Then he placed the stack of clothes in it and stood aside to rest
a second. Burying his clothes was not a symbol to him of burying his
former self; he only knew he wouldn’t need them any more. As soon as he
got his breath, he pushed the displaced dirt over the hole and stamped
it down with his foot. He discovered while he did this that he still had
his shoes on, and when he finished, he removed them and threw them from
him. Then he picked up the loose bulky object and shook it vigorously.

In the uncertain light, one of his lean white legs could be seen to
disappear and then the other, one arm and then the other: a black
heavier shaggier figure replaced his. For an instant, it had two heads,
one light and one dark, but after a second, it pulled the dark back head
over the other and corrected this. It busied itself with certain hidden
fastenings and what appeared to be minor adjustments of its hide.

For a time after this, it stood very still and didn’t do anything. Then
it began to growl and beat its chest; it jumped up and down and flung
its arms and thrust its head forward. The growls were thin and uncertain
at first but they grew louder after a second. They became low and
poisonous, louder again, low and poisonous again; they stopped
altogether. The figure extended its hand, clutched nothing, and shook
its arm vigorously; it withdrew the arm, extended it again, clutched
nothing, and shook. It repeated this four or five times. Then it picked
up the pointed stick and placed it at a cocky angle under its arm and
left the woods for the highway. No gorilla in existence, whether in the
jungles of Africa or California, or in New York City in the finest
apartment in the world, was happier at that moment than this one, whose
god had finally rewarded it.

A man and woman sitting close together on a rock just off the highway
were looking across an open stretch of valley at a view of the city in
the distance and they didn’t see the shaggy figure approaching. The
smokestacks and square tops of buildings made a black uneven wall
against the lighter sky and here and there a steeple cut a sharp wedge
out of a cloud. The young man turned his neck just in time to see the
gorilla standing a few feet away, hideous and black, with its hand
extended. He eased his arm from around the woman and disappeared
silently into the woods. She, as soon as she turned her eyes, fled
screaming down the highway. The gorilla stood as though surprised and
presently its arm fell to its side. It sat down on the rock where they
had been sitting and stared over the valley at the uneven skyline of the
city.




                               CHAPTER 13


On his second night out, working with his hired Prophet and the Holy
Church of Christ Without Christ, Hoover Shoats made fifteen dollars and
thirty-five cents clear. The Prophet got three dollars an evening for
his services and the use of his car. His name was Solace Layfield; he
had consumption and a wife and six children and being a Prophet was as
much work as he wanted to do. It never occurred to him that it might be
a dangerous job. The second night out, he failed to observe a high
rat-colored car parked about a half-block away and a white face inside
it, watching him with the kind of intensity that means something is
going to happen no matter what is done to keep it from happening.

The face watched him for almost an hour while he performed on the nose
of his car every time Hoover Shoats raised his hand with two fingers
pointed. When the last showing of the movie was over and there were no
more people to attract, Hoover paid him and the two of them got in his
car and drove off. They drove about ten blocks to where Hoover lived;
the car stopped and Hoover jumped out, calling, “See you tomorrow night,
friend”; then he went inside a dark doorway and Solace Layfield drove
on. A half-block behind him the other rat-colored car was following
steadily. The driver was Hazel Motes.

Both cars increased their speed and in a few minutes they were heading
rapidly toward the outskirts of town. The first car cut off onto a
lonesome road where the trees were hung over with moss and the only
light came like stiff antennae from the two cars. Haze gradually
shortened the distance between them and then, grinding his motor
suddenly, he shot ahead and rammed the back end of the other car. Both
cars came to a stop.

Haze backed the Essex a little way down the road, while the other
Prophet got out of his car and stood squinting in the glare from Haze’s
lights. After a second, he came up to the window of the Essex and looked
in. There was no sound but from crickets and tree frogs. “What you
want?” he said in a nervous voice. Haze didn’t answer, he only looked at
him, and in a second the man’s jaw slackened and he seemed to perceive
the resemblance in their clothes and possibly in their faces. “What you
want?” he said in a higher voice. “I ain’t done nothing to you.”

Haze ground the motor of the Essex again and shot forward. This time he
rammed the other car at such an angle that it rolled to the side of the
road and over into the ditch.

The man got up off the ground where he had been thrown and ran back to
the window of the Essex. He stood about four feet away, looking in.

“What you keep a thing like that on the road for?” Haze said.

“It ain’t nothing wrong with that car,” the man said. “Howcome you
knockt it in the ditch?”

“Take off that hat,” Haze said.

“Listenere,” the man said, beginning to cough, “what you want? Quit just
looking at me. Say what you want.”

“You ain’t true,” Haze said. “What do you get up on top of a car and say
you don’t believe in what you do believe in for?”

“Whatsit to you?” the man wheezed. “Whatsit to you what I do?”

“What do you do it for?” Haze said. “That’s what I asked you.”

“A man has to look out for hisself,” the other Prophet said.

“You ain’t true,” Haze said. “You believe in Jesus.”

“Whatsit to you?” the man said. “What you knockt my car off the road
for?”

“Take off that hat and that suit,” Haze said.

“Listenere,” the man said, “I ain’t trying to mock you. He bought me
thisyer suit. I thrown my othern away.”

Haze reached out and brushed the man’s white hat off. “And take off that
suit,” he said.

The man began to sidle off, out into the middle of the road.

“Take off that suit,” Haze shouted and started the car forward after
him. Solace began to lope down the road, taking off his coat as he went.
“Take it all off,” Haze yelled, with his face close to the windshield.

The Prophet began to run in earnest. He tore off his shirt and unbuckled
his belt and ran out of his trousers. He began grabbing for his feet as
if he would take off his shoes too, but before he could get at them, the
Essex knocked him flat and ran over him. Haze drove about twenty feet
and stopped the car and then began to back it. He backed it over the
body and then stopped and got out. The Essex stood half over the other
Prophet as if it were pleased to guard what it had finally brought down.
The man didn’t look so much like Haze, lying on the ground on his face
without his hat or suit on. A lot of blood was coming out of him and
forming a puddle around his head. He was motionless all but for one
finger that moved up and down in front of his face as if he were marking
time with it. Haze poked his toe in his side and he wheezed for a second
and then was quiet. “Two things I can’t stand,” Haze said, “—a man that
ain’t true and one that mocks what is. You shouldn’t ever have tampered
with me if you didn’t want what you got.”

The man was trying to say something but he was only wheezing. Haze
squatted down by his face to listen. “Give my mother a lot of trouble,”
he said through a kind of bubbling in his throat. “Never giver no rest.
Stole theter car. Never told the truth to my daddy or give Henry what,
never give him . . .”

“You shut up,” Haze said, leaning his head closer to hear the
confession.

“Told where his still was and got five dollars for it,” the man gasped.

“You shut up now,” Haze said.

“Jesus . . .” the man said.

“Shut up like I told you to now,” Haze said.

“Jesus hep me,” the man wheezed.

Haze gave him a hard slap on the back and he was quiet. He leaned down
to hear if he was going to say anything else but he wasn’t breathing any
more. Haze turned around and examined the front of the Essex to see if
there had been any damage done to it. The bumper had a few splurts of
blood on it but that was all. Before he turned around and drove back to
town, he wiped them off with a rag.

Early the next morning he got out of the back of the car and drove to a
filling station to get the Essex filled up and checked for his trip. He
hadn’t gone back to his room but had spent the night parked in an alley,
not sleeping but thinking about the life he was going to begin,
preaching the Church Without Christ in the new city.

At the filling station a sleepy-looking white boy came out to wait on
him and he said he wanted the tank filled up, the oil and water checked,
and the tires tested for air, that he was going on a long trip. The boy
asked him where he was going and he told him to another city. The boy
asked him if he was going that far in this car here and he said yes he
was. He tapped the boy on the front of his shirt. He said nobody with a
good car needed to worry about anything, and he asked the boy if he
understood that. The boy said yes he did, that that was his opinion too.
Haze introduced himself and said that he was a preacher for the Church
Without Christ and that he preached every night on the nose of this very
car here. He explained that he was going to another city to preach. The
boy filled up the gas tank and checked the water and oil and tested the
tires, and while he was working, Haze followed him around, telling him
what it was right to believe. He said it was not right to believe
anything you couldn’t see or hold in your hands or test with your teeth.
He said he had only a few days ago believed in blasphemy as the way to
salvation, but that you couldn’t even believe in that because then you
were believing in something to blaspheme. As for the Jesus who was
reported to have been born at Bethlehem and crucified on Calvary for
man’s sins, Haze said, He was too foul a notion for a sane person to
carry in his head, and he picked up the boy’s water bucket and bammed it
on the concrete pavement to emphasize what he was saying. He began to
curse and blaspheme Jesus in a quiet intense way but with such
conviction that the boy paused from his work to listen. When he had
finished checking the Essex, he said that there was a leak in the gas
tank and two in the radiator and that the rear tire would probably last
twenty miles if he went slow.

“Listen,” Haze said, “this car is just beginning its life. A lightening
bolt couldn’t stop it!”

“It ain’t any use to put water in it,” the boy said, “because it won’t
hold it.”

“You put it in just the same,” Haze said, and he stood there and watched
while the boy put it in. Then he got a road map from him and drove off,
leaving little bead-chains of water and oil and gas on the road.

He drove very fast out onto the highway, but once he had gone a few
miles, he had the sense that he was not gaining ground. Shacks and
filling stations and road camps and 666 signs passed him, and deserted
barns with CCC snuff ads peeling across them, even a sign that said,
“Jesus Died for YOU,” which he saw and deliberately did not read. He had
the sense that the road was really slipping back under him. He had known
all along that there was no more country but he didn’t know that there
was not another city.

He had not gone five miles on the highway before he heard a siren behind
him. He looked around and saw a black patrol car coming up. It drove
alongside him and the patrolman in it motioned for him to pull over to
the edge of the road. The patrolman had a red pleasant face and eyes the
color of clear fresh ice.

“I wasn’t speeding,” Haze said.

“No,” the patrolman agreed, “you wasn’t.”

“I was on the right side of the road.”

“Yes you was, that’s right,” the cop said.

“What you want with me?”

“I just don’t like your face,” the patrolman said. “Where’s your
license?”

“I don’t like your face either,” Haze said, “and I don’t have a
license.”

“Well,” the patrolman said in a kindly voice, “I don’t reckon _you_ need
one.”

“Well I ain’t got one if I do,” Haze said.

“Listen,” the patrolman said, taking another tone, “would you mind
driving your car up to the top of the next hill? I want you to see the
view from up there, puttiest view you ever did see.”

Haze shrugged but he started the car up. He didn’t mind fighting the
patrolman if that was what he wanted. He drove to the top of the hill,
with the patrol car following close behind him. “Now you turn it facing
the embankment,” the patrolman called. “You’ll be able to see better
thataway.” Haze turned it facing the embankment. “Now maybe you better
had get out,” the cop said. “I think you could see better if you was
out.”

Haze got out and glanced at the view. The embankment dropped down for
about thirty feet, sheer washed-out red clay, into a partly burnt
pasture where there was one scrub cow lying near a puddle. Over in the
middle distance there was a one-room shack with a buzzard standing
hunch-shouldered on the roof.

The patrolman got behind the Essex and pushed it over the embankment and
the cow stumbled up and galloped across the field and into the woods;
the buzzard flapped off to a tree at the edge of the clearing. The car
landed on its top, with the three wheels that stayed on, spinning. The
motor bounced out and rolled some distance away and various odd pieces
scattered this way and that.

“Them that don’t have a car, don’t need a license,” the patrolman said,
dusting his hands on his pants.

Haze stood for a few minutes, looking over at the scene. His face seemed
to reflect the entire distance across the clearing and on beyond, the
entire distance that extended from his eyes to the blank gray sky that
went on, depth after depth, into space. His knees bent under him and he
sat down on the edge of the embankment with his feet hanging over.

The patrolman stood staring at him. “Could I give you a lift to where
you was going?” he asked.

After a minute he came a little closer and said, “Where was you going?”

He leaned on down with his hands on his knees and said in an anxious
voice, “Was you going anywheres?”

“No,” Haze said.

The patrolman squatted down and put his hand on Haze’s shoulder. “You
hadn’t planned to go anywheres?” he asked anxiously.

Haze shook his head. His face didn’t change and he didn’t turn it toward
the patrolman. It seemed to be concentrated on space.

The patrolman got up and went back to his car and stood at the door of
it, staring at the back of Haze’s hat and shoulder. Then he said, “Well,
I’ll be seeing you,” and got in and drove off.

After a while Haze got up and started walking back to town. It took him
three hours to get inside the city again. He stopped at a supply store
and bought a tin bucket and a sack of quicklime and then he went on to
where he lived, carrying these. When he reached the house, he stopped
outside on the sidewalk and opened the sack of lime and poured the
bucket half full of it. Then he went to a water spigot by the front
steps and filled up the rest of the bucket with water and started up the
steps. His landlady was sitting on the porch, rocking a cat. “What you
going to do with that, Mr. Motes?” she asked.

“Blind myself,” he said and went on in the house.

The landlady sat there for a while longer. She was not a woman who felt
more violence in one word than in another; she took every word at its
face value but all the faces were the same. Still, instead of blinding
herself, if she had felt that bad, she would have killed herself and she
wondered why anybody wouldn’t do that. She would simply have put her
head in an oven or maybe have given herself too many painless sleeping
pills and that would have been that. Perhaps Mr. Motes was only being
ugly, for what possible reason could a person have for wanting to
destroy their sight? A woman like her, who was so clear-sighted, could
never stand to be blind. If she had to be blind she would rather be
dead. It occurred to her suddenly that when she was dead she would be
blind too. She stared in front of her intensely, facing this for the
first time. She recalled the phrase, “eternal death,” that preachers
used, but she cleared it out of her mind immediately, with no more
change of expression than the cat. She was not religious or morbid, for
which every day she thanked her stars. She would credit a person who had
that streak with anything, though, and Mr. Motes had it or he wouldn’t
be a preacher. He might put lime in his eyes and she wouldn’t doubt it a
bit, because they were all, if the truth was only known, a little bit
off in their heads. What possible reason could a sane person have for
wanting to not enjoy himself any more?

She certainly couldn’t say.




                               CHAPTER 14


But she kept it in mind because after he had done it, he continued to
live in her house and every day the sight of him presented her with the
question. She first told him he couldn’t stay because he wouldn’t wear
dark glasses and she didn’t like to look at the mess he had made in his
eye sockets. At least she didn’t think she did. If she didn’t keep her
mind going on something else when he was near her, she would find
herself leaning forward, staring into his face as if she expected to see
something she hadn’t seen before. This irritated her with him and gave
her the sense that he was cheating her in some secret way. He sat on her
porch a good part of every afternoon, but sitting out there with him was
like sitting by yourself; he didn’t talk except when it suited him. You
asked him a question in the morning and he might answer it in the
afternoon, or he might never. He offered to pay her extra to let him
keep his room because he knew his way in and out, and she decided to let
him stay, at least until she found out how she was being cheated.

He got money from the government every month for something the war had
done to his insides and so he was not obliged to work. The landlady had
always been impressed with the ability to pay. When she found a stream
of wealth, she followed it to its source and before long, it was not
distinguishable from her own. She felt that the money she paid out in
taxes returned to all the worthless pockets in the world, that the
government not only sent it to foreign niggers and A-rabs, but wasted it
at home on blind fools and on every idiot who could sign his name on a
card. She felt justified in getting any of it back that she could. She
felt justified in getting anything at all back that she could, money or
anything else, as if she had once owned the earth and been dispossessed
of it. She couldn’t look at anything steadily without wanting it, and
what provoked her most was the thought that there might be something
valuable hidden near her, something she couldn’t see.

To her, the blind man had the look of seeing something. His face had a
peculiar pushing look, as if it were going forward after something it
could just distinguish in the distance. Even when he was sitting
motionless in a chair, his face had the look of straining toward
something. But she knew he was totally blind. She had satisfied herself
of that as soon as he took off the rag he used for a while as a bandage.
She had got one long good look and it had been enough to tell her he had
done what he’d said he was going to do. The other boarders, after he had
taken off the rag, would pass him slowly in the hall, tiptoeing, and
looking as long as they could, but now they didn’t pay any attention to
him; some of the new ones didn’t know he had done it himself. The Hawks
girl had spread it over the house as soon as it happened. She had
watched him do it and then she had run to every room, yelling what he
had done, and all the boarders had come running. That girl was a harpy
if one ever lived, the landlady felt. She had hung around pestering him
for a few days and then she had gone on off; she said she hadn’t counted
on no honest-to-Jesus blind man and she was homesick for her papa; he
had deserted her, gone off on a banana boat. The landlady hoped he was
at the bottom of the salt sea; he had been a month behind in his rent.
In two weeks, of course, she was back, ready to start pestering him
again. She had the disposition of a yellow jacket and you could hear her
a block away, shouting and screaming at him, and him never opening his
mouth.

The landlady conducted an orderly house and she told him so. She told
him that when the girl lived with him, he would have to pay double; she
said there were things she didn’t mind and things she did. She left him
to draw his own conclusions about what she meant by that, but she
waited, with her arms folded, until he had drawn them. He didn’t say
anything, he only counted out three more dollars and handed them to her.
“That girl, Mr. Motes,” she said, “is only after your money.”

“If that was what she wanted she could have it,” he said. “I’d pay her
to stay away.”

The thought that her tax money would go to support such trash was more
than the landlady could bear. “Don’t do that,” she said quickly. “She’s
got no right to it.” The next day she called the Welfare people and made
arrangements to have the girl sent to a detention home; she was
eligible.

She was curious to know how much he got every month from the government
and with that set of eyes removed, she felt at liberty to find out. She
steamed open the government envelope as soon as she found it in the
mailbox the next time; in a few days she felt obliged to raise his rent.
He had made arrangements with her to give him his meals and as the price
of food went up, she was obliged to raise his board also; but she didn’t
get rid of the feeling that she was being cheated. Why had he destroyed
his eyes and saved himself unless he had some plan, unless he saw
something that he couldn’t get without being blind to everything else?
She meant to find out everything she could about him.

“Where were your people from, Mr. Motes?” she asked him one afternoon
when they were sitting on the porch. “I don’t suppose they’re alive?”

She supposed she might suppose what she pleased; he didn’t disturb his
doing nothing to answer her. “None of my people’s alive either,” she
said. “All Mr. Flood’s people’s alive but him.” She was a Mrs. Flood.
“They all come here when they want a hand-out,” she said, “but Mr. Flood
had money. He died in the crack-up of an airplane.”

After a while he said, “My people are all dead.”

“Mr. Flood,” she said, “died in the crack-up of an airplane.”

She began to enjoy sitting on the porch with him, but she could never
tell if he knew she was there or not. Even when he answered her, she
couldn’t tell if he knew it was she. She herself. Mrs. Flood, the
landlady. Not just anybody. They would sit, he only sit, and she sit
rocking, for half an afternoon and not two words seemed to pass between
them, though she might talk at length. If she didn’t talk and keep her
mind going, she would find herself sitting forward in her chair, looking
at him with her mouth not closed. Anyone who saw her from the sidewalk
would think she was being courted by a corpse.

She observed his habits carefully. He didn’t eat much or seem to mind
anything she gave him. If she had been blind, she would have sat by the
radio all day, eating cake and ice cream, and soaking her feet. He ate
anything and never knew the difference. He kept getting thinner and his
cough deepened and he developed a limp. During the first cold months, he
took the virus, but he walked out every day in spite of that. He walked
about half of each day. He got up early in the morning and walked in his
room—she could hear him below in hers, up and down, up and down—and
then he went out and walked before breakfast and after breakfast, he
went out again and walked until midday. He knew the four or five blocks
around the house and he didn’t go any farther than those. He could have
kept on one for all she saw. He could have stayed in his room, in one
spot, moving his feet up and down. He could have been dead and get all
he got out of life but the exercise. He might as well be one of them
monks, she thought, he might as well be in a monkery. She didn’t
understand it. She didn’t like the thought that something was being put
over her head. She liked the clear light of day. She liked to see
things.

She could not make up her mind what would be inside his head and what
out. She thought of her own head as a switchbox where she controlled
from; but with him, she could only imagine the outside in, the whole
black world in his head and his head bigger than the world, his head big
enough to include the sky and planets and whatever was or had been or
would be. How would he know if time was going backwards or forwards or
if he was going with it? She imagined it was like you were walking in a
tunnel and all you could see was a pin point of light. She had to
imagine the pin point of light; she couldn’t think of it at all without
that. She saw it as some kind of a star, like the star on Christmas
cards. She saw him going backwards to Bethlehem and she had to laugh.

She thought it would be a good thing if he had something to do with his
hands, something to bring him out of himself and get him in connection
with the real world again. She was certain he was out of connection with
it; she was not certain at times that he even knew she existed. She
suggested he get himself a guitar and learn to strum it; she had a
picture of them sitting on the porch in the evening and him strumming
it. She had bought two rubber plants to make where they sat more private
from the street, and she thought that the sound of him strumming it from
behind the rubber plant would take away the dead look he had. She
suggested it but he never answered the suggestion.

After he paid his room and board every month, he had a good third of the
government check left but that she could see, he never spent any money.
He didn’t use tobacco or drink whisky; there was nothing for him to do
with all that money but lose it, since there was only himself. She
thought of benefits that might accrue to his widow should he leave one.
She had seen money drop out of his pocket and him not bother to reach
down and feel for it. One day when she was cleaning his room, she found
four dollar bills and some change in his trash can. He came in about
that time from one of his walks. “Mr. Motes,” she said, “here’s a dollar
bill and some change in this waste basket. You know where your waste
basket is. How did you make that mistake?”

“It was left over,” he said. “I didn’t need it.”

She dropped onto his straight chair. “Do you throw it away every month?”
she asked after a time.

“Only when it’s left over,” he said.

“The poor and needy,” she muttered. “The poor and needy. Don’t you ever
think about the poor and needy? If you don’t want that money somebody
else might.”

“You can have it,” he said.

“Mr. Motes,” she said coldly, “I’m not charity yet!” She realized now
that he was a mad man and that he ought to be under the control of a
sensible person.

The landlady was past her middle years and her plate was too large but
she had long race-horse legs and a nose that had been called Grecian by
one boarder. She wore her hair clustered like grapes on her brow and
over each ear and in the middle behind, but none of these advantages
were any use to her in attracting his attention. She saw that the only
way was to be interested in what he was interested in. “Mr. Motes,” she
said one afternoon when they were sitting on the porch, “why don’t you
preach any more? Being blind wouldn’t be a hinderance. People would like
to go see a blind preacher. It would be something different.” She was
used to going on without an answer. “You could get you one of those
seeing dogs,” she said, “and he and you could get up a good crowd.
People’ll always go to see a dog.

“For myself,” she continued, “I don’t have that streak. I believe that
what’s right today is wrong tomorrow and that the time to enjoy yourself
is now so long as you let others do the same. I’m as good, Mr. Motes,”
she said, “not believing in Jesus as a many a one that does.”

“You’re better,” he said, leaning forward suddenly. “If you believed in
Jesus, you wouldn’t be so good.”

He had never paid her a compliment before! “Why Mr. Motes,” she said, “I
expect you’re a fine preacher! You certainly ought to start it again. It
would give you something to do. As it is, you don’t have anything to do
but walk. Why don’t you start preaching again?”

“I can’t preach any more,” he muttered.

“Why?”

“I don’t have time,” he said, and got up and walked off the porch as if
she had reminded him of some urgent business. He walked as if his feet
hurt him but he had to go on.

Some time later she discovered why he limped. She was cleaning his room
and happened to knock over his extra pair of shoes. She picked them up
and looked into them as if she thought she might find something hidden
there. The bottoms of them were lined with gravel and broken glass and
pieces of small stone. She spilled this out and sifted it through her
fingers, looking for a glitter that might mean something valuable, but
she saw that what she had in her hand was trash that anybody could pick
up in the alley. She stood for some time, holding the shoes, and finally
she put them back under the cot. In a few days she examined them again
and they were lined with fresh rocks. Who’s he doing this for? she asked
herself. What’s he getting out of doing it? Every now and then she would
have an intimation of something hidden near her but out of her reach.
“Mr. Motes,” she said that day, when he was in her kitchen eating his
dinner, “what do you walk on rocks for?”

“To pay,” he said in a harsh voice.

“Pay for what?”

“It don’t make any difference for what,” he said. “I’m paying.”

“But what have you got to show that you’re paying for?” she persisted.

“Mind your business,” he said rudely. “You can’t see.”

The landlady continued to chew very slowly. “Do you think, Mr. Motes,”
she said hoarsely, “that when you’re dead, you’re blind?”

“I hope so,” he said after a minute.

“Why?” she asked, staring at him.

After a while he said, “If there’s no bottom in your eyes, they hold
more.”

The landlady stared for a long time, seeing nothing at all.

She began to fasten all her attention on him, to the neglect of other
things. She began to follow him in his walks, meeting him accidentally
and accompanying him. He didn’t seem to know she was there, except
occasionally when he would slap at his face as if her voice bothered
him, like the singing of a mosquito. He had a deep wheezing cough and
she began to badger him about his health. “There’s no one,” she would
say, “to look after you but me, Mr. Motes. No one that has your interest
at heart but me. Nobody would care if I didn’t.” She began to make him
tasty dishes and carry them to his room. He would eat what she brought,
immediately, with a wry face, and hand back the plate without thanking
her, as if all his attention were directed elsewhere and this was an
interruption he had to suffer. One morning he told her abruptly that he
was going to get his food somewhere else, and named the place, a diner
around the corner, run by a foreigner. “And you’ll rue the day!” she
said. “You’ll pick up an infection. No sane person eats there. A dark
and filthy place. Encrusted! It’s you that can’t see, Mr. Motes.

“Crazy fool,” she muttered when he had walked off. “Wait till winter
comes. Where will you eat when winter comes, when the first wind blows
the virus into you?”

She didn’t have to wait long. He caught influenza before winter and for
a while he was too weak to walk out and she had the satisfaction of
bringing his meals to his room. She came earlier than usual one morning
and found him asleep, breathing heavily. The old shirt he wore to sleep
in was open down the front and showed three strands of barbed wire,
wrapped around his chest. She retreated backwards to the door and then
she dropped the tray. “Mr. Motes,” she said in a thick voice, “what do
you do these things for? It’s not natural.”

He pulled himself up.

“What’s that wire around you for? It’s not natural,” she repeated.

After a second he began to button the shirt. “It’s natural,” he said.

“Well, it’s not normal. It’s like one of them gory stories, it’s
something that people have quit doing—like boiling in oil or being a
saint or walling up cats,” she said. “There’s no reason for it. People
have quit doing it.”

“They ain’t quit doing it as long as I’m doing it,” he said.

“People have quit doing it,” she repeated. “What do you do it for?”

“I’m not clean,” he said.

She stood staring at him, unmindful of the broken dishes at her feet. “I
know it,” she said after a minute, “you got blood on that night shirt
and on the bed. You ought to get you a washwoman . . .”

“That’s not the kind of clean,” he said.

“There’s only one kind of clean, Mr. Motes,” she muttered. She looked
down and observed the dishes he had made her break and the mess she
would have to get up and she left for the hall closet and returned in a
minute with the dust pan and broom. “It’s easier to bleed than sweat,
Mr. Motes,” she said in the voice of High Sarcasm. “You must believe in
Jesus or you wouldn’t do these foolish things. You must have been lying
to me when you named your fine church. I wouldn’t be surprised if you
weren’t some kind of a agent of the pope or got some connection with
something funny.”

“I ain’t treatin’ with you,” he said and lay back down, coughing.

“You got nobody to take care of you but me,” she reminded him.

Her first plan had been to marry him and then have him committed to the
state institution for the insane, but gradually her plan had become to
marry him and keep him. Watching his face had become a habit with her;
she wanted to penetrate the darkness behind it and see for herself what
was there. She had the sense that she had tarried long enough and that
she must get him now while he was weak, or not at all. He was so weak
from the influenza that he tottered when he walked; winter had already
begun and the wind slashed at the house from every angle, making a sound
like sharp knives swirling in the air.

“Nobody in their right mind would like to be out on a day like this,”
she said, putting her head suddenly into his room in the middle of the
morning on one of the coldest days of the year. “Do you hear that wind,
Mr. Motes? It’s fortunate for you that you have this warm place to be
and someone to take care of you.” She made her voice more than usually
soft. “Every blind and sick man is not so fortunate,” she said, “as to
have somebody that cares about him.” She came in and sat down on the
straight chair that was just at the door. She sat on the edge of it,
leaning forward with her legs apart and her hands braced on her knees.
“Let me tell you, Mr. Motes,” she said, “few men are as fortunate as you
but I can’t keep climbing these stairs. It wears me out. I’ve been
thinking what we could do about it.”

He had been lying motionless on the bed but he sat up suddenly as if he
were listening, almost as if he had been alarmed by the tone of her
voice. “I know you wouldn’t want to give up your room here,” she said,
and waited for the effect of this. He turned his face toward her; she
could tell she had his attention. “I know you like it here and wouldn’t
want to leave and you’re a sick man and need somebody to take care of
you as well as being blind,” she said and found herself breathless and
her heart beginning to flutter. He reached to the foot of the bed and
felt for his clothes that were rolled up there. He began to put them on
hurriedly over his night shirt. “I been thinking how we could arrange it
so you would have a home and somebody to take care of you and I wouldn’t
have to climb these stairs, what you dressing for today, Mr. Motes? You
don’t want to go out in this weather.

“I been thinking,” she went on, watching him as he went on with what he
was doing, “and I see there’s only one thing for you and me to do. Get
married. I wouldn’t do it under any ordinary condition but I would do it
for a blind man and a sick one. If we don’t help each other, Mr. Motes,
there’s nobody to help us,” she said. “Nobody. The world is a empty
place.”

The suit that had been glare-blue when it was bought was a softer shade
now. The panama hat was wheat-colored. He kept it on the floor by his
shoes when he was not wearing it. He reached for it and put it on and
then he began to put on his shoes that were still lined with rocks.

“Nobody ought to be without a place of their own to be,” she said, “and
I’m willing to give you a home here with me, a place where you can
always stay, Mr. Motes, and never worry yourself about.”

His cane was on the floor near where his shoes had been. He felt for it
and then stood up and began to walk slowly toward her. “I got a place
for you in my heart, Mr. Motes,” she said and felt it shaking like a
bird cage; she didn’t know whether he was coming toward her to embrace
her or not. He passed her, expressionless, out the door and into the
hall. “Mr. Motes!” she said, turning sharply in the chair, “I can’t
allow you to stay here under no other circumstances. I can’t climb these
stairs. I don’t want a thing,” she said, “but to help you. You don’t
have anybody to look after you but me. Nobody to care if you live or die
but me! No other place to be but mine!”

He was feeling for the first step with his cane.

“Or were you planning to find you another rooming house?” she asked in a
voice getting higher. “Maybe you were planning to go to some other
city!”

“That’s not where I’m going,” he said. “There’s no other house nor no
other city.”

“There’s nothing, Mr. Motes,” she said, “and time goes forward, it don’t
go backward and unless you take what’s offered you, you’ll find yourself
out in the cold pitch black and just how far do you think you’ll get?”

He felt for each step with his cane before he put his foot on it. When
he reached the bottom, she called down to him. “You needn’t to return to
a place you don’t value, Mr. Motes. The door won’t be open to you. You
can come back and get your belongings and then go on to wherever you
think you’re going.” She stood at the top of the stairs for a long time.
“He’ll be back,” she muttered. “Let the wind cut into him a little.”

                                   *

That night a driving icy rain came up and lying in her bed, awake at
midnight, Mrs. Flood, the landlady, began to weep. She wanted to run out
into the rain and cold and hunt him and find him huddled in some
half-sheltered place and bring him back and say, Mr. Motes, Mr. Motes,
you can stay here forever, or the two of us will go where you’re going,
the two of us will go. She had had a hard life, without pain and without
pleasure, and she thought that now that she was coming to the last part
of it, she deserved a friend. If she was going to be blind when she was
dead, who better to guide her than a blind man? Who better to lead the
blind than the blind, who knew what it was like?

As soon as it was daylight, she went out in the rain and searched the
five or six blocks he knew and went from door to door, asking for him,
but no one had seen him. She came back and called the police and
described him and asked for him to be picked up and brought back to her
to pay his rent. She waited all day for them to bring him in the squad
car, or for him to come back of his own accord, but he didn’t come. The
rain and wind continued and she thought he was probably drowned in some
alley by now. She paced up and down in her room, walking faster and
faster, thinking of his eyes without any bottom in them and of the
blindness of death.

Two days later, two young policemen cruising in a squad car found him
lying in a drainage ditch near an abandoned construction project. The
driver drew the squad car up to the edge of the ditch and looked into it
for some time. “Ain’t we been looking for a blind one?” he asked.

The other consulted a pad. “Blind and got on a blue suit and ain’t paid
his rent,” he said.

“Yonder he is,” the first one said, and pointed into the ditch. The
other moved up closer and looked out of the window too.

“His suit ain’t blue,” he said.

“Yes it is blue,” the first one said. “Quit pushing up so close to me.
Get out and I’ll show you it’s blue.” They got out and walked around the
car and squatted down on the edge of the ditch. They both had on tall
new boots and new policemen’s clothes; they both had yellow hair with
sideburns, and they were both fat, but one was much fatter than the
other.

“It might have uster been blue,” the fatter one admitted.

“You reckon he’s daid?” the first one asked.

“Ast him,” the other said.

“No, he ain’t daid. He’s moving.”

“Maybe he’s just unconscious,” the fatter one said, taking out his new
billy. They watched him for a few seconds. His hand was moving along the
edge of the ditch as if it were hunting something to grip. He asked them
in a hoarse whisper where he was and if it was day or night.

“It’s day,” the thinner one said, looking at the sky. “We got to take
you back to pay your rent.”

“I want to go on where I’m going,” the blind man said.

“You got to pay your rent first,” the policeman said. “Ever’ bit of it!”

The other, perceiving that he was conscious, hit him over the head with
his new billy. “We don’t want to have no trouble with him,” he said.
“You take his feet.”

He died in the squad car but they didn’t notice and took him on to the
landlady’s. She had them put him on her bed and when she had pushed them
out the door, she locked it behind them and drew up a straight chair and
sat down close to his face where she could talk to him. “Well, Mr.
Motes,” she said, “I see you’ve come home!”

His face was stern and tranquil. “I knew you’d come back,” she said.
“And I’ve been waiting for you. And you needn’t to pay any more rent but
have it free here, any way you like, upstairs or down. Just however you
want it and with me to wait on you, or if you want to go on somewhere,
we’ll both go.”

She had never observed his face more composed and she grabbed his hand
and held it to her heart. It was resistless and dry. The outline of a
skull was plain under his skin and the deep burned eye sockets seemed to
lead into the dark tunnel where he had disappeared. She leaned closer
and closer to his face, looking deep into them, trying to see how she
had been cheated or what had cheated her, but she couldn’t see anything.
She shut her eyes and saw the pin point of light but so far away that
she could not hold it steady in her mind. She felt as if she were
blocked at the entrance of something. She sat staring with her eyes
shut, into his eyes, and felt as if she had finally got to the beginning
of something she couldn’t begin, and she saw him moving farther and
farther away, farther and farther into the darkness until he was the pin
point of light.






                                  ONE




                                   I

FRANCIS MARION TARWATER’S uncle had been dead for only half a day when
the boy got too drunk to finish digging his grave and a Negro named
Buford Munson, who had come to get a jug filled, had to finish it and
drag the body from the breakfast table where it was still sitting and
bury it in a decent and Christian way, with the sign of its Saviour at
the head of the grave and enough dirt on top to keep the dogs from
digging it up. Buford had come along about noon and when he left at
sundown, the boy, Tarwater, had never returned from the still.

The old man had been Tarwater’s great-uncle, or said he was, and they
had always lived together so far as the child knew. His uncle had said
he was seventy years of age at the time he had rescued and undertaken to
bring him up; he was eighty-four when he died. Tarwater figured this
made his own age fourteen. His uncle had taught him Figures, Reading,
Writing, and History beginning with Adam expelled from the Garden and
going on down through the presidents to Herbert Hoover and on in
speculation toward the Second Coming and the Day of Judgment. Besides
giving him a good education, he had rescued him from his only other
connection, old Tarwater’s nephew, a schoolteacher who had no child of
his own at the time and wanted this one of his dead sister’s to raise
according to his own ideas.

The old man was in a position to know what his ideas were. He had lived
for three months in the nephew’s house on what he had thought at the
time was Charity but what he said he had found out was not Charity or
anything like it. All the time he had lived there, the nephew had
secretly been making a study of him. The nephew, who had taken him in
under the name of Charity, had at the same time been creeping into his
soul by the back door, asking him questions that meant more than one
thing, planting traps around the house and watching him fall into them,
and finally coming up with a written study of him for a schoolteacher
magazine. The stench of his behaviour had reached heaven and the Lord
Himself had rescued the old man. He had sent him a rage of vision, had
told him to fly with the orphan boy to the farthest part of the
backwoods and raise him up to justify his Redemption. The Lord had
assured him a long life and he had snatched the baby from under the
schoolteacher’s nose and taken him to live in the clearing, Powderhead,
that he had a title to for his lifetime.

The old man, who said he was a prophet, had raised the boy to expect the
Lord’s call himself and to be prepared for the day he would hear it. He
had schooled him in the evils that befall prophets; in those that come
from the world, which are trifling, and those that come from the Lord
and burn the prophet clean; for he himself had been burned clean and
burned clean again. He had learned by fire.

He had been called in his early youth and had set out for the city to
proclaim the destruction awaiting a world that had abandoned its
Saviour. He proclaimed from the midst of his fury that the world would
see the sun burst in blood and fire and while he raged and waited, it
rose every morning, calm and contained in itself, as if not only the
world, but the Lord Himself had failed to hear the prophet’s message. It
rose and set, rose and set on a world that turned from green to white
and green to white and green to white again. It rose and set and he
despaired of the Lord’s listening. Then one morning he saw to his joy a
finger of fire coming out of it and before he could turn, before he
could shout, the finger had touched him and the destruction he had been
waiting for had fallen in his own brain and his own body. His own blood
had been burned dry and not the blood of the world.

Having learned much by his own mistakes, he was in a position to
instruct Tarwater—when the boy chose to listen—in the hard facts of
serving the Lord. The boy, who had ideas of his own, listened with an
impatient conviction that he would not make any mistakes himself when
the time came and the Lord called him.

That was not the last time the Lord had corrected the old man with fire,
but it had not happened since he had taken Tarwater from the
schoolteacher. That time his rage of vision had been clear. He had known
what he was saving the boy from and it was saving and not destruction he
was seeking. He had learned enough to hate the destruction that had to
come and not all that was going to be destroyed.

Rayber, the schoolteacher, had shortly discovered where they were and
had come out to the clearing to get the baby back. He had had to leave
his car on the dirt road and walk a mile through the woods on a path
that appeared and disappeared before he came to the corn patch with the
gaunt two-story shack standing in the middle of it. The old man had been
fond of recalling for Tarwater the red sweating bitten face of his
nephew bobbing up and down through the corn and behind it the pink
flowered hat of a welfare-woman he had brought along with him. The corn
was planted up to four feet from the porch that year and as the nephew
came out of it, the old man appeared in the door with his shotgun and
shouted that he would shoot any foot that touched his step and the two
stood facing each other while the welfare-woman bristled out of the
corn, ruffled like a peahen upset on the nest. The old man said if it
hadn’t been for the welfare-woman, his nephew wouldn’t have taken a
step. Both their faces were scratched and bleeding from thorn bushes and
a switch of blackberry bush hung from the sleeve of the welfare-woman’s
blouse.

She had only to let out her breath slowly as if she were releasing the
last patience on earth and the nephew lifted his foot and planted it on
the step and the old man shot him in the leg. He recalled for the boy’s
benefit the nephew’s expression of outraged righteousness, a look that
had so infuriated him that he had raised the gun slightly higher and
shot him again, this time taking a wedge out of his right ear. The
second shot flushed the righteousness off his face and left it blank and
white, revealing that there was nothing underneath it, revealing, the
old man sometimes admitted, his own failure as well, for he had tried
and failed, long ago, to rescue the nephew. He had kidnapped him when
the child was seven and had taken him to the backwoods and baptized him
and instructed him in the facts of his Redemption, but the instruction
had lasted only for a few years; in time the child had set himself a
different course. There were moments when the thought that he might have
helped the nephew on to his new course himself became so heavy in the
old man that he would stop telling the story to Tarwater, stop and stare
in front of him as if he were looking into a pit which had opened up
before his feet.

At such times he would wander into the woods and leave Tarwater alone in
the clearing, occasionally for days, while he thrashed out his peace
with the Lord, and when he returned, bedraggled and hungry, he would
look the way the boy thought a prophet ought to look. He would look as
if he had been wrestling a wildcat, as if his head were still full of
the visions he had seen in its eyes, wheels of light and strange beasts
with giant wings of fire and four heads turned to the four points of the
universe. These were the times that Tarwater knew that when he was
called, he would say, “Here I am, Lord, ready!” At other times when
there was no fire in his uncle’s eye and he spoke only of the sweat and
stink of the cross, of being born again to die, and of spending eternity
eating the bread of life, the boy would let his mind wander off to other
subjects.

The old man’s thought did not always move at the same rate of speed
through every point in his story. Sometimes, as if he did not want to
think of it, he would speed over the part where he shot the nephew and
race on, telling how the two of them, the nephew and the welfare-woman
(whose very name was comical—Bernice Bishop) had scuttled off, making a
disappearing rattle in the corn, and how the welfare-woman had screamed,
“Why didn’t you tell me? You knew he was crazy!” and how when they came
out of the corn on the other side, he had noted from the upstairs window
where he had run that she had her arm around the nephew and was holding
him up while he hopped into the woods. Later he learned that he had
married her though she was twice his age and he could only possibly get
one child out of her. She had never let him come back again.

And the Lord, the old man said, had preserved the one child he had got
out of her from being corrupted by such parents. He had preserved him in
the only possible way: the child was dim-witted. The old man would pause
here and let the weight of this mystery sink in on Tarwater. He had
made, since he learned of that child’s existence, several trips into
town to try to kidnap him so that he could baptize him, but each time he
had come back unsuccessful. The schoolteacher was on his guard and the
old man was too fat and stiff now to make an agile kidnapper.

“If by the time I die,” he had said to Tarwater, “I haven’t got him
baptized, it’ll be up to you. It’ll be the first mission the Lord sends
you.”

The boy doubted very much that his first mission would be to baptize a
dim-witted child. “Oh no it won’t be,” he said. “He don’t mean for me to
finish up your leavings. He has other things in mind for me.” And he
thought of Moses who struck water from a rock, of Joshua who made the
sun stand still, of Daniel who stared down lions in the pit.

“It’s no part of your job to think for the Lord,” his great-uncle said.
“Judgment may rack your bones.”

The morning the old man died, he came down and cooked the breakfast as
usual and died before he got the first spoonful to his mouth. The
downstairs of their house was all kitchen, large and dark, with a wood
stove at one end of it and a board table drawn up to the stove. Sacks of
feed and mash were stacked in the corners and scrapmetal, woodshavings,
old rope, ladders, and other tinder were wherever he or Tarwater had let
them fall. They had slept in the kitchen until a bobcat sprang in the
window one night and frightened his uncle into carrying the bed upstairs
where there were two empty rooms. The old man prophesied at the time
that the stairsteps would take ten years off his life. At the moment of
his death, he sat down to his breakfast and lifted his knife in one
square red hand halfway to his mouth, and then with a look of complete
astonishment, he lowered it until the hand rested on the edge of the
plate and tilted it up off the table.

He was a bull-like old man with a short head set directly into his
shoulders and silver protruding eyes that looked like two fish straining
to get out of a net of red threads. He had on a putty-colored hat with
the brim turned up all around and over his undershirt a grey coat that
had once been black. Tarwater, sitting across the table from him, saw
red ropes appear in his face and a tremor pass over him. It was like the
tremor of a quake that had begun at his heart and run outward and was
just reaching the surface. His mouth twisted down sharply on one side
and he remained exactly as he was, perfectly balanced, his back a good
six inches from the chair back and his stomach caught just under the
edge of the table. His eyes, dead silver, were focussed on the boy
across from him.

Tarwater felt the tremor transfer itself and run lightly over him. He
knew the old man was dead without touching him and he continued to sit
across the table from the corpse, finishing his breakfast in a kind of
sullen embarrassment as if he were in the presence of a new personality
and couldn’t think of anything to say. Finally he said in a querulous
tone, “Just hold your horses. I already told you I would do it right.”
The voice sounded like a stranger’s voice, as if the death had changed
him instead of his great-uncle.

He got up and took his plate out the back door and set it down on the
bottom step and two long-legged black game roosters tore across the yard
and finished what was on it. He sat down on a long pine box on the back
porch and his hands began absently to unravel a length of rope while his
long face stared ahead beyond the clearing over the woods that ran in
grey and purple folds until they touched the light blue fortress line of
trees set against the empty morning sky.

Powderhead was not simply off the dirt road but off the wagon track and
footpath, and the nearest neighbors, colored not white, still had to
walk through the woods, pushing plum branches out of their way to get to
it. Once there had been two houses; now there was only the one house
with the dead owner inside and the living owner outside on the porch,
waiting to bury him. The boy knew he would have to bury the old man
before anything would begin. It was as if there would have to be dirt
over him before he would be thoroughly dead. The thought seemed to give
him respite from something that pressed on him.

A few weeks before, the old man had started an acre of corn to the left
and had run it beyond the fenceline almost up to the house on one side.
The two strands of barbed-wire ran through the middle of the patch. A
line of fog, hump-shaped, was creeping toward it like a white hound dog
ready to crouch under and crawl across the yard.

“I’m going to move that fence,” Tarwater said. “I ain’t going to have
any fence I own in the middle of a patch.” The voice was loud and
strange and disagreeable. Inside his head it continued: you ain’t the
owner. The schoolteacher owns it.

I own it, Tarwater said, because I’m here and can’t nobody get me off.
If any schoolteacher comes to claim the property, I’ll kill him.

The Lord may send you off, he thought. There was a complete stillness
over everything and the boy felt his heart begin to swell. He held his
breath as if he were about to hear a voice from on high. After a few
moments he heard a hen scratching beneath him under the porch. He ran
his arm fiercely under his nose and gradually his face paled again.

He had on a faded pair of overalls and a grey hat pulled down over his
ears like a cap. He followed his uncle’s custom of never taking off his
hat except in bed. He had always followed his uncle’s customs up to this
date but: if I want to move that fence before I bury him, it wouldn’t be
a soul to hinder me, he thought; no voice will be uplifted.

Bury him first and get it over with, the loud stranger’s disagreeable
voice said. He got up and went to look for the shovel.

The pine box he had been sitting on was his uncle’s coffin but he didn’t
intend to use it. The old man was too heavy for a thin boy to hoist over
the side of a box and though old Tarwater had built it himself a few
years before, he had said that if it wasn’t feasible to get him into it
when the time came, then just to put him in the hole as he was, only to
be sure the hole was deep. He wanted it ten foot, he said, not just
eight. He had worked on the box a long time and when he finished it, he
had scratched on the lid, MASON TARWATER, WITH GOD, and had climbed into
it where it stood on the back porch, and had lain there for some time,
nothing showing but his stomach which rose over the top like
over-leavened bread. The boy had stood at the side of the box, studying
him. “This is the end of us all,” the old man said with satisfaction,
his gravel voice hearty in the coffin.

“It’s too much of you for the box,” Tarwater said. “I’ll have to sit on
the lid to press you down or wait until you rot a little.”

“Don’t wait,” old Tarwater had said. “Listen. If it ain’t feasible to
use the box when the time comes, if you can’t lift it or whatever, just
get me in the hole but I want it deep. I want it ten foot, not just
eight, ten. You can roll me to it if nothing else. I’ll roll. Get two
boards and set them down the steps and start me rolling and dig where I
stop and don’t let me roll over into it until it’s deep enough. Prop me
with some bricks so I won’t roll into it and don’t let the dogs nudge me
over the edge before it’s finished. You better pen up the dogs,” he
said.

“What if you die in bed?” the boy asked. “How’m I going to get you down
the stairs?”

“I ain’t going to die in bed,” the old man said. “As soon as I hear the
summons, I’m going to run downstairs. I’ll get as close to the door as I
can. If I should get stuck up there, you’ll have to roll me down the
stairs, that’s all.”

“My Lord,” the child said.

The old man sat up in the box and brought his fist down on the edge of
it. “Listen,” he said. “I never asked much of you. I taken you and
raised you and saved you from that ass in town and now all I’m asking in
return is when I die to get me in the ground where the dead belong and
set up a cross over me to show I’m there. That’s all in the world I’m
asking you to do. I ain’t even asking you to go for the niggers and try
to get me in the plot with my daddy. I could ask you that but I ain’t.
I’m doing everything to make it easy for you. All I’m asking you is to
get me in the ground and set up a cross.”

“I’ll be doing good if I get you in the ground,” Tarwater said. “I’ll be
too wore out to set up any cross. I ain’t bothering with trifles.”

“Trifles!” his uncle hissed. “You’ll learn what a trifle is on the day
those crosses are gathered! Burying the dead right may be the only honor
you ever do yourself. I brought you out here to raise you a Christian,
and more than a Christian, a prophet!” he hollered, “and the burden of
it will be on you!”

“If I don’t have the strength to do it,” the child said, watching him
with a careful detachment, “I’ll notify my uncle in town and he can come
out and take care of you. The schoolteacher,” he drawled, observing that
the pockmarks in his uncle’s face had already turned pale against the
purple. “He’ll tend to you.”

The threads that restrained the old man’s eyes thickened. He gripped
both sides of the coffin and pushed forward as if he were going to drive
it off the porch. “He’d burn me,” he said hoarsely. “He’d have me
cremated in an oven and scatter my ashes. ‘Uncle,’ he said to me,
‘you’re a type that’s almost extinct!’ He’d be willing to pay the
undertaker to burn me to be able to scatter my ashes,” he said. “He
don’t believe in the Resurrection. He don’t believe in the Last Day. He
don’t believe in the bread of life . . .”

“The dead don’t bother with particulars,” the boy interrupted.

The old man grabbed the front of his overalls and pulled him up against
the side of the box and glared into his pale face. “The world was made
for the dead. Think of all the dead there are,” he said, and then as if
he had conceived the answer for all the insolence in the world, he said,
“There’s a million times more dead than living and the dead are dead a
million times longer than the living are alive,” and he released him
with a laugh.

The boy had shown only by a slight quiver that he was shaken by this,
and after a minute he had said, “The schoolteacher is my uncle. The only
blood connection with good sense I’ll have and a living man and if I
wanted to go to him, I’d go; now.”

The old man looked at him silently for what seemed a full minute. Then
he slammed his hands flat on the sides of the box and roared, “Whom the
plague beckons, to the plague! Whom the sword to the sword! Whom fire to
fire!” And the child trembled visibly.

“I saved you to be free, your own self!” he had shouted, “and not a
piece of information inside his head! If you were living with him, you’d
be information right now, you’d be inside his head, and what’s
furthermore,” he said, “you’d be going to school.”

The boy grimaced. The old man had always impressed on him his good
fortune in not being sent to school. The Lord had seen fit to guarantee
the purity of his upbringing, to preserve him from contamination, to
preserve him as His elect servant, trained by a prophet for prophesy.
While other children his age were herded together in a room to cut out
paper pumpkins under the direction of a woman, he was left free for the
pursuit of wisdom, the companions of his spirit Abel and Enoch and Noah
and Job, Abraham and Moses, King David and Solomon, and all the
prophets, from Elijah who escaped death, to John whose severed head
struck terror from a dish. The boy knew that escaping school was the
surest sign of his election.

The truant officer had come only once. The Lord had told the old man to
expect it and what to do and old Tarwater had instructed the boy in his
part against the day when, as the devil’s emissary, the officer would
appear. When the time came and they saw him cutting across the field,
they were ready. The child got behind the house and the old man sat on
the steps and waited. When the officer, a thin bald-headed man with red
galluses, stepped out of the field onto the packed dirt of the yard, he
greeted old Tarwater warily and commenced his business as if he had not
come for it. He sat down on the steps and spoke of poor weather and poor
health. Finally, gazing out over the field, he said, “You got a boy,
don’t you, that ought to be in school?”

“A fine boy,” the old man said, “and I wouldn’t stand in his way if
anybody thought they could teach him. You boy!” he called. The boy
didn’t come at once. “Oh you boy!” the old man shouted.

In a few minutes Tarwater appeared from around the side of the house.
His eyes were open but not well-focused. His head rolled uncontrollably
on his slack shoulders and his tongue lolled in his open mouth.

“He ain’t bright,” the old man said, “but he’s a mighty good boy. He
knows to come when you call him.”

“Yes,” the truant officer said, “well yes, but it might be best to leave
him in peace.”

“I don’t know, he might take to schooling,” the old man said. “He ain’t
had a fit for going on two months.”

“I speck he better stay at home,” the officer said. “I wouldn’t want to
put a strain on him,” and he commenced to speak of other things. Shortly
he took his leave and the two of them watched with satisfaction as the
diminishing figure moved back across the field and the red galluses were
finally lost to view.

If the schoolteacher had got hold of him, right now he would have been
in school, one among many, indistinguishable from the herd, and in the
schoolteacher’s head, he would be laid out in parts and numbers. “That’s
where he wanted me,” the old man said, “and he thought once he had me in
that schoolteacher magazine, I would be as good as in his head.” The
schoolteacher’s house had had little in it but books and papers. The old
man had not known when he went there to live that every living thing
that passed through the nephew’s eyes into his head was turned by his
brain into a book or a paper or a chart. The schoolteacher had appeared
to have a great interest in his being a prophet, chosen by the Lord, and
had asked numerous questions, the answers to which he had sometimes
scratched down on a pad, his little eyes lighting every now and then as
if in some discovery.

The old man had fancied he was making progress in convincing the nephew
again of his Redemption, for he at least listened though he did not
_say_ he believed. He seemed to delight to talk about the things that
interested his uncle. He questioned him at length about his early life,
which old Tarwater had practically forgotten. The old man had thought
this interest in his forebears would bear fruit, but what it bore, what
it bore, stench and shame, were dead words. What it bore was a dry and
seedless fruit, incapable even of rotting, dead from the beginning. From
time to time, the old man would spit out of his mouth, like gobbets of
poison, some of the idiotic sentences from the schoolteacher’s piece.
Wrath had burned them on his memory, word for word. “His fixation of
being called by the Lord had its origin in insecurity. He needed the
assurance of a call, and so he called himself.”

“Called myself!” the old man would hiss, “called myself!” This so
enraged him that half the time he could do nothing but repeat it.
“Called myself. I called myself. I, Mason Tarwater, called myself!
Called myself to be beaten and tied up. Called myself to be spit on and
snickered at. Called myself to be struck down in my pride. Called myself
to be torn by the Lord’s eye. Listen boy,” he would say and grab the
child by the straps of his overalls and shake him slowly, “even the
mercy of the Lord burns.” He would let go the straps and allow the boy
to fall back into the thorn bed of that thought, while he continued to
hiss and groan.

“Where he wanted me was inside that schoolteacher magazine. He thought
once he got me in there, I’d be as good as inside his head and done for
and that would be that, that would be the end of it. Well, that wasn’t
the end of it! Here I sit. And there you sit. In freedom. Not inside
anybody’s head!” and his voice would run away from him as if it were the
freest part of his free self and were straining ahead of his heavy body
to be off. Something of his great-uncle’s glee would take hold of
Tarwater at that point and he would feel that he had escaped some
mysterious prison. He even felt he could smell his freedom,
pine-scented, coming out of the woods, until the old man would continue,
“You were born into bondage and baptized into freedom, into the death of
the Lord, into the death of the Lord Jesus Christ.”

Then the child would feel a sullenness creeping over him, a slow warm
rising resentment that this freedom had to be connected with Jesus and
that Jesus had to be the Lord.

“Jesus is the bread of life,” the old man said.

The boy, disconcerted, would look off into the distance over the dark
blue treeline where the world stretched out, hidden and at its ease. In
the darkest, most private part of his soul, hanging upsidedown like a
sleeping bat, was the certain, undeniable knowledge that he was not
hungry for the bread of life. Had the bush flamed for Moses, the sun
stood still for Joshua, the lions turned aside before Daniel only to
prophesy the bread of life? Jesus? He felt a terrible disappointment in
that conclusion, a dread that it was true. The old man said that as soon
as he died, he would hasten to the banks of the Lake of Galilee to eat
the loaves and fishes that the Lord had multiplied.

“Forever?” the horrified boy asked.

“Forever,” the old man said.

The boy sensed that this was the heart of his great-uncle’s madness,
this hunger, and what he was secretly afraid of was that it might be
passed down, might be hidden in the blood and might strike some day in
him and then he would be torn by hunger like the old man, the bottom
split out of his stomach so that nothing would heal or fill it but the
bread of life.

He tried when possible to pass over these thoughts, to keep his vision
located on an even level, to see no more than what was in front of his
face and to let his eyes stop at the surface of that. It was as if he
were afraid that if he let his eye rest for an instant longer than was
needed to place something—a spade, a hoe, the mule’s hind quarters
before his plow, the red furrow under him—that the thing would suddenly
stand before him, strange and terrifying, demanding that he name it and
name it justly and be judged for the name he gave it. He did all he
could to avoid this threatened intimacy of creation. When the Lord’s
call came, he wished it to be a voice from out of a clear and empty sky,
the trumpet of the Lord God Almighty, untouched by any fleshly hand or
breath. He expected to see wheels of fire in the eyes of unearthly
beasts. He had expected this to happen as soon as his great-uncle died.
He turned his mind off this quickly and went to get the shovel. The
schoolteacher is a living man, he thought as he went, but he’d better
not come out here and try to get me off this property because I’ll kill
him. Go to him and be damned, his uncle had said. I’ve saved you from
him this far and if you go to him the minute I’m in the ground there’s
nothing I can do about it.

The shovel lay against the side of the hen house. “I’ll never set my
foot in the city again,” the boy said to himself aloud. I’ll never go to
him. Him nor nobody else will ever get me off this place.

He decided to dig the grave under the fig tree because the old man would
be good for the figs. The ground was sandy on top and solid brick
underneath and the shovel made a clanging sound when he struck it in the
sand. Two hundred pounds of dead mountain to bury, he thought, and stood
with one foot on the shovel, leaning forward, studying the white sky
through the leaves of the tree. It would take all day to get a hole big
enough out of this rock and the schoolteacher would burn him in a
minute.

Tarwater had seen the schoolteacher once from a distance of about twenty
feet and he had seen the dim-witted child closer up. The little boy
somewhat resembled old Tarwater except for his eyes which were grey like
the old man’s but clear, as if the other side of them went down and down
into two pools of light. It was plain to look at him that he did not
have any sense. The old man had been so shocked by the likeness and the
unlikeness that the time he and Tarwater had gone there, he had only
stood in the door, staring at the little boy and rolling his tongue
around outside his mouth as if he had no sense himself. That had been
the first time he had seen the child and he could not forget him.
“Married her and got one child out of her and that without sense,” he
would murmur. “The Lord preserved him and now He means to see he’s
baptized.”

“Well whyn’t you get on with it then?” the boy asked, for he wanted
something to happen, wanted to see the old man in action, wanted him to
kidnap the child and have the schoolteacher have to come after him so
that he could get a closer look at his other uncle. “What ails you?” he
asked. “What makes you tarry so long? Why don’t you make haste and steal
him?”

“I take my directions from the Lord God,” the old man said, “Who moves
in His own time. I don’t take them from you.”

The white fog had eased through the yard and disappeared into the next
bottom and the air was clear and blank. His mind continued to dwell on
the schoolteacher’s house. “Three months there,” his great-uncle had
said. “It shames me. Betrayed for three months in the house of my own
kin and if when I’m dead you want to turn me over to my betrayer and see
my body burned, go ahead! Go ahead, boy,” he had shouted, sitting up
splotch-faced in his box. “Go ahead and let him burn me but watch out
for the Lord’s lion after that. Remember the Lord’s lion set in the path
of the false prophet! I been leavened by the yeast he don’t believe in,”
he had said, “and I won’t be burned! And when I’m gone, you’ll be better
off in these woods by yourself with just as much light as the sun wants
to let in than you’ll be in the city with him.”

He kept on digging but the grave did not get any deeper. “The dead are
poor,” he said in the voice of the stranger. You can’t be any poorer
than dead. He’ll have to take what he gets. Nobody to bother me, he
thought. Ever. No hand uplifted to hinder me from anything; except the
Lord’s and He ain’t said anything. He ain’t even noticed me yet.

A sand-colored hound beat its tail on the ground nearby and a few black
chickens scratched in the raw clay he was turning up. The sun had
slipped over the blue line of trees and circled by a haze of yellow was
moving slowly across the sky. “Now I can do anything I want to,” he
said, softening the stranger’s voice so that he could stand it. Could
kill off all those chickens if I had a mind to, he thought, watching the
worthless black game bantams that his uncle had been fond of keeping.

He favored a lot of foolishness, the stranger said. The truth is he was
childish. Why, that schoolteacher never did him any harm. You take, all
he did was to watch him and write down what he seen and heard and put it
in a paper for schoolteachers to read. Now what was wrong in that? Why
nothing. Who cares what a schoolteacher reads? And the old fool acted
like he had been killed in his very soul. Well he wasn’t so near dead as
he thought he was. Lived on fourteen years and raised up a boy to bury
him, suitable to his own taste.

As Tarwater slashed at the ground with the shovel, the stranger’s voice
took on a kind of restrained fury and he kept repeating, you got to bury
him whole and completely by hand and that schoolteacher would burn him
in a minute.

After he had dug for an hour or more, the grave was only a foot deep,
not as deep yet as the corpse. He sat down on the edge of it for a
while. The sun was like a furious white blister in the sky.

The dead are a heap more trouble than the living, the stranger said.
That schoolteacher wouldn’t consider for a minute that on the last day
all the bodies marked by crosses will be gathered. In the rest of the
world they do things different than what you been taught.

“I been there once,” Tarwater muttered. “Nobody has to tell me.”

His uncle two or three years before had gone to call on the lawyers to
try to get the property unentailed so that it would skip the
schoolteacher and go to Tarwater. Tarwater had sat at the lawyer’s
twelfth-story window and looked down into the pit of the street while
his uncle transacted the business. On the way from the railroad station
he had walked tall in the mass of moving metal and concrete speckled
with the very small eyes of people. The glitter of his own eyes was
shaded under the stiff roof-like brim of a new grey hat, balanced
perfectly straight on his buttressing ears. Before coming he had read
facts in the almanac and he knew that there were 75,000 people here who
were seeing him for the first time. He wanted to stop and shake hands
with each of them and say his name was F. M. Tarwater and that he was
here only for the day to accompany his uncle on business at a lawyer’s.
His head jerked backwards after each passing figure until they began to
pass too thickly and he observed that their eyes didn’t grab at you like
the eyes of country people. Several people bumped into him and this
contact that should have made an acquaintance for life, made nothing
because the hulks shoved on with ducked heads and muttered apologies
that he would have accepted if they had waited.

Then he had realized, almost without warning, that this place was
evil—the ducked heads, the muttered words, the hastening away. He saw
in a burst of light that these people were hastening away from the Lord
God Almighty. It was to the city that the prophets came and he was here
in the midst of it. He was here enjoying what should have repelled him.
His lids narrowed with caution and he looked at his uncle who was
rolling on ahead of him, no more concerned with it all than a bear in
the woods. “What kind of prophet are you?” the boy hissed.

His uncle paid him no attention, did not stop.

“Call yourself a prophet!” he continued in a high rasping carrying
voice.

His uncle stopped and turned. “I’m here on bidnis,” he said mildly.

“You always said you were a prophet,” Tarwater said. “Now I see what
kind of prophet you are. Elijah would think a heap of you.”

His uncle thrust his head forward and his eyes began to bulge. “I’m here
on bidnis,” he said. “If you been called by the Lord, then be about your
own mission.”

The boy paled slightly and his gaze shifted. “I ain’t been called
_yet_,” he muttered. “It’s you that’s been called.”

“And I know what times I’m called and what times I ain’t,” his uncle
said and turned and paid him no more attention.

At the lawyer’s window, he knelt down and let his face hang out
upsidedown over the floating speckled street moving like a river of tin
below and watched the glints on it from the sun which drifted pale in a
pale sky, too far away to ignite anything. When he was called, on that
day when he returned, he would set the city astir, he would return with
fire in his eyes. You have to do something particular here to make them
look at you, he thought. They ain’t going to look at you just because
you’re here. He considered his uncle with renewed disgust. When I come
for good, he said to himself, I’ll do something to make every eye stick
on me, and leaning forward, he saw his new hat drop down gently, lost
and casual, dallied slightly by the breeze on its way to be smashed in
the tin river below. He clutched at his bare head and fell back inside
the room.

His uncle was in argument with the lawyer, both hitting the desk that
separated them, bending their knees and hitting their fists at the same
time. The lawyer, a tall dome-headed man with an eagle’s nose, kept
repeating in a restrained shriek, “But I didn’t make the will. I didn’t
make the law,” and his uncle’s gravel voice grated, “I can’t help it. My
daddy wouldn’t have seen a fool inherit his property. That’s not how he
intended it.”

“My hat is gone,” Tarwater said.

The lawyer threw himself backwards into his chair and screaked it toward
Tarwater and saw him without interest from pale blue eyes and screaked
it forward again and said to his uncle, “There’s nothing I can do.
You’re wasting your time and mine. You might as well resign yourself to
this will.”

“Listen,” old Tarwater said, “at one time I thought I was finished, old
and sick and about to die and no money, nothing, and I accepted his
hospitality because he was my closest blood connection and you could
have called it his duty to take me, only I thought it was Charity, I
thought . . .”

“I can’t help what you thought or did or what your connection thought or
did,” the lawyer said and closed his eyes.

“My hat fell,” Tarwater said.

“I’m only a lawyer,” the lawyer said, letting his glance rove over the
lines of clay-colored books of law that fortressed his office.

“A car is liable to have run over it by now.”

“Listen,” his uncle said, “all the time he was studying me for this
paper. Taking secret tests on me, his own kin, crawling into my soul
through the back door and then says to me, ‘Uncle, you’re a type that’s
almost extinct!’ Almost extinct!” the old man piped, barely able to
force a thread of sound from his throat. “You see how extinct I am!”

The lawyer closed his eyes again and smiled into one cheek.

“Other lawyers,” the old man growled and they had left and visited three
more, without stopping, and Tarwater had counted eleven men who might
have had on his hat or might not. Finally when they came out of the
fourth lawyer’s office, they sat down on the window ledge of a bank
building and his uncle felt in his pocket for some biscuits he had
brought and handed one to Tarwater. The old man unbuttoned his coat and
allowed his stomach to ease forward and rest on his lap while he ate.
His face worked wrathfully; the skin between the pockmarks appeared to
jump from one spot to another. Tarwater was very pale and his eyes
glittered with a peculiar hollow depth. He had an old work kerchief tied
around his head, knotted at the four corners. He didn’t observe the
passing people who observed him now. “Thank God we’re finished and can
go home,” he muttered.

“We ain’t finished here,” the old man said and got up abruptly and
started down the street.

“My Lord!” the boy groaned, jumping to catch up with him. “Can’t we sit
down for one minute? Ain’t you got any sense? They all tell you the same
thing. It’s only one law and it’s nothing you can do about it. I got
sense enough to get that; why ain’t you? What’s the matter with you?”

The old man strode on with his head thrust forward as if he were
smelling out an enemy.

“Where we going?” Tarwater asked after they had walked out of the
business streets and were passing between rows of grey bulbous houses
with sooty porches that overhung the sidewalks. “Listen,” he said,
hitting at his uncle’s hip, “I never ast to come.”

“You would have ast to come soon enough,” the old man muttered. “Get
your fill now.”

“I never ast for no fill. I never ast to come at all. I’m here before I
knew this here was here.”

“Just remember,” the old man said, “just remember that I told you to
remember when you ast to come that you never liked it when you were
here,” and they kept on going, crossing one length of sidewalk after
another, row after row of overhanging houses with half-open doors that
let a little dried light fall on the stained passageways inside. Finally
they came out into another section where the houses were clean and squat
and almost identical and each had a square of grass in front of it.
After a few blocks Tarwater dropped down on the sidewalk and said, “I
ain’t going no further. I don’t even know where I’m going and I ain’t
going no further.” His uncle didn’t stop or look back. In a second he
jumped up and followed him again in a panic lest he be left.

The old man kept straining forward as if his blood scent were leading
him closer and closer to the place where his enemy was hiding. He
suddenly turned up the short walk of a pale yellow brick house and moved
rigidly to the white door, his heavy shoulders hunched as if he were
going to crash through it. He struck the wood with his fist, ignoring a
polished brass knocker. At that instant Tarwater realized that this was
where the schoolteacher lived, and he stopped where he was and remained
rigid, his eye on the door. He knew by some obscure instinct that the
door was going to open and reveal his destiny. In his mind’s eye, he saw
the schoolteacher about to appear in it, lean and evil, waiting to
engage whom the Lord would send to conquer him. The boy clamped his
teeth together to keep them from chattering. The door opened.

A small pink-faced boy stood in it with his mouth hung in a silly smile.
He had white hair and a knobby forehead. He wore steel-rimmed spectacles
and had pale silver eyes like the old man’s except that they were clear
and empty. He was gnawing on a brown apple core.

The old man stared at him, his lips parting slowly until his mouth hung
open. He looked as if he beheld an unspeakable mystery. The little boy
made an unintelligible noise and pushed the door almost shut, hiding
himself all but one spectacled eye.

Suddenly a tremendous indignation seized Tarwater. He eyed the small
face peering from the crack. He searched his mind fiercely for the right
word to hurl at it. Finally he said in a slow emphatic voice, “Before
you was here, _I_ was here.”

The old man caught his shoulder and pulled him back. “He don’t have good
sense,” he said. “Can’t you see he don’t have good sense? He don’t know
what you’re talking about.”

The boy grew more furious than ever. He swung around on his heel to
leave.

“Wait,” his uncle said and caught him. “Get behind that hedge yonder and
hide yourself. I’m going in there and baptize him.”

Tarwater’s mouth was agape.

“Get behind there like I told you,” he said and gave him a push toward
the hedge. Then the old man braced himself. He turned and went back to
the door. Just as he reached it, it was flung open and a lean young man
with heavy black-rimmed spectacles stood in it, his head thrust forward,
glaring at him.

Old Tarwater raised his fist. “The Lord Jesus Christ sent me to baptize
that boy!” he shouted. “Stand aside. I mean to do it!”

Tarwater’s head popped up from behind the hedge. Breathlessly he took
the schoolteacher in—the narrow boney face slanting backwards from the
jutting jaw, the hair that receded from the high forehead, the eyes
encircled in glass. The white-haired child had caught hold of his
father’s leg and was hanging onto it. The schoolteacher pushed him back
inside the house. Then he stepped outside and slammed the door behind
him and continued to glare at the old man as if he dared him to take a
step.

“That boy cries out for his baptism,” the old man said. “Precious in the
sight of the Lord even an idiot!”

“Get off my property,” the nephew said in a tight voice as if he were
keeping it calm by force. “If you don’t, I’ll have you put back in the
asylum where you belong.”

“You can’t touch the servant of the Lord!” the old man hollered.

“You get away from here!” the nephew shouted, losing control of his
voice. “Ask the Lord why He made him an idiot in the first place, uncle.
Tell him I want to know why!”

The boy’s heart was beating so fast he was afraid it was going to gallop
out of his chest and disappear forever. He was head and shoulders out of
the shrubbery.

“Yours not to ask!” the old man shouted. “Yours not to question the mind
of the Lord God Almighty. Yours not to grind the Lord into your head and
spit out a number!”

“Where’s the boy?” the nephew asked, looking around suddenly as if he
had just thought of it. “Where’s the boy you were going to raise into a
prophet to burn my eyes clean?” and he laughed.

Tarwater lowered his head into the bush again, instantly disliking the
schoolteacher’s laugh which seemed to reduce him to the least
importance.

“His day is going to come,” the old man said. “Either him or me is going
to baptize that child. If not me in my day, him in his.”

“You’ll never lay a hand on him,” the schoolteacher said. “You could
slosh water on him for the rest of his life and he’d still be an idiot.
Five years old for all eternity, useless forever. Listen,” he said, and
the boy heard his taut voice turn low with a kind of subdued intensity,
a passion equal and opposite to the old man’s, “he’ll never be
baptized—just as a matter of principle, nothing else. As a gesture of
human dignity, he’ll never be baptized.”

“Time will discover the hand that baptizes him,” the old man said.

“Time will discover it,” the nephew said and opened the door behind him
and stepped back inside and slammed it on himself.

The boy had risen from the shrubbery, his head swirling with excitement.
He had never been back there again, never seen his cousin again, never
seen the schoolteacher again, and he hoped to God, he told the stranger
digging the grave along with him now that he would never see him again
though he had nothing against him himself and he would dislike to have
to kill him but if he came out here, messing in what was none of his
business except by law, then he would be obliged to.

Listen, the stranger said, what would he want to come out here
for—where there’s nothing?

Tarwater didn’t answer. He didn’t search out the stranger’s face but he
knew by now that it was sharp and friendly and wise, shadowed under a
stiff broad-brimmed panama hat that obscured the color of his eyes. He
had lost his dislike for the thought of the voice. Only every now and
then it sounded like a stranger’s voice to him. He began to feel that he
was only just now meeting himself, as if as long as his uncle had lived,
he had been deprived of his own acquaintance. I ain’t denying the old
man was a good one, his new friend said, but like you said: you can’t be
any poorer than dead. They have to take what they can get. His soul is
off this mortal earth now and his body is not going to feel the pinch,
of fire or anything else.

“It was the last day he was thinking of,” Tarwater murmured.

Well now, the stranger said, don’t you think any cross you set up in the
year 1952 would be rotted out by the year the Day of Judgment comes in?
Rotted to as much dust as his ashes if you reduced him to ashes? And
lemme ast you this: what’s God going to do with sailors drowned at sea
that the fish have et and the fish that et them et by other fish and
they et by yet others? And what about people that get burned up
naturally in house fires? Burnt up one way or another or lost in
machines until they’re pulp? And all those sojers blasted to nothing?
What about all those that there’s nothing left of to burn or bury?

If I burnt him, Tarwater said, it wouldn’t be natural, it would be
deliberate.

Oh I see, the stranger said. It ain’t the Day of Judgment for him you’re
worried about. It’s the Day of Judgment for you.

That’s my bidnis, Tarwater said.

I ain’t buttin into your bidnis, the stranger said. It don’t mean a
thing to me. You’re left by yourself in this empty place. Forever by
yourself in this empty place with just as much light as that dwarf sun
wants to let in. You don’t mean a thing to a soul as far as I can see.

“Redeemed,” Tarwater muttered.

Do you smoke? the stranger asked.

Smoke if I want to and don’t if I don’t, Tarwater said. Bury if need be
and don’t if don’t.

Go take a look at him and see if he’s fell off his chair, his friend
suggested.

Tarwater let the shovel drop in the grave and returned to the house. He
opened the front door a crack and put his face to it. His uncle glared
slightly to the side of him like a judge intent upon some terrible
evidence. The boy shut the door quickly and went back to the grave, cold
in spite of the sweat that stuck his shirt to his back. He began digging
again.

The schoolteacher was too smart for him, that’s all, the stranger said
presently. You remember well enough how he said he kidnapped him when
the schoolteacher was seven years of age. Gone to town and persuaded him
out of his own back yard and brought him out here and baptized him. And
what come of it? Nothing. The schoolteacher don’t care now if he’s
baptized or if he ain’t. It don’t mean a thing to him one way or the
other. Don’t care if he’s Redeemed or not neither. He only spent four
days out here; you’ve spent fourteen years and now got to spend the rest
of your life.

You see he was crazy all along, he continued. Wanted to make a prophet
out of that schoolteacher too, but the schoolteacher was too smart for
him. He got away.

He had somebody to come for him, Tarwater said. His daddy came and got
him back. Nobody came and got me back.

The schoolteacher himself come after you, the stranger said, and got
shot in the leg and the ear for his trouble.

I was not yet one year old, Tarwater said. A baby can’t walk off and
leave.

You ain’t a baby now, his friend said.

The grave did not appear to get any deeper though he continued to dig.
Look at the big prophet, the stranger jeered, and watched him from the
shade of the speckled tree shadows. Lemme hear you prophesy something.
The truth is the Lord ain’t studying about you. You ain’t entered His
Head.

Tarwater turned around abruptly and worked from the other side and the
voice continued from behind him. Anybody that’s a prophet has got to
have somebody to prophesy to. Unless you’re just going to prophesy to
yourself, he amended—or go baptize that dim-witted child, he added in a
tone of high sarcasm.

The truth is, he said after a minute, the truth is that you’re just as
smart, if you ain’t actually smarter, than the schoolteacher. Because he
had somebody—his daddy and his mother—to tell him the old man was
crazy, whereas you ain’t had anybody and yet you’ve figured it out for
yourself. Of course, it’s taken you longer, but you’ve come to the right
conclusion: you know he was a crazy man even when he wasn’t in the
asylum, even those last years.

Or if he wasn’t actually crazy, he was the same thing in a different
way: he didn’t have but one thing on his mind. He was a one-notion man.
Jesus. Jesus this and Jesus that. Ain’t you in all your fourteen years
of supporting his foolishness fed up and sick to the roof of your mouth
with Jesus? My Lord and Saviour, the stranger sighed, I am if you ain’t.

After a pause he continued. The way I see it, he said, you can do one of
two things. One of them, not both. Nobody can do both of two things
without straining themselves. You can do one thing or you can do the
opposite.

Jesus or the devil, the boy said.

No no no, the stranger said, there ain’t no such thing as a devil. I can
tell you that from my own self-experience. I know that for a fact. It
ain’t Jesus or the devil. It’s Jesus or _you_.

Jesus or me, Tarwater repeated. He put the shovel down for a rest and
thought: he said the schoolteacher was glad to come. He said all he had
to do was go out in the schoolteacher’s back yard where he was playing
and say, Let’s you and me go to the country for a while—you have to be
born again. The Lord Jesus Christ sent me to see to it. And the
schoolteacher got up and took hold of his hand without a word and came
with him and all the four days while he was out here he said the
schoolteacher was hoping they wouldn’t come for him.

Well that’s all the sense a seven-year-old boy’s got, the stranger said.
You can’t expect no more from a child. He learned better as soon as he
got back to town; his daddy told him the old man was crazy and not to
believe a word of what all he had learnt him.

That’s not the way he told it, Tarwater said. He said that when the
schoolteacher was seven years old, he had good sense but later it dried
up. His daddy was an ass and not fit to raise him and his mother was a
whore. She ran away from here when she was eighteen years old.

It took her that long? the stranger said in an incredulous tone. My, she
was kind of an ass herself.

My great-uncle said he hated to admit it that his own sister was a whore
but he had to say it to say the truth, the boy said.

Shaw, you know yourself that it give him great satisfaction to admit she
was a whore, the stranger said. He was always admitting somebody was an
ass or a whore. That’s all a prophet is good for—to admit somebody else
is an ass or a whore. And anyway, he asked slyly, what do you know about
whores? Where have you ever run up on one of them?

Certainly I know what one of them is, the boy said.

The Bible was full of them. He knew what they were and to what they were
liable to come, and just as Jezebel was discovered by dogs, an arm here
and a foot there, so said his great-uncle, it had almost been with his
own mother and grandmother. The two of them, along with his grandfather,
had been killed in an automobile crash, leaving only the schoolteacher
alive in that family, and Tarwater himself, for his mother (unmarried
and shameless) had lived just long enough after the crash for him to be
born. He had been born at the scene of the wreck.

The boy was very proud that he had been born in a wreck. He had always
felt that it set his existence apart from the ordinary one and he had
understood from it that the plans of God for him were special, even
though nothing of consequence had happened to him so far. Often when he
walked in the woods and came upon some bush a little removed from the
rest, his breath would catch in his throat and he would stop and wait
for the bush to burst into flame. It had not done it yet.

His uncle had never seemed to be aware of the importance of the way he
had been born, only of how he had been born again. He would often ask
him why he thought the Lord had rescued him out of the womb of a whore
and let him see the light of day at all, and then why, having done it
once, He had gone and done it again, allowing him to be baptized by his
great-uncle into the death of Christ, and then having done it twice,
gone on and done it a third time, allowing him to be rescued by his
great-uncle from the schoolteacher and brought to the backwoods and
given a chance to be brought up according to the truth. It was because,
his uncle said, the Lord meant him to be trained for a prophet, even
though he was a bastard, and to take his great-uncle’s place when he
died. The old man compared their situation to that of Elijah and Elisha.

All right, the stranger said, I suppose you know what one of them is.
But there’s a heap else you don’t know. You go ahead and put your feet
in his shoes. Elisha after Elijah like he said. But just lemme ast you
this: where is the voice of the Lord? I haven’t heard it. Who’s called
you this morning? Or any morning? Have you been told what to do? You
ain’t even heard the sound of natural thunder this morning. There ain’t
a cloud in the sky. The trouble with you, I see, he concluded, is that
you ain’t got but just enough sense to believe every word he told you.

The sun was directly overhead, apparently dead still, holding its
breath, waiting out the noontime. The grave was about two feet deep. Ten
foot now, remember, the stranger said and laughed. Old men are selfish.
You got to expect the least of them. The least of everybody, he added
and let out a flat sigh that was like a gust of sand raised and dropped
suddenly by the wind.

Tarwater looked up and saw two figures cutting across the field, a
colored man and woman, each dangling an empty vinegar jug by a finger.
The woman, tall and Indianlike, had on a green sun hat. She stooped
under the fence without pausing and came on across the yard toward the
grave; the man held the wire down and swung his leg over and followed at
her elbow. They kept their eyes on the hole and stopped at the edge of
it, looking down into the raw ground with shocked satisfied expressions.
The man, Buford, had a crinkled face, darker than his hat. “Old man
passed,” he said.

The woman lifted her head and let out a slow sustained wail, piercing
and formal. She set her jug down on the ground and crossed her arms and
then lifted them in the air and wailed again.

“Tell her to shut up that,” Tarwater said. “I’m in charge here now and I
don’t want no nigger-mourning.”

“I seen his spirit for two nights,” she said. “Seen him two nights and
he was unrested.”

“He ain’t been dead but since this morning,” Tarwater said. “If you all
want your jugs filled, give them to me and dig while I’m gone.”

“He’d been predicting his passing for many years,” Buford said. “She
seen him in her dream several nights and he wasn’t rested. I known him
well. I known him very well indeed.”

“Poor sweet sugar boy,” the woman said to Tarwater, “what you going to
do here now by yourself in this lonesome place?”

“Mind my bidnis,” the boy said, jerking the jug out of her hand. He
started off so quickly that he almost fell. He stalked across the back
field toward the rim of trees that surrounded the clearing.

The birds had gone into the deep woods to escape the noon sun and one
thrush, hidden some distance ahead of him, called the same four notes
again and again, stopping each time after them to make a silence.
Tarwater began to walk faster, then he began to lope, and in a second he
was running like something hunted, sliding down slopes waxed with pine
needles and grasping the limbs of trees to pull himself, panting, up the
slippery inclines. He crashed through a wall of honeysuckle and leapt
across a sandy near-dry stream bed and fell down against the high clay
bank that formed the back wall of a cove where the old man kept his
extra liquor hidden. He hid it in a hollow of the bank, covered with a
large stone. Tarwater began to fight at the stone to pull it away, while
the stranger stood over his shoulder panting, he was crazy! He was
crazy! That’s the long and short of it, he was crazy!

Tarwater got the stone away and pulled out a black jug and sat down
against the bank with it. Crazy! the stranger hissed, collapsing by his
side.

The sun appeared, a furious white, edging its way secretly behind the
tops of the trees that rose over the hiding place.

A man, seventy years of age, to bring a baby out into the backwoods to
raise him right! Suppose he had died when you were four years old
instead of fourteen? Could you have toted mash to the still then and
supported yourself? I never heard of no four-year-old running a still.

Never did I hear of that, he continued. You weren’t anything to him but
something that would grow big enough to bury him when the time came and
now that he’s dead, he’s shut of you but you got two hundred and fifty
pounds of him to put below the face of the earth. And don’t think he
wouldn’t heat up like a coal stove to see you take a drop of liquor, he
added. Though he had a weakness for it himself. When he couldn’t stand
the Lord one instant longer, he got drunk, prophet or no prophet. Hah.
He might say it would hurt you but what he meant was you might get so
much you wouldn’t be in no fit condition to bury him. He said he brought
you out here to raise you according to principle and that was the
principle: that you should be fit when the time came to bury him so he
would have a cross to mark where he was at.

A prophet with a still! He’s the only prophet I ever heard of making
liquor for a living.

After a minute he said in a softer tone as the boy took a long swallow
from the black jug, well, a little won’t interfere. Moderation never
hurt no one.

A burning arm slid down Tarwater’s throat as if the devil were already
reaching inside him to finger his soul. He squinted at the angry sun
creeping behind the topmost fringe of trees.

Take it easy, his friend said. Do you remember them nigger gospel
singers you saw one time, all drunk, all singing, all dancing around
that black Ford automobile? Jesus, they wouldn’t have been near so glad
they were Redeemed if they hadn’t had that liquor in them. I wouldn’t
pay too much attention to my Redemption if I was you. Some people take
everything too hard.

Tarwater drank more slowly. He had been drunk only one time before and
that time his uncle had beat him with a piece of crate for it, saying
liquor would dissolve a child’s gut, another of his lies because his gut
had not dissolved.

It should be clear to you, his kind friend said, how all your life you
been tricked by that old man. You could have been a city slicker for the
last fourteen years. Instead, you been deprived of any company but his,
you been living in a two-story barn in the middle of this earth’s bald
patch, following behind a mule and plow since you were seven. And how do
you know the education he give you is true to the facts? Maybe he taught
you a system of figures nobody else uses? How do you know that two added
to two makes four? Four added to four makes eight? Maybe other people
don’t think so. How do you know if there was an Adam or if Jesus eased
your situation any when He redeemed you? Or how do you know if He
actually done it? Nothing but that old man’s word and it ought to be
obvious to you by now that he was crazy. And as for Judgment Day, the
stranger said, every day is Judgment Day.

Ain’t you old enough to have learnt that yet for yourself? Don’t
everything you do, everything you have ever done, work itself out right
or wrong before your eye and usually before the sun has set? Have you
ever got by with anything? No you ain’t nor ever thought you would. You
might as well drink all that liquor since you’ve already drunk so much.
Once you pass the moderation mark you’ve passed it, and that gyration
you feel working down from the top of your brain, he said, that’s the
Hand of God laying a blessing on you. He has given you your release.
That old man was the stone before your door and the Lord has rolled it
away. He ain’t rolled it quite far enough, of course. You got to finish
up yourself but He’s done the main part. Praise Him.

Tarwater had ceased to have any feeling in his legs. He dozed for a
while, his head hanging to the side and his mouth open and the liquor
trickling slowly down the side of his overalls where the jug had
overturned in his lap. Eventually there was only a drip at the neck of
the bottle, forming and filling and dropping, silent and measured and
sun-colored. The bright even sky began to fade, coarsening with clouds
until every shadow had gone in. He woke with a wrench forward, his eyes
focussing and unfocussing on something that looked like a burnt rag
hanging close to his face.

Buford said, “This ain’t no way for you to act. Old man don’t deserve
this. There’s no rest until the dead is buried.” He was squatting on his
heels, one hand gripped around Tarwater’s arm. “I gone yonder to the
door and seen him sitting there at the table, not even laid out on a
cooling board. He ought to be laid out and have some salt on his bosom
if you mean to keep him overnight.”

The boy’s lids pinched together to hold the image steady and in a second
he made out two small red blistered eyes.

“He deserves to lie in a grave that fits him,” Buford said. “He was deep
in this life, he was deep in Jesus’ misery.”

“Nigger,” the child said, working his strange swollen tongue, “take your
hand off me.”

Buford lifted his hand. “He needs to be rested,” he said.

“He’ll be rested all right when I get through with him,” Tarwater said
vaguely. “Go on and lea’ me to my bidnis.”

“Nobody going to bother you,” Buford said, standing up. He waited a
minute, bent, looking down at the limp figure sprawled against the bank.
The boy’s head was tilted backwards over a root that jutted out of the
clay wall. His mouth hung open and his turned-up hat cut a straight line
across his forehead, just over his half-open unseeing eyes. His
cheekbones protruded, narrow and thin like the arms of a cross, and the
hollows under them had an ancient look as if the child’s skeleton
beneath were as old as the world. “Nobody going to bother you,” the
Negro muttered, pushing through the wall of honeysuckle without looking
back. “That going to be your trouble.”

Tarwater closed his eyes again.

Some night bird complaining close by woke him up. It was not a
screeching noise, only an intermittent hump-hump as if the bird had to
recall his grievance each time before he repeated it. Clouds were moving
convulsively across a black sky and there was a pink unsteady moon that
appeared to be jerked up a foot or so and then dropped and jerked up
again. This was because, as he observed in an instant, the sky was
lowering, coming down fast to smother him. The bird screeched and flew
off in time and Tarwater lurched into the middle of the stream bed and
crouched on his hands and knees. The moon was reflected like pale fire
in the few spots of water in the sand. He sprang at the wall of
honeysuckle and began to tear through it, confusing the sweet familiar
odor with the weight coming down on him. When he stood up on the other
side, the black ground swung slowly and threw him down again. A flare of
pink lightning lit the woods and he saw the black shapes of trees pierce
out of the ground all around him. The night bird began to hump again
from a thicket where he had settled.

He got up and began to move in the direction of the clearing, feeling
his way from tree to tree, the trunks very cold and dry to his touch.
There was distant thunder and a continuous flicker of pale lightning
firing one section of woods and then another. Finally he saw the shack,
standing gaunt-black and tall in the middle of the clearing, with the
pink moon trembling directly over it. His eyes glittered like open pits
of light as he moved across the sand, dragging his crushed shadow behind
him. He didn’t turn his head to that side of the yard where he had
started the grave. He stopped at the far back corner of the house and
squatted down on the ground and looked underneath at the litter there,
chicken crates and barrels and old rags and boxes. He had a small box of
wooden matches in his pocket.

He crawled under and began to set small fires, building one from
another, and working his way out at the front porch, leaving the fire
behind him eating greedily at the dry tinder and the floor boards of the
house. He crossed the front side of the yard and went through the rutted
field without looking back until he reached the edge of the opposite
woods. Then he glanced over his shoulder and saw that the pink moon had
dropped through the roof of the shack and was bursting and he began to
run, forced on through the woods by two bulging silver eyes that grew in
immense astonishment in the center of the fire behind him. He could hear
it moving up through the black night like a whirling chariot.

Toward midnight he came out on the highway and caught a ride with a
salesman who was a manufacturer’s representative, selling copper flues
throughout the Southeast, and who gave the silent boy what he said was
the best advice he could give any young fellow setting out to find
himself a place in the world. While they sped forward on the black
untwisting highway, watched on either side by a dark wall of trees, the
salesman said that it had been his personal experience that you couldn’t
sell a copper flue to a man you didn’t love. He was a thin fellow with a
narrow face that appeared to have been worn down to the sharpest
possible depressions. He wore a broad-brimmed stiff grey hat of the kind
used by businessmen who would like to look like cowboys. He said love
was the only policy that worked 95% of the time. He said when he went to
sell a man a flue, he asked first about that man’s wife’s health and how
his children were. He said he had a book that he kept the names of his
customer’s families in and what was wrong with them. A man’s wife had
cancer, he put her name down in the book and wrote _cancer_ after it and
inquired about her every time he went to that man’s hardware store until
she died; then he scratched out the word _cancer_ and wrote _dead_
there. “And I say thank God when they’re dead,” the salesman said;
“that’s one less to remember.”

“You don’t owe the dead anything,” Tarwater said in a loud voice,
speaking for almost the first time since he had got in the car.

“Nor they you,” said the stranger. “And that’s the way it ought to be in
this world—nobody owing nobody nothing.”

“Look,” Tarwater said suddenly, sitting forward, his face close to the
windshield, “we’re headed in the wrong direction. We’re going back where
we came from. There’s the fire again. There’s the fire we left!”

Ahead of them in the sky there was a faint glow, steady, and not made by
lightning. “That’s the same fire we came from!” the boy said in a high
voice.

“Boy, you must be nuts,” the salesman said. “That’s the city we’re
coming to. That’s the glow from the city lights. I reckon this is your
first trip anywhere.”

“You’re turned around,” the child said; “it’s the same fire.”

The stranger twisted his rutted face sharply. “I’ve never been turned
around in my life,” he said. “And I didn’t come from any fire. I come
from Mobile. And I know where I’m going. What’s the matter with you?”

Tarwater sat staring at the glow in front of him. “I was asleep,” he
muttered. “I’m just now waking up.”

“You should have been listening to me,” the salesman said. “I been
telling you things you ought to know.”




                                   II

IF THE BOY had actually trusted his new friend, Meeks, the copper flue
salesman, he would have accepted Meeks’ offer to take him directly to
his uncle’s door and let him out. Meeks had turned on the car light and
told him to climb over onto the back seat and root around until he found
the telephone book and when Tarwater had climbed back with it, he had
showed him how to find his uncle’s name in the book. Tarwater wrote the
address and the telephone number down on the back of one of Meeks’
cards. Meeks’ telephone number was on the other side and he said any
time Tarwater wanted to contact him for a little loan or any assistance,
not to be afraid to use it. What Meeks had decided after about a half
hour of the boy was that he was just enough off in the head and just
ignorant enough to be a very hard worker, and he wanted a very ignorant
energetic boy to work for him. But Tarwater was evasive. “I got to
contact this uncle of mine, my only blood connection,” he said.

Meeks could look at this boy and tell that he was running away from
home, that he had left a mother and probably a sot-father and probably
four or five brothers and sisters in a two-room shack set in a
brush-swept bare-ground clearing just off the highway and that he was
hightailing it for the big world, having first, from the way he reeked,
fortified himself with stump liquor. He didn’t for a minute believe he
had any uncle at any such respectable address. He thought the boy had
set his finger down on the name, Rayber, by chance and said, “That’s
him. A schoolteacher. My uncle.”

“I’ll take you right to his door,” Meeks had said, fox-like. “We pass
there going through town. We pass right by there.”

“No,” Tarwater said. He was sitting forward on the seat, looking out the
window at a hill covered with old used-car bodies. In the indistinct
darkness, they seemed to be drowning into the ground, to be about
half-submerged already. The city hung in front of them on the side of
the mountain as if it were a larger part of the same pile, not yet
buried so deep. The fire had gone out of it and it appeared settled into
its unbreakable parts.

The boy did not intend to go to the schoolteacher’s until daylight and
when he went he intended to make it plain that he had not come to be
beholden or to be studied for a schoolteacher magazine. He began trying
to remember the schoolteacher’s face so that he could stare him down in
his mind before he actually faced him. He felt that the more he could
recall about him, the less advantage the new uncle would have over him.
The face had not been one that held together in his mind, though he
remembered the sloping jaw and the black-rimmed glasses. What he could
not picture were the eyes behind the glasses. He had no memory of them
and there was every kind of contradiction in the rubble of his
great-uncle’s descriptions. Sometimes the old man had said the nephew’s
eyes were black and sometimes brown. The boy kept trying to find eyes
that fit mouth, nose that fit chin, but every time he thought he had a
face put together, it fell apart and he had to begin on a new one. It
was as if the schoolteacher, like the devil, could take on any look that
suited him.

Meeks was telling him about the value of work. He said that it had been
his personal experience that if you wanted to get ahead, you had to
work. He said this was the law of life and it was no way to get around
it because it was inscribed on the human heart like love thy neighbor.
He said these two laws were the team that worked together to make the
world go round and that any individual who wanted to be a success and
win the pursuit of happiness, that was all he needed to know.

The boy was beginning to see a consistent image for the schoolteacher’s
eyes and was not listening to this advice. He saw them dark grey,
shadowed with knowledge, and the knowledge moved like tree reflections
in a pond where far below the surface shadows a snake may glide and
disappear. He had made a habit of catching his great-uncle in
contradictions about the schoolteacher’s appearance.

“I forget what color eyes he’s got,” the old man would say, irked. “What
difference does the color make when I know the look? I know what’s
behind it.”

“What’s behind it?”

“Nothing. He’s full of nothing.”

“He knows a heap,” the boy said. “I don’t reckon it’s anything he don’t
know.”

“He don’t know it’s anything he can’t know,” the old man said. “That’s
his trouble. He thinks if it’s something he can’t know then somebody
smarter than him can tell him about it and he can know it just the same.
And if you were to go there, the first thing he would do would be to
test your head and tell you what you were thinking and howcome you were
thinking it and what you ought to be thinking instead. And before long
you wouldn’t belong to your self no more, you would belong to him.”

The boy had no intention of allowing this to happen. He knew enough
about the schoolteacher to be on his guard. He knew two complete
histories, the history of the world, beginning with Adam, and the
history of the schoolteacher, beginning with his mother, old Tarwater’s
own and only sister who had run away from Powderhead when she was
eighteen years old and had become—the old man said he would mince no
words, even with a child—a whore, until she had found a man by the name
of Rayber who was willing to marry one. At least once a week, beginning
at the beginning, the old man had reviewed this history through to the
end.

His sister and this Rayber had brought two children into the world, one
the schoolteacher and one a girl who had turned out to be Tarwater’s
mother and who, the old man said, had followed in the natural footsteps
of her own mother, being already a whore by the time she was eighteen.

The old man had a great deal to say about Tarwater’s conception, for the
schoolteacher had told him that he himself had got his sister this first
(and last) lover because he thought it would contribute to her
_self-confidence_. The old man would say this, imitating the
schoolteacher’s voice and making it sillier than the boy felt it
probably was. The old man was thrown into a fury of exasperation that
there was not enough scorn in the world to cast upon this idiocy.
Finally he would give up trying. The lover had shot himself after the
accident, which was a relief to the schoolteacher for he wanted to bring
up the baby himself.

The old man said that with the devil having such a heavy role in his
beginning, it was little wonder that he should have an eye on the boy
and keep him under close surveillance during his time on earth, in order
that the soul he had helped call into being might serve him forever in
hell. “You are the kind of boy,” the old man said, “that the devil is
always going to be offering to assist, to give you a smoke or a drink or
a ride, and to ask you your bidnis. You had better mind how you take up
with strangers. And keep your bidnis to yourself.” It was to foil the
devil’s plans for him that the Lord had seen to his upbringing.

“What line you going to get into?” Meeks asked.

The boy didn’t appear to hear.

Whereas the schoolteacher had led his sister into evil, with success,
old Tarwater had made every attempt to lead his own sister to
repentance, without success. Through one means or another, he had
managed to keep up with her after she ran away from Powderhead; but even
after she married, she would not listen to any word that had to do with
her salvation. He had twice been thrown out of her house by her
husband—each time with the assistance of the police because the husband
was a man of no force—but the Lord had prompted him constantly to go
back, even in the face of going to jail. When he could not get inside
the house, he would stand outside it and shout and then she would let
him in lest he attract the attention of the neighbors. The neighborhood
children would gather to listen to him and she would have to let him in.

It was not to be wondered at, the old man would say, that the
schoolteacher was no better than he was with such a father as he had.
The man, an insurance salesman, wore a straw hat on the side of his head
and smoked a cigar and when you told him his soul was in danger, he
offered to sell you a policy against any contingency. He said he was a
prophet too, a prophet of life insurance, for every right-thinking
Christian, he said, knew that it was his Christian duty to protect his
family and provide for them in the event of the unexpected. There was no
use treating with him, the old man said; his brain was as slick as his
eyeballs and the truth would no more soak into it than rain would
penetrate tin. The schoolteacher, with Tarwater blood in him, at least
had his father’s strain diluted. “Good blood flows in his veins,” the
old man said. “And good blood knows the Lord and there ain’t a thing he
can do about having it. There ain’t a way in the world he can get rid of
it.”

Meeks abruptly poked the boy in the side with his elbow. He said if it
was one thing a person needed to learn it was to pay attention to older
people than him when they gave him good advice. He said he himself had
graduated from the School of Experience with an H.L.L. degree. He asked
the boy if he knew what was an H.L.L. degree. Tarwater shook his head.
Meeks said the H.L.L. degree was the Hard Lesson from Life degree. He
said it was the quickest got and that it stayed learnt the longest.

The boy turned his head to the window.

One day the old man’s sister had worked a perfidy on him. He had been in
the habit of going on Wednesday afternoon because on that afternoon the
husband played a golf game and he could find her alone. On this
particular Wednesday, she did not open the door but he knew she was
inside because he heard footsteps. He beat on the door a few times to
warn her and when she wouldn’t open it, he began to shout, for her and
for all who would hear.

While he was telling this to Tarwater, he would jump up and begin to
shout and prophesy there in the clearing the same way he had done it in
front of her door. With no one to hear but the boy, he would flail his
arms and roar, “Ignore the Lord Jesus as long as you can! Spit out the
bread of life and sicken on honey. Whom work beckons, to work! Whom
blood to blood! Whom lust to lust! Make haste, make haste. Fly faster
and faster. Spin yourselves in a frenzy, the time is short! The Lord is
preparing a prophet. The Lord is preparing a prophet with fire in his
hand and eye and the prophet is moving toward the city with his warning.
The prophet is coming with the Lord’s message. ‘Go warn the children of
God,’ saith the Lord, ‘of the terrible speed of justice.’ Who will be
left? Who will be left when the Lord’s mercy strikes?”

He might have been shouting to the silent woods that encircled them.
While he was in his frenzy, the boy would take up the shotgun and hold
it to his eye and sight along the barrel, but sometimes as his uncle
grew more and more wild, he would lift his face from the gun for a
moment with a look of uneasy alertness, as if while he had been
inattentive, the old man’s words had been dropping one by one into him
and now, silent, hidden in his bloodstream, were moving secretly toward
some goal of their own.

His uncle would prophesy until he exhausted himself and then he would
fall with a thud on the swayback step and sometimes it would be five or
ten minutes before he could go on and relate how the sister had worked
the perfidy on him.

Whenever he came to this part of the story, his breath would at once
come short as if he were struggling to run up a hill. His face would get
redder and his voice thinner and sometimes it would give out completely
and he would sit there on the step, beating the porch floor with his
fist while he moved his lips and no sound came out. Finally he would
pipe, “They grabbed me. Two. From behind. The door behind. Two.”

His sister had had two men and a doctor behind the door, listening, and
the papers made out to commit him to the asylum if the doctor thought he
was crazy. When he understood what was happening, he had raged through
her house like a blinded bull, everything crashing behind him, and it
had taken two of them and the doctor and two neighbors to get him down.
The doctor had said he was not only crazy but dangerous and they had
taken him to the asylum in a strait jacket.

“Ezekiel was in the pit for forty days,” he would say, “but I was in it
for four years,” and he would stop at that point and warn Tarwater that
the servants of the Lord Jesus could expect the worse. The boy could see
that this was so. But no matter how little they had now, his uncle said,
their reward in the end was the Lord Jesus Himself, the bread of life!

The boy would have a hideous vision of himself sitting forever with his
great-uncle on a green bank, full and sick, staring at a broken fish and
a multiplied loaf.

His uncle had been in the asylum four years because it had taken him
four years to understand that the way for him to get out was to stop
prophesying on the ward. It had taken him four years to discover what
the boy felt he himself would have discovered in no time at all. But at
least in the asylum the old man had learned caution and when he got out,
he put everything he had learned to the service of his cause. He
proceeded about the Lord’s business like an experienced crook. He had
given the sister up but he intended to help her boy. He planned to
kidnap the child and keep him long enough to baptize him and instruct
him in the facts of his Redemption and he mapped out his plan to the
last detail and carried it out exactly.

Tarwater liked this part best because in spite of himself he had to
admire his uncle’s craft. The old man had persuaded Buford Munson to
send his daughter in to get a job cooking for the sister and with the
girl once in the house, he had been able to find out what he needed to
know. He learned that there were two children now instead of one and
that his sister sat in her nightgown all day drinking whiskey out of a
medicine bottle. While Luella Munson washed and cooked and took care of
the children, his sister lay on the bed sipping from the bottle and
reading books that she had to buy fresh every night from the drugstore.
But the principle reason the kidnapping had been so easy was because his
great-uncle had had the full co-operation of the schoolteacher himself,
a thin boy with a boney pale face and a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles
that were always falling down his nose.

The two of them, the old man said, had liked each other from the first.
The day he had gone to do the kidnapping, the husband was away on
business and the sister, shut up in her room with the bottle, didn’t
even know the time of day. All the old man had done was to walk in and
tell Luella Munson that his nephew was going off to spend a few days
with him in the country and then he had gone out to the back yard and
spoken to the schoolteacher who had been digging holes and lining them
with broken glass.

He and the schoolteacher had taken the train as far as the junction and
had walked the rest of the way to Powderhead. The old man had explained
to him that he was not taking him on this trip for pleasure but because
the Lord had sent him to do it, to see that he was born again and
instructed in his Redemption. All these facts were new to the
schoolteacher, for his parents had never taught him anything, old
Tarwater said, except not to wet the bed.

In four days the old man taught him what was necessary to know and
baptized him. He made him understand that his true father was the Lord
and not the simpleton in town and that he would have to lead a secret
life in Jesus until the day came when he would be able to bring the rest
of his family around to repentance. He had made him understand that on
the last day it would be his destiny to rise in glory in the Lord Jesus.
Since this was the first time anybody had bothered to tell these facts
to the schoolteacher, he could not hear too much of them, and as he had
never seen woods before or been in a boat or caught a fish or walked on
roads that were not paved, they did all those things too and, his uncle
said, he even allowed him to plow. His sallow face had become bright in
four days. At this point Tarwater would begin to weary of the story.

The schoolteacher had spent four days in the clearing because his mother
had not missed him for three days and when Luella Munson had mentioned
where he had gone, she had to wait another day before his father came
home and she could send him after the child. She would not come herself,
the old man said, for fear the wrath of God would strike her at
Powderhead and she would not be able to get back to the city again. She
had wired the schoolteacher’s father and when the simpleton arrived at
the clearing, the schoolteacher was in despair at having to leave. The
light had left his eyes. He had gone but the old man insisted that he
had been able to tell by the look on his face that he would never be the
same boy again.

“If he didn’t say he didn’t want to go, you can’t be sure he didn’t,”
Tarwater would say contentiously.

“Then why did he try to come back?” the old man asked. “Answer me that.
Why one week later did he run away and try to find his way back and got
his picture in the paper when the state patrol found him in the woods? I
ask you why. Tell me that if you know so much.”

“Because here was less bad than there,” Tarwater said. “Less bad don’t
mean good, it only means better-than.”

“He tried to come back,” his uncle said slowly, emphasizing each word,
“to hear more about God his Father, more about Jesus Christ Who had died
to redeem him and more of the Truth I could tell him.”

“Well go on,” Tarwater would say irritably, “get on with the rest of
it.” The story always had to be taken to completion. It was like a road
that the boy had travelled on so often that half the time he didn’t look
where they were going, and when at certain points he would become aware
where they were, he would be surprised to see that the old man had not
got farther on with it. Sometimes his uncle would lag at one point as if
he didn’t want to face what was coming and then when he finally came to
it, he would try to get past it in a rush. At such points, Tarwater
plagued him for details. “Tell about when he came when he was fourteen
years old and had already decided none of it was true and he give you
all that sass.”

“Bah,” the old man would say. “He was living in confusion. I don’t say
it was his fault then. They told him I was a crazy man. But I’ll tell
you one thing: he never believed them neither. They kept him from
believing me but I kept him from believing them and he never took on
none of their ways though he took on worse ones. And when he got shut of
the three of them in that crash, nobody was gladder than he was. Then he
turned his mind to raising you. Said he was going to give you every
advantage, every advantage.” The old man snorted. “You have me to thank
for saving you from those advantages.”

The boy looked off into the distance as though he were staring blankly
at his invisible advantages.

“When he got shut of the three of them in that crash, this was the first
place he came. On the very day they were killed he came out here to tell
me. Straight out here. Yes sir,” the old man said with the greatest
satisfaction, “straight out here. He hadn’t seen me in years but this is
where he came. I was the one he came to. I was the one he wanted to see.
Me. I had never left his mind. I had taken my seat in it.”

“You skipped all that part about how he came when he was fourteen and
give you all that sass,” Tarwater said.

“It was sass he had got from them,” the old man said. “Just
parrot-mouthing all they had ever said about how I was a crazy man. The
truth was even if they told him not to believe what I had taught him, he
couldn’t forget it. He never could forget that there was a chance that
that simpleton was not his only father. I planted the seed in him and it
was there for good. Whether anybody liked it or not.”

“It fell amongst cockles,” Tarwater said. “Say the sass.”

“It fell in deep,” the old man said, “or else after that crash he
wouldn’t have come out here hunting me.”

“He only wanted to see if you were still crazy,” the boy offered.

“The day may come,” his great-uncle said slowly, “when a pit opens up
inside you and you know some things you never known before,” and he
would give him such a prescient piercing look that the child would turn
his face away, scowling fiercely.

His great-uncle had gone to live with the schoolteacher and as soon as
he had got there, he had baptized Tarwater, practically under the
schoolteacher’s nose and the schoolteacher had made a blasphemous joke
of it. But the old man could never tell this straight through. He always
had to back up and tell why he had gone to live with the schoolteacher
in the first place. He had gone for three reasons. One, he said, because
he knew the schoolteacher wanted him. He was the only person in the
schoolteacher’s life who had ever taken two steps out of his way in his
behalf. And two, because his nephew was the proper person to bury him
and he wanted to have it understood with him how he wanted it done. And
three, because the old man meant to see that Tarwater was baptized.

“I know all that,” the boy would say, “get on with the rest of it.”

“After the three of them perished and the house was his, he cleared it
out,” old Tarwater said. “He moved every stick of furniture out of it
except a table and a chair or two and a bed or two and the crib he
bought for you. Taken down all the pictures and all the curtains and
taken up all the rugs. Even burned up all his mother’s and sister’s and
the simpleton’s clothes, didn’t want a thing of theirs around. It wasn’t
anything left but books and papers that he had collected. Papers
everywhere,” the old man said. “Every room looked like the inside of a
bird’s nest. I came a few days after the crash and when he saw me
standing there, he was glad to see me. His eyes lit up. He was glad to
see me. ‘Ha,’ he said, ‘my house is swept and garnished and here are the
seven other devils, all rolled into one!’” The old man slapped his knee
with pleasure.

“It don’t sound to me like . . .”

“No, he didn’t say so,” his uncle said, “but I ain’t an idiot.”

“If he didn’t say so you can’t be sure.”

“I’m as sure,” his uncle said, “as I am that this here,” and he held up
his hand, every short thick finger stretched rigid in front of
Tarwater’s face, “is my hand and not yours.” There was something final
in this that always made the boy’s impudence subside.

“Well get on with it,” he would say. “If you don’t make haste, you’ll
never get to where he blasphemed at.”

“He was glad to see me,” his uncle said. “He opened the door with all
that house full of paper-trash behind him and there I stood and he was
glad to see me. It was all underneath his face.”

“What did he say?” Tarwater asked.

“He looked at my satchel,” the old man said, “and he said, ‘Uncle, you
can’t live with me. I know exactly what you want but I’m going to raise
this child my way.’”

These words of the schoolteacher’s had always caused a quick charge of
excitement to race through Tarwater, an almost sensuous satisfaction.
“It might have sounded to you like he was glad to see you,” he said. “It
don’t sound that way to me.”

“He wasn’t but twenty-four years old,” the old man said. “His expression
hadn’t even set on his face yet. I could still see the seven-year-old
boy that had gone off with me, except that now he had a pair of
black-rimmed glasses and a nose big enough to hold them up. The size of
his eyes had shrunk because his face had grown but it was the same face
all right. You could see behind it to what he really wanted to say. When
he came out here later to get you back after I had stolen you, it was
already set. It was as set then as the outside of a penitentiary but not
now when I’m telling you about. Then it wasn’t set and I could see he
wanted me. Else why had he come out to Powderhead to tell me they were
all dead? I ask you that? He could have let me alone.”

The boy couldn’t answer.

“Anyway,” the old man said, “what all he gone on and done proved he
wanted me right then because he took me in. He looked at my satchel and
I said, ‘I’m on your charity,’ and he said, ‘I’m sorry, Uncle. You can’t
live with me and ruin another child’s life. This one is going to be
brought up to live in the real world. He’s going to be brought up to
expect exactly what he can do for himself. He’s going to be his own
saviour. He’s going to be free!’” The old man turned his head to the
side and spit. “Free,” he said. “He was full of such-like phrases. But
then I said it. I said what changed his mind.”

The boy sighed at this. The old man considered it his master stroke. He
had said, “I never come to live with you. I come to die!”

“And you should have seen his face,” he said. “He looked like he’d been
pushed all of a sudden from behind. He hadn’t cared if the other three
were wiped out but when he thought of me going, it was like he was
losing somebody for the first time. He stood there staring at me.” And
once, only once, the old man had leaned forward and said to Tarwater, in
a voice that could no longer contain the pleasure of its secret, “He
loved me like a daddy and he was ashamed of it!”

The boy’s face had remained unmoved. “Yes,” he said, “and you had told
him a bare-face lie. You never had no intention of dying.”

“I was sixty-nine years of age,” his uncle said. “I could have died the
next day as well as not. No man knows the hour of his death. I didn’t
have my life in front of me. It was not a lie, it was only a
speculation. I told him, I said, ‘I may live two months or two days.’
And I had on my clothes that I bought to be buried in—all new.”

“Ain’t it that same suit you got on now?” the boy asked indignantly,
pointing to the threadbare knee. “Ain’t it that one you got on yourself
right now?”

“I may live two months or two days, I said to him,” his uncle said.

Or ten years or twenty, Tarwater thought.

“Oh it was a shock to him,” the old man said.

It might have been a shock, the boy thought, but he wasn’t all that
sorry about it. The schoolteacher had merely said, “So I’m to put you
away, Uncle? All right, I’ll put you away. I’ll do it with pleasure.
I’ll put you away for good and all,” but the old man insisted that his
words were one thing and his actions and the look on his face another.

His great-uncle had not been in the nephew’s house ten minutes before he
had baptized Tarwater. They had gone into the room where the crib was
with Tarwater in it and as the old man looked at him for the first
time—a wizened grey-faced scrawny sleeping baby—the voice of the Lord
had come to him and said: =here is the prophet to take your place.
baptize him=.

That? the old man had asked, that wizened grey-faced . . . and then as
he wondered how he could baptize him with the nephew standing there, the
Lord had sent the paper boy to knock on the door and the schoolteacher
had gone to answer it.

When he came back in a few minutes, his uncle was holding Tarwater in
one hand and with the other he was pouring water over his head out of
the bottle that had been on the table by the crib. He had pulled off the
nipple and stuck it in his pocket. He was just finishing the words of
baptism as the schoolteacher came back in the door and he had had to
laugh when he looked up and saw his nephew’s face. It looked hacked, the
old man said. Not even angry at first, just hacked.

Old Tarwater had said, “He’s been born again and there ain’t a thing you
can do about it,” and then he had seen the rage rise in the nephew’s
face and had seen him try to conceal it.

“Time has passed you by, Uncle,” the nephew said. “That can’t even
irritate me. That only makes me laugh,” and he laughed, a short forced
bark, but the old man said his face was mottled. “Just as well you did
it now,” he said. “If you had got me when I was seven days instead of
seven years, you might not have ruined my life.”

“If it’s ruined,” the old man said, “it wasn’t me that ruined it.”

“Oh yes it was,” the nephew said, advancing across the room, his face
very red. “You’re too blind to see what you did to me. A child can’t
defend himself. Children are cursed with believing. You pushed me out of
the real world and I stayed out of it until I didn’t know which was
which. You infected me with your idiot hopes, your foolish violence. I’m
not always myself, I’m not al . . .” but he stopped. He wouldn’t admit
what the old man knew. “There’s nothing wrong with me,” he said. “I’ve
straightened the tangle you made. Straightened it by pure will power.
I’ve made myself straight.”

“You see,” the old man said, “he admitted himself the seed was still in
him.”

Old Tarwater had laid the baby back in the crib but the nephew took him
out again, a peculiar smile, the old man said, stiffening on his face.
“If one baptism is good, two will be better,” he said and he had turned
Tarwater over and poured what was left in the bottle over his bottom and
said the words of baptism again. Old Tarwater had stood there, aghast at
this blasphemy. “Now Jesus has a claim on both ends,” the nephew said.

The old man had roared, “Blasphemy never changed a plan of the Lord’s!”

“And the Lord hasn’t changed any of mine either,” said the nephew coolly
and put the baby back.

“And what did I do?” Tarwater asked.

“You didn’t do nothing,” the old man said as if what he did or didn’t do
was of no consequence whatsoever.

“It was me that was the prophet,” the boy said sullenly.

“You didn’t even know what was going on,” his uncle said.

“Oh yes I did,” the child said. “I was laying there thinking.”

His uncle would ignore this and go on. He had thought for a while that
by living with the schoolteacher, he might convince him again of all
that he had convinced him of when he had kidnapped him as a child and he
had had hope of it up until the time when the schoolteacher showed him
the study he had written of him for the magazine. Then the old man had
realized at last that there was no hope of his doing anything for the
schoolteacher. He had failed the schoolteacher’s mother and he had
failed the schoolteacher, and now there was nothing to do but try to
save Tarwater from being brought up by a fool. In this he had not
failed.

The boy felt that the schoolteacher could have made more of an effort to
get him back. He had come out and got shot in the leg and the ear but if
he had used his head, he might have avoided that and got him back at the
same time. “Why didn’t he bring the law out here and get me back?” he
had asked.

“You want to know why?” his uncle said. “Well I’ll tell you why. I’ll
tell you exactly why. It was because he found you a heap of trouble. He
wanted it all in his head. You can’t change a child’s pants in your
head.”

The boy would think: but if the schoolteacher hadn’t written that piece
on him, we might all three be living in town right now.

When the old man had read the piece in the schoolteacher magazine, he
had at first not recognized who it was the schoolteacher was writing
about, who the type was that was almost extinct. He had sat down to read
the piece, full of pride that his nephew had succeeded in having a
composition printed in a magazine. He had handed it carelessly to his
uncle and said he might want to glance over it and the old man had sat
down at once at the kitchen table and commenced to read it. He recalled
that the schoolteacher had kept passing by the kitchen door to witness
how he was taking the piece.

About the middle of it, old Tarwater had begun to think that he was
reading about someone he had once known or at least someone he had
dreamed about, for the figure was strangely familiar. “This fixation of
being called by the Lord had its origin in insecurity. He needed the
assurance of a call and so he called himself,” he read. The
schoolteacher kept passing by the door, passing and repassing, and
finally he came in and sat down quietly on the other side of the small
white metal table. When the old man looked up, the schoolteacher smiled.
It was a very slight smile, the slightest that would do for any
occasion. The old man knew from the smile who it was he had been reading
about.

For the length of a minute, he could not move. He felt he was tied hand
and foot inside the schoolteacher’s head, a space as bare and neat as
the cell in the asylum, and was shrinking, drying up to fit it. His
eyeballs swerved from side to side as if he were pinned in a strait
jacket again. Jonah, Ezekiel, Daniel, he was at that moment all of
them—the swallowed, the lowered, the enclosed.

The nephew, his smile still fixed, reached across the table and put his
hand on the old man’s wrist in a gesture of pity. “You’ve got to be born
again, Uncle,” he said, “by your own efforts, back to the real world
where there’s no saviour but yourself.”

The old man’s tongue lay in his mouth like a stone but his heart began
to swell. His prophet’s blood surged in him, surged to floodtide for a
miraculous release, though his face remained shocked, expressionless.
The nephew patted his huge clenched fist and got up and left the
kitchen, bearing away his smile of triumph.

The next morning when he went to the crib to give the baby his bottle,
he found nothing in it but the blue magazine with the old man’s message
scrawled on the back of it: =the prophet i raise up out of this boy
will burn your eyes clean=.

“It was me could act,” the old man said, “not him. He could never take
action. He could only get everything inside his head and grind it to
nothing. But I acted. And because I acted, you sit here in freedom, you
sit here a rich man, knowing the Truth, in the freedom of the Lord Jesus
Christ.”

The boy would move his thin shoulder blades irritably as if he were
shifting the burden of Truth like a cross on his back. “He came out here
and got shot to get me back,” he said obstinately.

“If he had really wanted you back, he could have got you,” the old man
said. “He could have had the law out here after me or got me put back in
the asylum. There was plenty he could have done, but what happened to
him was that welfare-woman. She persuaded him to have one of his own and
let you go, and he was easy persuaded. And that one,” the old man would
say, beginning to brood on the schoolteacher’s child again, “that
one—the Lord gave him one he couldn’t corrupt.” And then he would grip
the boy’s shoulder and put a fierce pressure on it. “And if I don’t get
him baptized, it’ll be for you to do,” he said. “I enjoin you to do it,
boy.”

Nothing irritated the boy so much as this. “I take my orders from the
Lord,” he would say in an ugly voice, trying to pry the fingers out of
his shoulder. “Not from you.”

“The Lord will give them to you,” the old man said, gripping his
shoulder tighter.

“He had to change that one’s pants and he done it,” Tarwater muttered.

“He had the welfare-woman to do it for him,” his uncle said. “She had to
be good for something, but you can bet she ain’t still around there.
Bernice Bishop!” he said as if he found this the most idiotic name in
the language. “Bernice Bishop!”

The boy had sense enough to know that he had been betrayed by the
schoolteacher and he did not mean to go to his house until daylight,
when he could see behind and before him. “I ain’t going there until
daylight,” he said suddenly to Meeks. “You needn’t to stop there because
I ain’t getting out there.”

Meeks leaned casually against the door of the car, driving with half his
attention and giving the other half to Tarwater. “Son,” he said, “I’m
not going to be a preacher to you. I’m not going to tell you not to lie.
I ain’t going to tell you nothing impossible. All I’m going to tell you
is this: don’t lie when you don’t have to. Else when you do have to,
nobody’ll believe you. You don’t have to lie to me. I know exactly what
you done.” A shaft of light plunged through the car window and he looked
to the side and saw the white face beside him, staring up with
soot-colored eyes.

“How do you know?” the boy asked.

Meeks smiled with pleasure. “Because I done the same thing myself once,”
he said.

Tarwater caught hold of the sleeve of the salesman’s coat and gave it a
quick pull. “On the Day of Judgment,” he said, “me and you will rise and
say we done it!”

Meeks looked at him again with one eyebrow cocked at the same angle he
wore his hat. “Will we?” he asked. Then he said, “What line you gonna
get into, boy?”

“What line?”

“What you going to do? What kind of _work_?”

“I know everything but the machines,” Tarwater said, sitting back again.
“My great-uncle learnt me everything but first I have to find out how
much of it is true.” They were entering the dilapidated outskirts of the
city where wooden buildings leaned together and an occasional dim light
lit up a faded sign advertising some remedy or other.

“What line was your great-uncle in?” Meeks asked.

“He was a prophet,” the boy said.

“Is that right?” Meeks asked and his shoulders jumped several times as
if they were going to leap over his head. “Who’d he prophesy to?”

“To me,” Tarwater said. “Nobody else would listen to him and there
wasn’t anybody else for me to listen to. He grabbed me away from this
other uncle, my only blood connection now, so as to save me from running
to doom.”

“You were a captive audience,” Meeks said. “And now you’re coming to
town to run to doom with the rest of us, huh?”

The boy didn’t answer at once. Then he said in a guarded tone, “I ain’t
said what I’m going to do.”

“You ain’t sure about what all this great-uncle of yours told you, are
you?” Meeks asked. “You figure he might have got aholt to some
misinformation.”

Tarwater looked away, out the window, at the brittle forms of the
houses. He was holding both arms close to his sides as if he were cold.
“I’ll find out,” he said.

“Well how now?” Meeks asked.

The dark city was unfolding on either side of them and they were
approaching a low circle of light in the distance. “I mean to wait and
see what happens,” he said after a moment.

“And suppose nothing don’t happen?” Meeks asked.

The circle of light became huge and they swung into the center of it and
stopped. It was a gaping concrete mouth with two red gas pumps set in
front of it and a small glass office toward the back. “I say suppose
nothing don’t happen?” Meeks repeated.

The boy looked at him darkly, remembering the silence after his
great-uncle’s death.

“Well?” Meeks said.

“Then I’ll make it happen,” he said. “I can act.”

“Attaboy,” Meeks said. He opened the car door and put his leg out while
he continued to observe his rider. Then he said, “Wait a minute. I got
to call my girl.”

A man was asleep in a chair tilted against the outside wall of the glass
office and Meeks went inside without waking him up. For a minute
Tarwater only craned his neck out the window. Then he got out and went
to the office door to watch Meeks use the machine. It sat, small and
black, in the center of a cluttered desk which Meeks sat down on as if
it had been his own. The room was lined with automobile tires and had a
concrete and rubber smell. Meeks took the machine in two parts and held
one part to his head while he circled with his finger on the other part.
Then he sat waiting, swinging his foot, while the horn buzzed in his
ear. After a minute an acid smile began to eat at the corners of his
mouth and he said, drawing in his breath, “Heythere, Sugar, hyer you?”
and Tarwater, from where he stood in the door, heard an actual woman’s
voice, like one coming from beyond the grave, say, “Why Sugar, is that
reely you?” and Meeks said it was him in the same old flesh and made an
appointment with her in ten minutes.

Tarwater stood awestruck in the doorway. Meeks put the telephone
together and then he said in a sly voice, “Now why don’t you call your
uncle?” and watched the boy’s face change, the eyes swerve suspiciously
to the side and the flesh drop around the boney mouth.

“I’ll speak with him soon enough,” he muttered, but he kept looking at
the black coiled machine, fascinated. “How do you use it?” he asked.

“You dial it like I did. Call your uncle,” Meeks urged.

“No, that woman is waiting on you,” Tarwater said.

“Let ’er wait,” Meeks said. “That’s what she knows how to do best.”

The boy approached it, taking out the card he had written the number on.
He put his finger on the dial and began gingerly to turn it.

“Great God,” Meeks said and took the receiver off the hook and put it in
his hand and thrust his hand to his ear. He dialed the number for him
and then pushed him down in the office chair to wait but Tarwater stood
up again, slightly crouched, holding the buzzing horn to his head, while
his heart began to kick viciously at his chest wall.

“It don’t speak,” he murmured.

“Give him time,” Meeks said, “maybe he don’t like to get up in the
middle of the night.”

The buzzing continued for a minute and then stopped abruptly. Tarwater
stood speechless, holding the earpiece tight against his head, his face
rigid as if he were afraid that the Lord might be about to speak to him
over the machine. All at once he heard what sounded like heavy breathing
in his ear.

“Ask for your party,” Meeks prompted. “How do you expect to get your
party if you don’t ask for him?”

The boy remained exactly as he was, saying nothing.

“I told you to ask for your party,” Meeks said irritably. “Ain’t you got
good sense?”

“I want to speak with my uncle,” Tarwater whispered.

There was a silence over the telephone but it was not a silence that
seemed to be empty. It was the kind where the breath is drawn in and
held. Suddenly the boy realized that it was the schoolteacher’s child on
the other side of the machine. The white-haired, blunted face rose
before him. He said in a furious shaking voice, “I want to speak with my
uncle. Not you!”

The heavy breathing began again as if in answer. It was a kind of
bubbling noise, the kind of noise someone would make who was struggling
to breathe in water. In a second it faded away. The horn of the machine
dropped out of Tarwater’s hand. He stood there blankly as if he had
received a revelation he could not yet decipher. He seemed to have been
stunned by some deep internal blow that had not yet made its way to the
surface of his mind.

Meeks picked up the earpiece and listened but there was no sound. He put
it back on the hook and said, “Come on. I ain’t got this kind of time.”
He gave the stupefied boy a shove and they left, driving off into the
city again. Meeks told him to learn to work every machine he saw. The
greatest invention of man, he said, was the wheel and he asked Tarwater
if he had ever thought how things were before it was a wheel, but the
boy didn’t answer him. He didn’t even appear to be listening. He sat
slightly forward and from time to time his lips moved as if he were
speaking silently with himself.

“Well, it was terrible,” Meeks said sourly. He knew the boy didn’t have
any uncle at any such respectable address and to prove it, he turned
down the street the uncle was supposed to live on and drove slowly past
the small shapes of squat houses until he found the number, visible in
phosphorescent letters on a small stick set on the edge of the grass
plot. He stopped the car and said, “Okay, kiddo, that’s it.”

“That’s what?” Tarwater mumbled.

“That’s your uncle’s house,” Meeks said.

The boy grabbed the edge of the window with both hands and stared out at
what appeared to be only a black shape crouched in a greater darkness a
little distance away. “I told you I wasn’t going there until daylight,”
he said angrily, “go on.”

“You’re going there right now,” Meeks said. “Because I ain’t getting
stuck with you. You can’t go with me where I’m going.”

“I ain’t getting out here,” the boy said.

Meeks reached across him and opened the car door. “So long, son,” he
said, “if you get real hungry by next week, you can contack me from that
card and we might make a deal.”

The boy gave him one white-faced outraged look and flung himself from
the car. He moved up the short concrete walk to the doorstep and sat
down abruptly, absorbed into the darkness. Meeks pulled the car door
shut. His face hung for a moment watching the barely visible outline of
the boy’s shape on the step. Then he drew back and drove on. He won’t
come to no good end, he said to himself.




                                  III

TARWATER SAT in the corner of the doorstep, scowling in the dark as the
car disappeared down the block. He did not look up at the sky but he was
unpleasantly aware of the stars. They seemed to be holes in his skull
through which some distant unmoving light was watching him. It was as if
he were alone in the presence of an immense silent eye. He had an
intense desire to make himself known to the schoolteacher at once, to
tell him what he had done and why and to be congratulated by him. At the
same time, his deep suspicion of the man continued to work in him. He
tried to bring the schoolteacher’s face again to mind, but all he could
manage was the face of the seven-year-old boy the old man had kidnapped.
He stared at it boldly, hardening himself for the encounter.

Then he rose and faced the heavy brass knocker on the door. He touched
it and jerked his hand away, burnt by a metallic coldness. He looked
quickly over his shoulder. The houses across the street formed a dark
jagged wall. The quiet seemed palpable, waiting. It seemed almost to be
waiting patiently, biding its time until it should reveal itself and
demand to be named. He turned back to the cold knocker and grabbed it
and shattered the silence as if it were a personal enemy. The noise
filled his head. He was aware of nothing but the racket he was making.

He beat louder and louder, bamming at the same time with his free fist
until he felt he was shaking the house. The empty street echoed with his
blows. He stopped once to get his breath and then began again, kicking
the door frenziedly with the blunt toe of his heavy work shoe. Nothing
happened. Finally he stopped and the implacable silence descended around
him, immune to his fury. A mysterious dread filled him. His whole body
felt hollow as if he had been lifted like Habakkuk by the hair of his
head, borne swiftly through the night and set down in the place of his
mission. He had a sudden foreboding that he was about to step into a
trap laid for him by the old man. He half-turned to run.

At once the glass panels on either side of the door filled with light.
There was a click and the knob turned. Tarwater jerked his hands up
automatically as if he were pointing an invisible gun and his uncle, who
had opened the door, jumped back at the sight of him.

The image of the seven-year-old boy disappeared forever from Tarwater’s
mind. His uncle’s face was so familiar to him that he might have seen it
every day of his life. He steadied himself and shouted, “My great-uncle
is dead and burnt, just like you would have burnt him yourself!”

The schoolteacher remained absolutely still as if he thought that by
looking long enough his hallucination would disappear. He had been
roused by the vibration in the house and had run, half-asleep, to the
door. His face was like the face of a sleep-walker who wakes and sees
some horror of his dreams take shape before him. After a moment he
muttered, “Wait here, deaf,” and turned and went quickly out of the
hall. He was barefooted and in his pajamas. He came back almost at once,
plugging something into his ear. He had thrust on the black-rimmed
glasses and he was sticking a metal box into the waist-band of his
pajamas. This was joined by a cord to the plug in his ear. For an
instant the boy had the thought that his head ran by electricity. He
caught Tarwater by the arm and pulled him into the hall under a
lantern-shaped light that hung from the ceiling. The boy found himself
scrutinized by two small drill-like eyes set in the depths of twin glass
caverns. He drew away. Already he felt his privacy imperilled.

“My great-uncle is dead and burnt,” he said again. “I was the only one
there to do it and I done it. I done your work for you,” and as he said
the last, a perceptible trace of scorn crossed his face.

“Dead?” the schoolteacher said. “My uncle? The old man’s dead?” he asked
in a blank unbelieving tone. He caught Tarwater abruptly by the arms and
stared into his face. In the depths of his eyes, the boy, shocked, saw
an instant’s stricken look, plain and awful. It vanished at once. The
straight line of the schoolteacher’s mouth began turning into a smile.
“And how did he go—with his fist in the air?” he asked. “Did the Lord
arrive for him in a chariot of fire?”

“He didn’t have no warning,” Tarwater said, suddenly breathless. “He was
eating his breakfast and I never moved him from the table. I set him on
fire where he was and the house with him.”

The schoolteacher said nothing but the boy read in his look a doubt that
this had happened, a suspicion that he dealt with an interesting liar.

“You can go there and see for yourself,” Tarwater said. “He was too big
to bury. I done it the quickest way.”

His uncle’s eyes had the look now of being trained on a fascinating
problem. “How did you get here? How did you know this was where you
belonged?” he asked.

The boy had expended all his energy announcing himself. He was suddenly
blank and stunned and he remained stupidly silent. He had never been
this tired before. He felt he was about to fall.

The schoolteacher waited, searching his face impatiently. Then his
expression changed again. He tightened his grip on Tarwater’s arm and
his eyes turned, glowering, toward the front door, which was still open.
“Is he out there?” he asked in a low enraged voice. “Is this one of his
tricks? Is he out there waiting to sneak in a window and baptize Bishop
while you’re here baiting me? Is that his senile game this time?”

The boy blanched. In his mind’s eye he saw the old man, a dark shape
standing behind the corner of the house, restraining his wheezing breath
while he waited impatiently for him to baptize the dim-witted child. He
stared shocked at the schoolteacher’s face. There was a wedge-shaped
gash in his new uncle’s ear. The sight of it brought old Tarwater so
close that the boy thought he could hear him laugh. With a terrible
clarity he saw that the schoolteacher was no more than a decoy the old
man had set up to lure him to the city to do his unfinished business.

His eyes began to burn in his fierce fragile face. A new energy seized
him. “He’s dead,” he said. “You can’t be any deader than he is. He’s
reduced to ashes. He don’t even have a cross set up over him. If it’s
anything left of him, the buzzards wouldn’t have it and the bones the
dogs’ll carry off. That’s how dead he is.”

The schoolteacher winced, but almost at once he was smiling again. He
held Tarwater’s arms tightly and peered into his face as if he were
beginning to see a solution, one that intrigued him with its symmetry
and lightness. “It’s a perfect irony,” he murmured, “a perfect irony
that you should have taken care of the matter in that way. He got what
he deserved.”

The boy’s pride swelled. “I done the needful,” he said.

“Everything he touched he warped,” the schoolteacher said. “He lived a
long and useless life and he did you a great injustice. It’s a blessing
he’s dead at last. You could have had everything and you’ve had nothing.
All that can be changed now. Now you belong to someone who can help you
and understand you.” His eyes were alight with pleasure. “It’s not too
late for me to make a man of you!”

The boy’s face darkened. His expression hardened until it was a fortress
wall to keep his thoughts from being exposed; but the schoolteacher did
not notice any change. He gazed through the actual insignificant boy
before him to an image of him that he held fully developed in his mind.

“You and I will make up for lost time,” he said. “We’ll get you started
now in the right direction.”

Tarwater was not looking at him. His neck had suddenly snapped forward
and he was staring straight ahead over the schoolteacher’s shoulder. He
heard a faint familiar sound of heavy breathing. It was closer to him
than the beating of his own heart. His eyes widened and an inner door in
them opened in preparation for some inevitable vision.

The small white-haired boy shambled into the back of the hall and stood
peering forward at the stranger. He had on the bottoms to a pair of blue
pajamas drawn up as high as they would go, the string tied over his
chest and then again, harness-like, around his neck to keep them on. His
eyes were slightly sunken beneath his forehead and his cheekbones were
lower than they should have been. He stood there, dim and ancient, like
a child who had been a child for centuries.

Tarwater clenched his fists. He stood like one condemned, waiting at the
spot of execution. Then the revelation came, silent, implacable, direct
as a bullet. He did not look into the eyes of any fiery beast or see a
burning bush. He only knew, with a certainty sunk in despair, that he
was expected to baptize the child he saw and begin the life his
great-uncle had prepared him for. He knew that he was called to be a
prophet and that the ways of his prophecy would not be remarkable. His
black pupils, glassy and still, reflected depth on depth his own
stricken image of himself, trudging into the distance in the bleeding
stinking mad shadow of Jesus, until at last he received his reward, a
broken fish, a multiplied loaf. The Lord out of dust had created him,
had made him blood and nerve and mind, had made him to bleed and weep
and think, and set him in a world of loss and fire all to baptize one
idiot child that He need not have created in the first place and to cry
out a gospel just as foolish. He tried to shout, “NO!” but it was like
trying to shout in his sleep. The sound was saturated in silence, lost.

His uncle put a hand on his shoulder and shook him slightly to penetrate
his inattention. “Listen boy,” he said, “getting out from under the old
man is just like coming out of the darkness into the light. You’re going
to have a chance now for the first time in your life. A chance to
develop into a useful man, a chance to use your talents, to do what you
want to do and not what he wanted—whatever idiocy it was.”

The boy’s eyes were focussed beyond him, the pupils dilated. The
schoolteacher turned his head to see what it was that was keeping him
from being responsive. His own face tightened. The little boy was
creeping forward, grinning.

“That’s only Bishop,” he said. “He’s not all right. Don’t mind him. All
he can do is stare at you and he’s very friendly. He stares at
everything that way.” His hand tightened on the boy’s shoulder and his
mouth stretched painfully. “All the things that I would do for him—if
it were any use—I’ll do for you,” he said. “Now do you see why I’m so
glad to have you here?”

The boy heard nothing he said. The muscles in his neck stood out like
cables. The dim-witted child was not five feet from him and was coming
every instant closer with his lop-sided smile. Suddenly he knew that the
child _recognized_ him, that the old man himself had primed him from on
high that here was the forced servant of God come to see that he was
born again. The little boy was sticking out his hand to touch him.

“Git!” Tarwater screamed. His arm shot out like a whip and knocked the
hand away. The child let out a bellow startlingly loud. He clambered up
his father’s leg, pulling himself up by the schoolteacher’s pajama coat
until he was almost on his shoulder.

“All right, all right,” the schoolteacher said, “there, there, shut up,
it’s all right, he didn’t mean to hit you,” and he righted the child on
his back and tried to slide him off but the little boy hung on,
thrusting his head against his father’s neck and never taking his eyes
off Tarwater.

The boy had a vision of the schoolteacher and his child as inseparably
joined. The schoolteacher’s face was red and pained. The child might
have been a deformed part of himself that had been accidentally
revealed.

“You’ll get used to him,” he said.

“No!” the boy shouted.

It was like a shout that had been waiting, straining to burst out. “I
won’t get used to him! I won’t have anything to do with him!” He
clenched his fist and lifted it. “I won’t have anything to do with him!”
he shouted and the words were clear and positive and defiant like a
challenge hurled in the face of his silent adversary.




                                  TWO




                                   IV

AFTER FOUR DAYS of Tarwater, the schoolteacher’s enthusiasm had passed.
He would admit no more than that. It had passed the first day and had
been succeeded by determination, and while he knew that determination
was a less powerful tool, he thought that in this case, it was the one
best fitted for the job. It had taken him barely half a day to find out
that the old man had made a wreck of the boy and that what was called
for was a monumental job of reconstruction. The first day enthusiasm had
given him energy but ever since, determination had exhausted him.

Although it was only eight o’clock in the evening, he had put Bishop to
bed and had told the boy that he could go to his room and read. He had
bought him books, among other things still ignored. Tarwater had gone to
his room and had closed the door, not saying whether he intended to read
or not, and Rayber was in bed for the night, lying too exhausted to
sleep, watching the late evening light fade through the hedge that grew
in front of his window. He had left his hearing aid on so that if the
boy tried to escape, he would hear and could go after him. For the last
two days he had looked poised to leave, and not simply to leave but to
be gone, silently and in the night when he would not be followed. This
was the fourth night and the schoolteacher lay thinking, with a wry
expression on his face, how it differed from the first.

The first night he had sat until daylight by the side of the bed where,
still dressed, the boy had fallen. He had sat there, his eyes shining,
like a man who sits before a treasure he is not yet convinced is real.
His eyes had moved over and over the sprawled thin figure which had
appeared lost in an exhaustion so profound that it seemed doubtful it
would ever move again. As he followed the outline of the face, he had
realized with an intense stab of joy that his nephew looked enough like
him to be his son. The heavy work shoes, the worn overalls, the
atrocious stained hat filled him with pain and pity. He thought of his
poor sister. The only real pleasure she had had in her life was the time
she had had the lover who had given her this child, the hollow-cheeked
boy who had come from the country to study divinity but whose mind
Rayber (a graduate student at the time) had seen at once was too good
for that. He had befriended him, had helped him to discover himself and
then to discover her. He had engineered their meeting purposely and then
had observed to his delight how it prospered and how the relationship
developed them both. If there had been no accident, he felt sure the boy
would have become completely stable. As it was, after the calamity he
had killed himself, a prey to morbid guilt. He had come to Rayber’s
apartment and had stood confronting him with the gun. He saw again the
long brittle face as raw red as if a blast of fire had singed the skin
off it and the eyes that had seemed burnt too. He had not felt they were
entirely human eyes. They were the eyes of repentence and lacked all
dignity. The boy had looked at him for what seemed an age but was
perhaps only a second, then he had turned without a word and left and
killed himself as soon as he reached his own room.

When Rayber had first opened the door in the middle of the night and had
seen Tarwater’s face—white, drawn by some unfathomable hunger and
pride—he had remained for an instant frozen before what might have been
a mirror thrust toward him in a nightmare. The face before him was his
own, but the eyes were not his own. They were the student’s eyes, singed
with guilt. He had left the door hurriedly to get his glasses and his
hearing aid.

As he sat that first night by the bed, he had recognized something rigid
and recalcitrant about the boy even in repose. He lay with his teeth
bared and the hat clenched in his fist like a weapon. Rayber’s
conscience smote him that all these years he had left him to his fate,
that he had not gone back and saved him. His throat had tightened, his
eyes had begun to ache. He had vowed to make it up to him now, to lavish
on him everything he would have lavished on his own child if he had had
one who would have known the difference.

The next morning while Tarwater was still asleep, he had rushed out and
bought him a decent suit, a plaid shirt, socks, and a red leather cap.
He wanted him to have new clothes to wake up to, new clothes to indicate
a new life.

After four days they were still untouched in the box on a chair in the
room. The boy had looked at them as if the suggestion he put them on
were equal to asking that he appear naked.

It was apparent from everything he did and said exactly who had brought
him up. At every turn an almost uncontrollable fury would rise in Rayber
at the brand of independence the old man had wrought—not a constructive
independence but one that was irrational, backwoods, and ignorant. After
Rayber had rushed back with the clothes, he had gone to the bed and put
his hand on the still sleeping boy’s forehead and decided that he had a
fever and should not get up. He had prepared a breakfast on a tray and
brought it to the room. When he appeared in the door with it, Bishop at
his side, Tarwater was sitting up in the bed, in the act of shaking out
his hat and putting it on. Rayber had said, “Don’t you want to hang up
your hat and stay a while?” and had given him such a smile of welcome
and good will as he thought had possibly never been turned on him
before.

The boy, with no look of appreciation or even interest, had pulled the
hat down farther on his head. His gaze had turned with a peculiar glare
of recognition to Bishop. The child had on a black cowboy hat and he was
gaping over the top of a trashbasket that he clasped to his stomach. He
kept a rock in it. Rayber remembered that Bishop had caused the boy some
disturbance the night before and he pushed him back with his free hand
so that he could not get in. Then stepping into the room, he closed the
door and locked it. Tarwater looked at the closed door darkly as if he
continued to see the child through it, still clasping his trashbasket.

Rayber set the tray down across his knees and stood back scrutinizing
him. The boy seemed barely aware that he was in the room. “That’s your
breakfast,” his uncle said as if he might not be able to identify it. It
was a bowl of dry cereal and a glass of milk. “I thought you’d better
stay in bed today,” he said. “You don’t look too chipper.” He pulled up
a straight chair and sat down. “Now we can have a real talk,” he said,
his smile spreading. “It’s high time we got to know each other.”

No expression of approval or pleasure lightened the boy’s face. He
glanced at the breakfast but did not pick up the spoon. He began to look
around the room. The walls were an insistent pink, the color chosen by
Rayber’s wife. He used it now for a store room. There were trunks in the
corners with crates piled on top of them. On the mantel, besides
medicine bottles and dead electric lightbulbs and some old matchboxes,
was a picture of her. The boy’s attention paused there and the corner of
his mouth twitched slightly as if in some kind of comic recognition.
“The welfare woman,” he said.

His uncle reddened. The tone he detected under this was old Tarwater’s
exactly. Without warning, irritation mounted in him. The old man might
suddenly have obtruded his presence between them. He felt the same
familiar fantastic anger, out of all proportion to its cause, that his
uncle had always been able to stir in him. With an effort, he forced it
out of his way. “That’s my wife,” he said, “but she doesn’t live with us
anymore. This is her old room you’re in.”

The boy picked up the spoon. “My great-uncle said she wouldn’t hang
around long,” he said and began to eat rapidly as if he had established
enough independence by this remark to eat somebody else’s food. It was
apparent from his expression that he found the quality of it poor.

Rayber sat and watched him, saying to himself in an effort to calm his
irritation: this child hasn’t had a chance, remember he hasn’t had a
chance. “God only knows what the old fool has told you and taught you!”
he said with a sudden explosive force. “God only knows!”

The boy stopped eating and looked at him sharply. Then after a second he
said, “He ain’t had no effect on me,” and returned to his eating.

“He did you a terrible injustice,” Rayber said, wishing to impress this
on him as often as he could. “He kept you from having a normal life,
from getting a decent education. He filled your head with God knows what
rot!”

Tarwater continued to eat. Then with a stoney deliberateness, he looked
up and his gaze fastened on the gash in his uncle’s ear. Somewhere in
the depths of his eyes a glint appeared. “Shot yer, didn’t he?” he said.

Rayber took a package of cigarets from his shirt pocket and lit one, his
motions inordinately slow from the effort he was making to calm himself.
He blew the smoke straight into the boy’s face. Then he tilted back in
the chair and gave him a long hard look. The cigaret hanging from the
corner of his mouth trembled. “Yes, he shot me,” he said.

The glint in the boy’s eyes followed the wires of the hearing aid down
to the metal box stuck in his belt. “What you wired for?” he drawled.
“Does your head light up?”

Rayber’s jaw snapped and then relaxed. After a moment, after extending
his arm stiffly and knocking the ash off his cigaret onto the floor, he
replied that his head did not light up. “This is a hearing aid,” he said
patiently. “After the old man shot me I began to lose my hearing. I
didn’t have a gun when I went to get you back. If I’d stayed he would
have killed me and I wouldn’t have done you any good dead.”

The boy continued to study the machine. His uncle’s face might have been
only an appendage to it. “You ain’t done me no good alive neither,” he
remarked.

“Do you understand me?” Rayber persisted. “I didn’t have a gun. He would
have killed me. He was a mad man. The time when I can do you good is
beginning now, and I want to help you. I want to make up for all those
years.”

For an instant the boy’s eyes left the hearing aid and rested on his
uncle’s eyes. “Could have got you a gun and come back terreckly,” he
said.

Stricken by the distinct sound of betrayal in his voice, Rayber could
not say a word. He looked at him helplessly. The boy returned to his
eating.

Finally Rayber said, “Listen.” He took hold of the fist with the spoon
in it and held it. “I want you to understand. He was crazy and if he had
killed me, you wouldn’t have this place to come to now. I’m no fool. I
don’t believe in senseless sacrifice. A dead man is not going to do you
any good, don’t you know that? Now I can do something for you. Now I can
make up for all the time we’ve lost. I can help correct what he’s done
to you, help you to correct it yourself.” He kept hold of the fist all
the while it was being drawn insistently back. “This is our problem
together,” he said, seeing himself so clearly in the face before him
that he might have been beseeching his own image.

With a quick yank, Tarwater managed to free his hand. Then he gave the
schoolteacher a long appraising look, tracing the line of his jaw, the
two creases on either side of his mouth, the forehead extending into
skull until it reached the pie-shaped hairline. He gazed briefly at the
pained eyes behind his uncle’s glasses, appearing to abandon a search
for something that could not possibly be there. The glint in his eye
fell on the metal box half-sticking out of Rayber’s shirt. “Do you think
in the box,” he asked, “or do you think in your head?”

His uncle had wanted to tear the machine out of his ear and fling it
against the wall. “It’s because of you I can’t hear!” he said, glaring
at the impassive face. “It’s because once I tried to help you!”

“You never helped me none.”

“I can help you now,” he said.

After a second he sank back in his chair. “Perhaps you’re right,” he
said, letting his hands fall in a helpless gesture. “It was my mistake.
I should have gone back and killed him or let him kill me. Instead I let
something in you be killed.”

The boy put down his milk glass. “Nothing in me has been killed,” he
said in a positive voice, and then he added, “And you needn’t to worry.
I done your work for you. I tended to him. It was me put him away. I was
drunk as a coot and I tended to him.” He said it as if he were recalling
the most vivid point in his history.

Rayber heard his own heart, magnified by the hearing aid, suddenly begin
to pound like the works of a gigantic machine in his chest. The boy’s
delicate defiant face, his glowering eyes still shocked by some violent
memory, brought back instantly to him the vision of himself when he was
fourteen and had found his way to Powderhead to shout imprecations at
the old man.

An insight came to him that he was not to question until the end. He
understood that the boy was held in bondage by his great-uncle, that he
suffered a terrible false guilt for burning and not burying him, and he
saw that he was engaged in a desperate heroic struggle to free himself
from the old man’s ghostly grasp. He leaned forward and said in a voice
so full of feeling that it was barely balanced, “Listen, listen
Frankie,” he said, “you’re not alone any more. You have a friend. You
have more than a friend now.” He swallowed. “You have a father.”

The boy turned very white. His eyes were blackened by the shadow of some
unspeakable outrage. “I ain’t ast for no father,” he said and the
sentence struck like a whip across his uncle’s face. “I ain’t ast for no
father,” he repeated. “I’m out of the womb of a whore. I was born in a
wreck.” He flung this forth as if he were declaring a royal birth. “And
my name ain’t Frankie. I go by Tarwater and . . .”

“Your mother was not a whore,” the schoolteacher said angrily. “That’s
just some rot he’s taught you. She was a good healthy American girl,
just beginning to find herself when she was struck down. She was . . .”

“I ain’t fixing to hang around here,” the boy said, looking about him as
if he might throw over the breakfast tray and jump out the window. “I
only come to find out a few things and when I find them out, then I’m
going.”

“What did you come to find out?” the schoolteacher asked evenly. “I can
help you. All I want to do is help you any way I can.”

“I don’t need noner yer help,” the boy said, looking away.

His uncle felt something tightening around him like an invisible strait
jacket. “How do you mean to find out if you don’t have help?”

“I’ll wait,” he said, “and see what happens.”

“And suppose,” his uncle asked, “nothing happens?”

An odd smile, like some strange inverted sign of grief, came over the
boy’s face. “Then I’ll make it happen,” he said, “like I done before.”

In four days nothing had happened and nothing had been made to happen.
They had simply covered—the three of them—the entire city, walking and
all night Rayber rewalked the same territory backwards in his sleep. It
would not have been so tiring if he had not had Bishop. The child
dragged backwards on his hand, always attracted by something they had
already passed. Every block or so he would squat down to pick up a stick
or a piece of trash and have to be pulled up and along. Whereas Tarwater
was always slightly in advance of them, pushing forward on the scent of
something. In four days they had been to the art gallery and the movies,
they had toured department stores, ridden escalators, visited the
supermarkets, inspected the water works, the post office, the railroad
yards and the city hall. Rayber had explained how the city was run and
detailed the duties of a good citizen. He had talked as much as he had
walked, and the boy for all the interest he showed might have been the
one who was deaf. Silent, he viewed everything with the same
noncommittal eye as if he found nothing here worth holding his attention
but must keep moving, must keep searching for whatever it was that
appeared just beyond his vision.

Once he had paused at a window where a small red car turned slowly on a
revolving platform. Seizing on the display of interest, Rayber had said
that perhaps when he was sixteen, he could have a car of his own. It
might have been the old man who had replied that he could walk on his
two feet for nothing without being beholden. Rayber had never, even when
Old Tarwater had lived under his roof, been so conscious of the old
man’s presence.

Once the boy had stopped suddenly in front of a tall building and had
stood glaring up at it with a peculiar ravaged look of recognition.
Puzzled, Rayber said, “You look as if you’ve been here before.”

“I lost my hat there,” he muttered.

“Your hat is on your head,” Rayber said. He could not look at the object
without irritation. He wished to God there were some way to get it off
him.

“My first hat,” the boy said. “It fell,” and he had rushed on, away from
the place as if he could not stand to be near it.

Only one other time had he shown a particular interest. He had stopped
with a kind of lurch backwards in front of a large grimey garage-like
structure with two yellow and blue painted windows in the front of it,
and had stood there, precariously balanced as if he were arresting
himself in the middle of a fall. Rayber recognized the place for some
kind of pentecostal tabernacle. Over the door was a paper banner bearing
the words, =unless ye be born again ye shall not have everlasting
life=. Beneath it a poster showed a man and woman and child
holding hands. “Hear the Carmodys for Christ!” it said. “Thrill to the
Music, Message, and Magic of this team!”

Rayber was well enough aware of the boy’s trouble to understand the
sinister pull such a place would have on his mind. “Does this interest
you?” he asked drily. “Does it remind you of something in particular?”

Tarwater was very pale. “Horse manure,” he whispered.

Rayber smiled. Then he laughed. “All such people have in life,” he said,
“is the conviction they’ll rise again.”

The boy steadied himself, his eyes still on the banner but as if he had
reduced it to a small spot a great distance away.

“They won’t rise again?” he said. The statement had the lilt of a
question and Rayber realized with an intense thrill of pleasure that his
opinion, for the first time, was being called for.

“No,” he said simply, “they won’t rise again.” There was a profound
finality in his tone. The grimey structure might have been the carcass
of a beast he had just brought down. He put his hand experimentally on
the boy’s shoulder. It was suffered to remain there.

In a voice unsteady with the sudden return of enthusiasm he said,
“That’s why I want you to learn all you can. I want you to be educated
so that you can take your place as an intelligent man in the world. This
fall when you start school . . .”

The shoulder was roughly withdrawn and the boy, throwing him one dark
look, removed himself to the farthest edge of the sidewalk.

He wore his isolation like a mantle, wrapped it around himself as if it
were a garment signifying the elect. Rayber had intended to keep notes
on him and write up his most important observations but each night his
energy had been too depleted to permit him to do any work. He had
dropped off every night into a restless sleep, afraid that he would wake
up and find the boy gone. He felt he had hastened his urge to leave by
confronting him with the test. He had intended giving him the standard
ones, intelligence and aptitude, and then going on to some he had
perfected himself dealing with emotional factors. He had thought that in
this way he could ferret to the center of the emotional infection. He
had laid a simple aptitude test out on the kitchen table—the printed
book and a few newly sharpened pencils. “This is a kind of game,” he
said. “Sit down and see what you can make of it. I’ll help you begin.”

The expression that came over the boy’s face was very peculiar. His
eyelids lowered just slightly; his mouth failed a smile by only a
fraction; his look was compounded of fury and superiority. “Play with it
yourself,” he said. “I ain’t taking no _test_,” and he spit the word out
as if it were not fit to pass between his lips.

Rayber sized up the situation. Then he said, “Maybe you don’t really
know how to read and write. Is that the trouble?”

The boy thrust his head forward. “I’m free,” he hissed. “I’m outside
your head. I ain’t in it. I ain’t in it and I ain’t about to be.”

His uncle laughed. “You don’t know what freedom is,” he said, “you don’t
. . .” but the boy turned and strode off.

It was no use. He could no more be reasoned with than a jackal. Nothing
gave him pause—except Bishop, and Rayber knew that the reason Bishop
gave him pause was because the child reminded him of the old man. Bishop
looked like the old man grown backwards to the lowest form of innocence,
and Rayber observed that the boy strictly avoided looking him in the
eye. Wherever the child happened to be standing or sitting or walking
seemed to be for Tarwater a dangerous hole in space that he must keep
away from at all costs. Rayber was afraid that Bishop would drive him
away with his friendliness. He was always creeping up to touch him and
when the boy was aware of his being near, he would draw himself up like
a snake ready to strike and hiss, “Git!” and Bishop would scurry off to
watch him again from behind the nearest piece of furniture.

The schoolteacher understood this too. Every problem the boy had he had
had himself and had conquered, or had for the most part conquered, for
he had not conquered the problem of Bishop. He had only learned to live
with it and had learned too that he could not live without it.

When he had got rid of his wife, he and the child had begun living
together in a quiet automatic fashion like two bachelors whose habits
were so smoothly connected that they no longer needed to take notice of
each other. In the winter he sent him to a school for exceptional
children and he had made great strides. He could wash himself, dress
himself, feed himself, go to the toilet by himself and make peanut
butter sandwiches though sometimes he put the bread inside. For the most
part Rayber lived with him without being painfully aware of his presence
but the moments would still come when, rushing from some inexplicable
part of himself, he would experience a love for the child so outrageous
that he would be left shocked and depressed for days, and trembling for
his sanity. It was only a touch of the curse that lay in his blood.

His normal way of looking on Bishop was as an _x_ signifying the general
hideousness of fate. He did not believe that he himself was formed in
the image and likeness of God but that Bishop was he had no doubt. The
little boy was part of a simple equation that required no further
solution, except at the moments when with little or no warning he would
feel himself overwhelmed by the horrifying love. Anything he looked at
too long could bring it on. Bishop did not have to be around. It could
be a stick or a stone, the line of a shadow, the absurd old man’s walk
of a starling crossing the sidewalk. If, without thinking, he lent
himself to it, he would feel suddenly a morbid surge of the love that
terrified him—powerful enough to throw him to the ground in an act of
idiot praise. It was completely irrational and abnormal.

He was not afraid of love in general. He knew the value of it and how it
could be used. He had seen it transform in cases where nothing else had
worked, such as with his poor sister. None of this had the least bearing
on his situation. The love that would overcome him was of a different
order entirely. It was not the kind that could be used for the child’s
improvement or his own. It was love without reason, love for something
futureless, love that appeared to exist only to be itself, imperious and
all demanding, the kind that would cause him to make a fool of himself
in an instant. And it only began with Bishop. It began with Bishop and
then like an avalanche covered everything his reason hated. He always
felt with it a rush of longing to have the old man’s eyes—insane,
fish-coloured, violent with their impossible vision of a world
transfigured—turned on him once again. The longing was like an undertow
in his blood dragging him backwards to what he knew to be madness.

The affliction was in the family. It lay hidden in the line of blood
that touched them, flowing from some ancient source, some desert prophet
or pole-sitter, until, its power unabated, it appeared in the old man
and him and, he surmised, in the boy. Those it touched were condemned to
fight it constantly or be ruled by it. The old man had been ruled by it.
He, at the cost of a full life, staved it off. What the boy would do
hung in the balance.

He had kept it from gaining control over him by what amounted to a rigid
ascetic discipline. He did not look at anything too long, he denied his
senses unnecessary satisfactions. He slept in a narrow iron bed, worked
sitting in a straight-backed chair, ate frugally, spoke little, and
cultivated the dullest for friends. At his high school he was the expert
on testing. All his professional decisions were prefabricated and did
not involve his participation. He was not deceived that this was a whole
or a full life, he only knew that it was the way his life had to be
lived if it were going to have any dignity at all. He knew that he was
the stuff of which fanatics and madmen are made and that he had turned
his destiny as if with his bare will. He kept himself upright on a very
narrow line between madness and emptiness, and when the time came for
him to lose his balance, he intended to lurch toward emptiness and fall
on the side of his choice. He recognized that in silent ways he lived an
heroic life. The boy would go either his way or old Tarwater’s and he
was determined to save him for the better course. Although Tarwater
claimed to believe nothing the old man had taught him, Rayber could see
clearly that there was still a backdrag of belief and fear in him
keeping his responses locked.

By virtue of kinship and similarity and experience, Rayber was the
person to save him, yet something in the boy’s very look drained him,
something in his very look, something starved in it, seemed to feed on
him. With Tarwater’s eyes on him, he felt subjected to a pressure that
killed his energy before he had a chance to exert it. The eyes were the
eyes of the crazy student father, the personality was the old man’s, and
somewhere between the two, Rayber’s own image was struggling to survive
and he was not able to reach it. After three days of walking, he was
numb with fatigue and plagued with a sense of his own inffectiveness.
All day his sentences had not quite connected with his thought.

That night they had eaten at an Italian restaurant, dark and not
crowded, and he had ordered ravioli for them because Bishop liked it.
After each meal the boy removed a piece of paper and a stub of pencil
from his pocket and wrote down a figure—his estimate of what the meal
was worth. In time he would pay back the total sum, he had said, as he
did not intend to be beholden. Rayber would have liked to see the
figures and learn what his meals were valued at—the boy never asked the
price. He was a finicky eater, pushing the food around on his plate
before he ate it and putting each forkful in his mouth as if he
suspected it was poisoned. He had pushed the ravioli about, his face
drawn. He ate a little of it and then put the fork down.

“Don’t you like that?” Rayber had asked. “You can have something else if
you don’t.”

“It all come out the same slop bucket,” the boy said.

“Bishop is eating his,” Rayber said. Bishop had it smeared all over his
face. Occasionally he would feed a spoonful into the sugar bowl or touch
the tip of his tongue to the dish.

“That’s what I said,” Tarwater said, and his glance grazed the top of
the child’s head, “—a hog might like it.”

The schoolteacher put his fork down.

Tarwater was glaring at the dark walls of the room. “He’s like a hog,”
he said. “He eats like a hog and he don’t think no more than a hog and
when he dies, hell rot like a hog. Me and you too,” he said, looking
back at the schoolteacher’s mottled face, “will rot like hogs. The only
difference between me and you and a hog is me and you can calculate, but
there ain’t any difference between him and one.”

Rayber appeared to be gritting his teeth. Finally he said, “Just forget
Bishop exists. You haven’t been asked to have anything to do with him.
He’s just a mistake of nature. Try not even to be aware of him.”

“He ain’t my mistake,” the boy muttered. “I ain’t having a thing to do
with him.”

“Forget him,” Rayber said in a short harsh voice.

The boy looked at him oddly as if he were beginning to perceive his
secret affliction. What he saw or thought he saw seemed grimly to amuse
him. “Let’s leave out of here,” he said, “and get to walking again.”

“We are not going to walk tonight,” Rayber said. “We are going home and
go to bed.” He said it with a firmness and finality he had not used
before. The boy had only shrugged.

As Rayber lay watching the window darken, he felt that all his nerves
were stretched through him like high tension wire. He began trying to
relax one muscle at a time as the books recommended, beginning with
those in the back of his neck. He emptied his mind of everything but the
just visible pattern of the hedge against the screen. Still he was alert
for any sound. Long after he lay in complete darkness, he was still
alert, unrelaxed, ready to spring up at the least creak of a floor board
in the hall. All at once he sat up, wide awake. A door opened and
closed. He leapt up and ran across the hall into the opposite room. The
boy was gone. He ran back to his own room and pulled his trousers on
over his pajamas. Then grabbing his coat, he went out of the house by
way of the kitchen, barefooted, his jaw set.




                                   V

KEEPING CLOSE TO his side of the hedge, he crept through the dark damp
grass toward the street. The night was close and very still. A light
went on in a window of the next house and revealed, at the end of the
hedge, the hat. It turned slightly and Rayber saw the sharp profile
beneath it, the set thrust of a jaw very like his own. The boy was
stopped still, most likely taking his bearings, deciding which direction
to walk in.

He turned again and again Rayber saw only the hat, intransigently ground
upon his head, fierce-looking even in the dim light. It had the boy’s
own defiant quality, as if its shape had been formed over the years by
his personality. It had been the first thing that Rayber had seen must
go. It suddenly moved out of the light and vanished.

Rayber slipped through the hedge and followed, soundless on his bare
feet. Nothing cast a shadow. He could barely make out the boy a quarter
of a block in front of him, except when occasionally light from a window
outlined him briefly. Since Rayber didn’t know whether he thought he was
leaving for good or only going for a walk on his own, he decided not to
shout and stop him but to follow silently and observe. He turned off his
hearing aid and pursued the dim figure as if in a dream. The boy walked
even faster at night than in the day time and was always on the verge of
vanishing.

Rayber felt the accelerated beat of his heart. He took a handkerchief
out of his pocket and wiped his forehead and inside the neck of his
pajama top. He walked over something sticky on the sidewalk and shifted
hurriedly to the other side, cursing under his breath. Tarwater was
heading toward town. Rayber thought it likely he was returning to see
something that had secretly interested him. He might discover tonight
what he would have found by testing if the boy had not been so
pig-headed. He felt the insidious pleasure of revenge and checked it.

A patch of sky blanched, revealing for a moment the outlines of the
housetops. Tarwater turned suddenly to the right. Rayber cursed himself
for not stopping long enough to get his shoes. They had come into a
neighborhood of large ramshackle boarding houses with porches that
abutted the sidewalks. On some of them late sitters were rocking and
watching the street. He felt eyes in the darkness move on him and he
turned on the hearing aid again. On one porch a woman rose and leaned
over the banister. She stood with her hands on her hips, looking him
over, taking in his bare feet, the striped pajama coat under his
seersucker suit. Irritated, he glanced back at her. The thrust of her
neck indicated a conclusion formed. He buttoned his coat and hurried on.

The boy stopped on the next corner. His lean shadow made by a street
light slanted to the side of him. The hat’s shadow, like a knob at the
top of it, turned to the right and then the left. He appeared to be
considering his direction. Rayber’s muscles felt suddenly weighted. He
was not conscious of his fatigue until the pace slackened.

Tarwater turned to the left and Rayber began angrily to move again. They
went down a street of dilapidated stores. When Rayber turned the next
corner, the gaudy cave of a movie house yawned to the side of him. A
knot of small boys stood in front of it. “Forgot yer shoes!” one of them
chirruped. “Forgot yer shirt!”

He began a kind of limping lope.

The chorus followed him down the block. “Hi yo Silverwear, Tonto’s lost
his underwear! What in the heck do we care?”

He kept his eye wrathfully on Tarwater who was turning to the right.
When he reached the corner and turned, he saw the boy stopped in the
middle of the block, looking in a store window. He slipped into a narrow
entrance a few yards farther on where a flight of steps led upward into
darkness. Then he looked out.

Tarwater’s face was strangely lit from the window he was standing
before. Rayber watched curiously for a few moments. It looked to him
like the face of someone starving who sees a meal he can’t reach laid
out before him. At last, something he wants, he thought, and determined
that tomorrow he would return and buy it. Tarwater reached out and
touched the glass and then drew his hand back slowly. He hung there as
if he could not take his eyes off what it was he wanted. A pet shop,
perhaps, Rayber thought. Maybe he wants a dog. A dog might make all the
difference. Abruptly the boy broke away and moved on.

Rayber stepped out of the entrance and made for the window he had left.
He stopped with a shock of disappointment. The place was only a bakery.
The window was empty except for a loaf of bread pushed to the side that
must have been overlooked when the shelf was cleaned for the night. He
stared, puzzled, at the empty window for a second before he started
after the boy again. Everything a false alarm, he thought with disgust.
If he had eaten his dinner, he wouldn’t be hungry. A man and woman
strolling past looked with interest at his bare feet. He glared at them,
then glanced to the side and saw his bloodless wired reflection in the
glass of a shoe shop. The boy disappeared all at once into an alley. My
God, Rayber thought, how long is this going on?

He turned into the alley, which was unpaved and so dark that he could
not see Tarwater in it at all. He was certain that any minute he would
cut his feet on broken glass. A garbage can materialized in his path.
There was a noise like the collapse of a tin house and he found himself
sitting up with his hand and one foot in something unidentifiable. He
scrambled up and limped on, hearing his own curses like the voice of a
stranger broadcast through his hearing aid. At the end of the alley, he
saw the lean figure in the middle of the next block, and with a sudden
fury he began to run.

The boy turned into another alley. Doggedly Rayber ran on. At the end of
the second alley, the boy turned to the left. When Rayber reached the
street, Tarwater was standing still in the middle of the next block.
With a furtive look around him, he vanished, apparently into the
building he had been facing. Rayber dashed forward. As he reached the
place, singing burst flatly against his eardrums. Two blue and yellow
windows glared at him in the darkness like the eyes of some Biblical
beast. He stopped in front of the banner and read the mocking words,
UNLESS YE BE BORN AGAIN. . . .

That the boy’s corruption was this deep did not surprise him. What
unstrung him was the thought that what Tarwater carried into the
atrocious temple was his own imprisoned image. Enraged, he started
around the building to locate a window he could look through and see the
boy’s face among the crowd. When he saw him, he would roar at him to
come out. The windows near the front were all too high but toward the
back, he found a lower one. He pushed through a straggly shrub beneath
it and, his chin just above the ledge, looked into what appeared to be a
small ante-room. A door on the other side of it opened onto a stage and
there a man in a bright blue suit was standing in a spotlight, leading a
hymn. Rayber could not see into the main body of the building where the
people were. He was about to move away when the man brought the hymn to
a close and began to speak.

“Friends,” he said, “the time has come. The time we’ve all been waiting
for this evening. Jesus said suffer the little children to come unto Him
and forbid them not and maybe it was because He knew that it would be
the little children that would call others to Him, maybe He knew,
friends, maybe He hadda hunch.”

Rayber listened angrily, too exhausted to move away once he had stopped.

“Friends,” the preacher said, “Lucette has travelled the world over
telling people about Jesus. She’s been to India and China. She’s spoken
to all the rulers of the world. Jesus is wonderful, friends. He teaches
us wisdom out of the mouths of babes!”

Another child exploited, Rayber thought furiously. It was the thought of
a child’s mind warped, of a child led away from reality that always
enraged him, bringing back to him his own childhood’s seduction. Glaring
at the spotlight, he saw the man there as a blur which he looked
through, down the length of his life until what confronted him were the
old man’s fish-coloured eyes. He saw himself taking the offered hand and
innocently walking out of his own yard, innocently walking into six or
seven years of unreality. Any other child would have thrown off the
spell in a week. He could not have. He had analysed his case and closed
it. Still, every now and then he would live over the five minutes it had
taken his father to snatch him away from Powderhead. Through the blur of
the man on the stage, as if he were looking into a transparent
nightmare, he had the experience again. He and his uncle sat on the
steps of the house at Powderhead watching his father emerge from the
woods and sight them across the field. His uncle leaned forward,
squinting, his hand cupped over his eyes, and he sat with his hands
clenched between his knees, his heart threshing from side to side as his
father moved closer and closer.

“Lucette travels with her mother and daddy and I want you to meet them
because a mother and daddy have to be unselfish to share their only
child with the world,” the preacher said. “Here they are, friends—Mr.
and Mrs. Carmody!”

While a man and woman moved into the light, Rayber had a clear vision of
plowed ground, of the shaded red ridges that separated him from the lean
figure approaching. He had let himself imagine that the field had an
undertow that would drag his father backwards and suck him under, but he
came on inexorably, only stopping every now and then to put a finger in
his shoe and push out a clod of dirt.

“He’s going to take me back with him,” he said.

“Back with him where?” his uncle growled. “He ain’t got any place to
take you back to.”

“He can’t take me back with him?”

“Not where you were before.”

“He can’t take me back to town?”

“I never said nothing about town,” his uncle said.

He saw vaguely that the man in the spotlight had sat down but that the
woman was still standing. She became a blur and he saw his father again,
getting closer and closer and he had one impulse to dart up and run
through his uncle’s house and tear out the back to the woods. He would
have raced along the path, familiar to him then, and sliding and
slipping over the waxy pine needles, he would have run down and down
until he reached the thicket of bamboo and would have pushed through it
and out onto the other side and would have fallen into the stream and
lain there, panting and wheezing and safe where he had been born again,
where his head had been thrust by his uncle into the water and brought
up again into a new life. Sitting on the step, his leg muscles twitched
as if they were ready for him to spring up but he remained absolutely
still. He could see the line of his father’s mouth, the line that had
gone past the point of exasperation, past the point of loud wrath to a
kind of stoked rage that would feed him for months.

While the woman evangelist, tall and raw-boned, was speaking of the
hardships she had endured, he watched his father as he reached the edge
of the yard and stepped onto the packed dirt, his face a slick pink from
the exertion of crossing a field. He was drawing short hard breaths. For
an instant he seemed about to reach forward and snatch him but he
remained where he was. His pale eyes moved carefully over the rock-like
figure watching him steadily from the steps, at the red hands knotted on
the heavy thighs and then at the gun lying on the porch. He said, “His
mother wants him back, Mason. I don’t know why. For my part you could
have him but you know how she is.”

“A drunken whore,” his uncle growled.

“Your sister, not mine,” his father said, and then said, “All right boy,
snap it up,” and nodded curtly to him.

He explained in a high reedy voice the exact reason he could not go
back, “I’ve been born again.”

“Great,” his father said, “great.” He took a step forward and grabbed
his arm and yanked him to his feet. “Glad you got him fixed up, Mason,”
he said. “One bath more or less won’t hurt the bugger.”

He had had no chance to see his uncle’s face. His father had already
leapt into the plowed field and was dragging him across the furrows
while the pellets pierced the air over their heads. His shoulders, just
under the window ledge, jumped. He shook his head to clear it.

“For ten years I was a missionary in China,” the woman was saying, “for
five years I was a missionary in Africa, and one year I was a missionary
in Rome where minds are still chained in priestly darkness; but for the
last six years, my husband and I have travelled the world over with our
daughter. They have been years of trial and pain, years of hardship and
suffering.” She had on a long dramatic cape, one side of which was
turned backward over her shoulder to reveal a red lining.

His father’s face was suddenly very close to his own. “Back to the real
world, boy,” he was saying, “back to the real world. And that’s me and
not him, see? Me and not him,” and he heard himself screaming, “It’s
him! Him! Him and not you! And I’ve been born again and there’s not a
thing you can do about it!”

“Christ in hell,” his father said, “believe it if you want to. Who
cares? You’ll find out soon enough.”

The woman’s tone had changed. The sound of something grasping drew his
attention again. “We have not had an easy time. We have been a
hardworking team for Christ. People have not always been generous to us.
Only here are the people really generous. I am from Texas and my husband
is from Tennessee but we have travelled the world over. We know,” she
said in a deepened softened voice, “where the people are really
generous.”

Rayber forgot himself and listened. He felt a relief from his pain,
recognizing that the woman was only after money. He could hear the
beginning click of coins falling in a plate.

“Our little girl began to preach when she was six. We saw that she had a
mission, that she had been called. We saw that we could not keep her to
ourselves and so we have endured many hardships to give her to the
world, to bring her to you tonight. To us,” she said, “you are as
important as the great rulers of the world!” Here she lifted the end of
her cape and holding it out as a magician would made a low bow. After a
moment she lifted her head, gazed in front of her as if at some grand
vista, and disappeared from view. A little girl hobbled into the
spotlight.

Rayber cringed. Simply by the sight of her he could tell that she was
not a fraud, that she was only exploited. She was eleven or twelve with
a small delicate face and a head of black hair that looked too thick and
heavy for a frail child to support. A cape like her mother’s was turned
back over one shoulder and her skirt was short as if better to reveal
the thin legs twisted from the knees. She held her arms over her head
for a moment. “I want to tell you people the story of the world,” she
said in a loud high child’s voice. “I want to tell you why Jesus came
and what happened to Him. I want to tell you how He’ll come again. I
want to tell you to be ready. Most of all,” she said, “I want to tell
you to be ready so that on the last day you’ll rise in the glory of the
Lord.”

Rayber’s fury encompassed the parents, the preacher, all the idiots he
could not see who were sitting in front of the child, parties to her
degradation. She believed it, she was locked tight in it, chained hand
and foot, exactly as he had been, exactly as only a child could be. He
felt the taste of his own childhood pain laid again on his tongue like a
bitter wafer.

“Do you know who Jesus is?” she cried. “Jesus is the Word of God and
Jesus is love. The Word of God is love and do you know what love is, you
people? If you don’t know what love is you won’t know Jesus when He
comes. You won’t be ready. I want to tell you people the story of the
world, how it never known when love come, so when love comes again,
you’ll be ready.”

She moved back and forth across the stage, frowning as if she were
trying to see the people through the fierce circle of light that
followed her. “Listen to me, you people,” she said, “God was angry with
the world because it always wanted more. It wanted as much as God had
and it didn’t know what God had but it wanted it and more. It wanted
God’s own breath, it wanted His very Word and God said, ‘I’ll make my
Word Jesus, I’ll give them my Word for a king, I’ll give them my very
breath for theirs.’

“Listen you people,” she said and flung her arms wide, “God told the
world He was going to send it a king and the world waited. The world
thought, a golden fleece will do for His bed. Silver and gold and
peacock tails, a thousand suns in a peacock’s tail will do for His sash.
His mother will ride on a four-horned white beast and use the sunset for
a cape. She’ll trail it behind her over the ground and let the world
pull it to pieces, a new one every evening.”

To Rayber she was like one of those birds blinded to make it sing more
sweetly. Her voice had the tone of a glass bell. His pity encompassed
all exploited children—himself when he was a child, Tarwater exploited
by the old man, this child exploited by parents, Bishop exploited by the
very fact he was alive.

“The world said, ‘How long, Lord, do we have to wait for this?’ And the
Lord said, ‘My Word is coming, my Word is coming from the house of
David, the king.’” She paused and turned her head to the side, away from
the fierce light. Her dark gaze moved slowly until it rested on Rayber’s
head in the window. He stared back at her. Her eyes remained on his face
for a moment. A deep shock went through him. He was certain that the
child had looked directly into his heart and seen his pity. He felt that
some mysterious connection was established between them.

“‘My Word is coming,’” she said, turning back to face the glare, “‘my
Word is coming from the house of David, the king.’”

She began again in a dirge-like tone. “Jesus came on cold straw, Jesus
was warmed by the breath of an ox. ‘Who is this?’ the world said, ‘who
is this blue-cold child and this woman, plain as the winter? Is this the
Word of God, this blue-cold child? Is this His will, this plain
winter-woman?’

“Listen you people!” she cried, “the world knew in its heart, the same
as you know in your hearts and I know in my heart. The world said, ‘Love
cuts like the cold wind and the will of God is plain as the winter.
Where is the summer will of God? Where are the green seasons of God’s
will? Where is the spring and summer of God’s will?’

“They had to flee into Egypt,” she said in a low voice and turned her
head again and this time her eyes moved directly to Rayber’s face in the
window and he knew they sought it. He felt himself caught up in her
look, held there before the judgment seat of her eyes.

“You and I know,” she said turning again, “what the world hoped then.
The world hoped old Herod would slay the right child, the world hoped
old Herod wouldn’t waste those children, but he wasted them. He didn’t
get the right one. Jesus grew up and raised the dead.”

Rayber felt his spirit borne aloft. But not those dead! he cried, not
the innocent children, not you, not me when I was a child, not Bishop,
not Frank! and he had a vision of himself moving like an avenging angel
through the world, gathering up all the children that the Lord, not
Herod, had slain.

“Jesus grew up and raised the dead,” she cried, “and the world shouted,
‘Leave the dead lie. The dead are dead and can stay that way. What do we
want with the dead alive?’ Oh you people!” she shouted, “they nailed Him
to a cross and run a spear through His side and then they said, ‘Now we
can have some peace, now we can ease our minds.’ And they hadn’t but
only said it when they wanted Him to come again. Their eyes were opened
and they saw the glory they had killed.

“Listen world,” she cried, flinging up her arms so that the cape flew
out behind her, “Jesus is coming again! The mountains are going to lie
down like hounds at His feet, the stars are going to perch on His
shoulder and when He calls it, the sun is going to fall like a goose for
His feast. Will you know the Lord Jesus then? The mountains will know
Him and bound forward, the stars will light on His head, the sun will
drop down at His feet, but will you know the Lord Jesus then?”

Rayber saw himself fleeing with the child to some enclosed garden where
he would teach her the truth, where he would gather all the exploited
children of the world and let the sunshine flood their minds.

“If you don’t know Him now, you won’t know Him then. Listen to me,
world, listen to this warning. The Holy Word is in my mouth!

“The Holy Word is in my mouth!” she cried and turned her eyes again on
his face in the window. This time there was a lowering concentration in
her gaze. He had drawn her attention entirely away from the
congregation.

Come away with me! he silently implored, and I’ll teach you the truth,
I’ll save you, beautiful child!

Her eyes still fixed on him, she cried, “I’ve seen the Lord in a tree of
fire! The Word of God is a burning Word to burn you clean!” She was
moving in his direction, the people in front of her forgotten. Rayber’s
heart began to race. He felt some miraculous communication between them.
The child alone in the world was meant to understand him. “Burns the
whole world, man and child,” she cried, her eye on him, “none can
escape.” She stopped a little distance from the end of the stage and
stood silent, her whole attention directed across the small room to his
face on the ledge. Her eyes were large and dark and fierce. He felt that
in the space between them, their spirits had broken the bonds of age and
ignorance and were mingling in some unheard of knowledge of each other.
He was transfixed by the child’s silence. Suddenly she raised her arm
and pointed toward his face. “Listen you people,” she shrieked, “I see a
damned soul before my eye! I see a dead man Jesus hasn’t raised. His
head is in the window but his ear is deaf to the Holy Word!”

Rayber’s head, as if it had been struck by an invisible bolt, dropped
from the ledge. He crouched on the ground, his furious spectacled eyes
glittering behind the shrubbery. Inside she continued to shriek, “Are
you deaf to the Lord’s Word? The Word of God is a burning Word to burn
you clean, burns man and child, man and child the same, you people! Be
saved in the Lord’s fire or perish in your own! Be saved in . . .”

He was groping fiercely about him, slapping at his coat pockets, his
head, his chest, not able to find the switch that would cut off the
voice. Then his hand touched the button and he snapped it. A silent dark
relief enclosed him like shelter after a tormenting wind. For a while he
sat limp behind the bush. Then the reason for his being here returned to
him and he experienced a moment of loathing for the boy that earlier
would have made him shudder. He wanted nothing but to get back home and
sink into his own bed, whether the boy returned or not.

He got out of the shrubbery and started toward the front of the
building. As he turned onto the sidewalk, the door of the tabernacle
flew open and Tarwater flung himself out. Rayber stopped abruptly.

The boy stood confronting him, his face strangely mobile as if
successive layers of shock were settling on it to form a new expression.
After a moment he raised his arm in an uncertain gesture of greeting.
The sight of Rayber seemed to afford him relief amounting to rescue.

Rayber’s face had the wooden look it wore when his hearing aid was off.
He did not see the boy’s expression at all. His rage obliterated all but
the general lines of his figure and he saw them moulded in an
irreversible shape of defiance. He grabbed him roughly by the arm and
started down the block with him. Both of them walked rapidly as if
neither could leave the place fast enough. When they were well down the
block, Rayber stopped and swung him around and glared into his face.
Through his fury he could not discern that for the first time the boy’s
eyes were submissive. He snapped on his hearing aid and said fiercely,
“I hope you enjoyed the show.”

Tarwater’s lips moved convulsively. Then he murmured, “I only gone to
spit on it.”

The schoolteacher continued to glare at him. “I’m not so sure of that.”

The boy said nothing. He seemed to have suffered some shock inside the
building that had permanently slowed his tongue.

Rayber turned and they walked away in silence. At any point along the
way, he could have put his hand on the shoulder next to his and it would
not have been withdrawn, but he made no gesture. His head was churning
with old rages. The afternoon he had learned the full extent of Bishop’s
future had sprung to his mind. He saw himself rigidly facing the doctor,
a man who had made him think of a bull, impassive, insensitive, his
brain already on the next case. He had said, “You should be grateful his
health is good. In addition to this, I’ve seen them born blind as well,
some without arms and legs, and one with a heart outside.”

He had lurched up, almost ready to strike the man. “How can I be
grateful,” he had hissed, “when one—just one—is born with a heart
outside?”

“You’d better try,” the doctor had said.

Tarwater walked slightly behind him and Rayber did not cast a glance
back at him. His fury seemed to be stirring from buried depths that had
lain quiet for years and to be working upward, closer and closer, toward
the slender roots of his peace. When they reached the house he went in
and straight to his bed without turning to look at the boy’s white face
which, drained but expectant, lingered a moment at the threshold of his
door as if waiting for an invitation to enter.




                                   VI

THE NEXT DAY, too late, he had the sense of opportunity missed.
Tarwater’s face had hardened again and the steely gleam in his eye was
like the glint of a metal door sealed against an intruder. Rayber felt
afflicted with a peculiar chilling clarity of mind in which he saw
himself divided in two—a violent and a rational self. The violent self
inclined him to see the boy as an enemy and he knew that nothing would
hinder his progress with the case so much as giving in to such an
inclination. He had waked up after a wild dream in which he chased
Tarwater through an interminable alley that twisted suddenly back on
itself and reversed the roles of pursuer and pursued. The boy had
overtaken him, given him a thunderous blow on the head, and then
disappeared. And with his disappearance there had come such an
overwhelming feeling of release that Rayber had waked up with a pleasant
anticipation that his guest would be gone. He was at once ashamed of the
feeling. He settled on a rational, tiring plan for the day and by ten
o’clock the three of them were on their way to the natural history
museum. He intended to stretch the boy’s mind by introducing him to his
ancestor, the fish, and to all the great wastes of unexplored time.

They passed part of the territory they had walked over the night before
but nothing was said about that trip. Except for the circles under
Rayber’s eyes, there was nothing about either of them to indicate it had
been made. Bishop stumped along, squatting every now and then to pick up
something off the sidewalk, while Tarwater, to avoid contamination with
them, walked a good four feet to the other side and slightly in advance.
I must have infinite patience, I must have infinite patience, Rayber
kept repeating to himself.

The museum lay on the other side of the city park which they had not
crossed before. As they approached it, the boy paled as if he were
shocked to find a wood in the middle of the city. Once inside the park,
he stopped and stood glaring about him at the huge trees whose ancient
rustling branches intermingled overhead. Patches of light sifting
through them spattered the concrete walks with sunshine. Rayber observed
that something disturbed him. Then he realized that the place reminded
him of Powderhead.

“Let’s sit down,” he said, wanting both to rest and to observe the boy’s
agitation. He sat down on a bench and stretched his legs in front of
him. He suffered Bishop to climb into his lap. The child’s shoelaces
were untied and he tied them, for the moment ignoring the boy who was
standing there, his face furiously impatient. When he finished tying the
shoes, he continued to hold the child, sprawled and grinning, in his
lap. The little boy’s white head fitted under his chin. Above it Rayber
looked at nothing in particular. Then he closed his eyes and in the
isolating darkness, he forgot Tarwater’s presence. Without warning his
hated love gripped him and held him in a vise. He should have known
better than to let the child onto his lap.

His forehead became beady with sweat; he looked as if he might have been
nailed to the bench. He knew that if he could once conquer this pain,
face it and with a supreme effort of his will refuse to feel it, he
would be a free man. He held Bishop rigidly. Although the child started
the pain, he also limited it, contained it. He had learned this one
terrible afternoon when he had tried to drown him.

He had taken him to the beach, two hundred miles away, intending to
effect the accident as quickly as possible and return bereaved. It had
been a beautiful calm day in May. The beach, almost empty, had stretched
down into the gradual swell of ocean. There was nothing to be seen but
an expanse of sea and sky and sand and an occasional figure, stick-like,
in the distance. He had taken him out on his shoulders and when he was
chest deep in the water, had lifted him off, swung the delighted child
high in the air and then plunged him swiftly below the surface on his
back and held him there, not looking down at what he was doing but up,
at an imperturbable witnessing sky, not quite blue, not quite white.

A fierce surging pressure had begun upward beneath his hands and grimly
he had exerted more and more force downward. In a second, he felt he was
trying to hold a giant under. Astonished, he let himself look. The face
under the water was wrathfully contorted, twisted by some primeval rage
to save itself. Automatically he released his pressure. Then when he
realized what he had done, he pushed down again angrily with all his
force until the struggle ceased under his hands. He stood sweating in
the water, his own mouth as slack as the child’s had been. The body,
caught by an undertow, almost got away from him but he managed to come
to himself and snatch it. Then as he looked at it, he had a moment of
complete terror in which he envisioned his life without the child. He
began to shout frantically. He plowed his way out of the water with the
limp body. The beach which he had thought empty before had become
peopled with strangers converging on him from all directions. A
bald-headed man in red and blue Roman striped shorts began at once to
administer artificial respiration. Three wailing women and a
photographer appeared. The next day there had been a picture in the
paper, showing the rescuer, striped bottom forward, working over the
child. Rayber was beside him on his knees, watching with an agonized
expression. The caption said, =overjoyed father sees son
revived=.

The boy’s voice broke in on him harshly. “All you got to do is nurse an
idiot!”

The schoolteacher opened his eyes. They were bloodshot and vague. He
might have been returning to consciousness after a blow on the head.

Tarwater was glaring to the side of him. “Come on if you’re coming,” he
said, “and if you ain’t, I’m going on about my bidnis.”

Rayber didn’t answer.

“So long,” Tarwater said.

“And where would your business be?” Rayber asked sourly. “At another
tabernacle?”

The boy reddened. He opened his mouth and said nothing.

“I nurse an idiot that you’re afraid to look at,” Rayber said. “Look him
in the eye.”

Tarwater shot a glance at the top of Bishop’s head and left it there an
instant like a finger on a candle flame. “I’d as soon be afraid to look
at a dog,” he said and turned his back. After a moment, as if he were
continuing the same conversation, he muttered, “I’d as soon baptize a
dog as him. It would be as much use.”

“Who said anything about baptizing anybody?” Rayber said. “Is that one
of your fixations? Have you taken that bug up from the old man?”

The boy whirled around and faced him. “I told you I only gone there to
spit on it,” he said tensely. “I ain’t going to tell you again.”

Rayber watched him without saying anything. He felt that his own sour
words had helped him recover himself. He pushed Bishop off and stood up.
“Let’s get going,” he said. He had no intention of discussing it
further, but as they moved on silently, he thought better of it.

“Listen Frank,” he said, “I’ll grant that you went to spit on it. I’ve
never for a second doubted your intelligence. Everything you’ve done,
your very presence here proves that you’re above your background, that
you’ve broken through the ceiling the old man set for you. After all,
you escaped from Powderhead. You had the courage to attend to him the
quickest way and then get out of there. And once out, you came directly
to the right place.”

The boy reached up and picked a leaf from a tree branch and bit it. A
wry expression spread over his face. He rolled the leaf into a ball and
threw it away. Rayber continued to speak, his voice detached, as if he
had no particular interest in the matter, and his were merely the voice
of truth, as impersonal as air.

“Say that you went to spit on it,” he said, “the point is this: there’s
no need to spit on it. It’s not worth spitting on. It’s not that
important. You’ve somehow enlarged the significance of it in your mind.
The old man used to enrage me until I learned better. He wasn’t worth my
hate and he’s not worth yours. He’s only worth our pity.” He wondered if
the boy were capable of the steadiness of pity. “You want to avoid
extremes. They are for violent people and you don’t want . . .”—he
broke off abruptly as Bishop let loose his hand and galloped away.

They had come out into the center of the park, a concrete circle with a
fountain in the middle of it. Water rushed from the mouth of a stone
lion’s head into a shallow pool and the little boy was flying toward it,
his arms flailing like a windmill. In a second he was over the side and
in. “Too late, goddammit,” Rayber muttered, “he’s in.” He glanced at
Tarwater.

The boy stood arrested in the middle of a step. His eyes were on the
child in the pool but they burned as if he beheld some terrible
compelling vision. The sun shone brightly on Bishop’s white head and the
little boy stood there with a look of attention. Tarwater began to move
toward him.

He seemed to be drawn toward the child in the water but to be pulling
back, exerting an almost equal pressure away from what attracted him.
Rayber watched, puzzled and suspicious, moving along with him but
somewhat to the side. As he drew closer to the pool, the skin on the
boy’s face appeared to stretch tighter and tighter. Rayber had the sense
that he was moving blindly, that where Bishop was he saw only a spot of
light. He felt that something was being enacted before him and that if
he could understand it, he would have the key to the boy’s future. His
muscles were tensed and he was prepared somehow to act. Suddenly his
sense of danger was so great that he cried out. In an instant of
illumination he understood. Tarwater was moving toward Bishop to baptize
him. Already he had reached the edge of the pool. Rayber sprang and
snatched the child out of the water and set him down, howling, on the
concrete.

His heart was beating furiously. He felt that he had just saved the boy
from committing some enormous indignity. He saw it all now. The old man
_had_ transferred his fixation to the boy, _had_ left him with the
notion that he must baptize Bishop or suffer some terrible consequence.
Tarwater put his foot down on the marble edge of the pool. He leaned
forward, his elbow on his knee, looking over the side at his broken
reflection in the water. His lips moved as if he were speaking silently
to the face forming in the pool. Rayber said nothing. He realized now
the magnitude of the boy’s affliction. He knew that there was no way to
appeal to him with reason. There was no hope of discussing it sanely
with him, for it was a compulsion. He saw no way of curing him except
perhaps through some shock, some sudden concrete confrontation with the
futility, the ridiculous absurdity of performing the empty rite.

He squatted down and began to take off Bishop’s wet shoes. The child had
stopped howling and was crying quietly, his face red and hideously
distorted. Rayber turned his eyes away.

Tarwater was walking off. He was past the pool, his back strangely bent
as if he were being driven away with a whip. He was moving off onto one
of the narrow tree-shaded paths.

“Wait!” Rayber shouted. “We can’t go to the museum now. We’ll have to go
home and change Bishop’s shoes.”

Tarwater could not have failed to hear but he kept on walking and in a
second was lost to view.

Goddam backwoods imbecile, Rayber said under his breath. He stood
looking at the path where the boy had disappeared. He felt no urge to go
after him for he knew that he would be back, that he was held by Bishop.
His feeling of oppression was caused now by the certain knowledge that
there was no way to get rid of him. He would be with them until he had
either accomplished what he came for, or until he was cured. The words
the old man had scrawled on the back of the journal rose before him:
=the prophet i raise up out of this boy will burn your eyes
clean.= The sentence was like a challenge renewed. I will cure
him, he said grimly. I will cure him or know the reason why.




                                  VII

THE CHEROKEE LODGE was a two-story converted warehouse, the lower part
painted white and the upper green. One end sat on land and the other was
set on stilts in a glassy little lake across which were dense woods,
green and, back farther toward the skyline, grey-blue. The long front
side of the building, plastered with beer and cigaret signs, faced the
highway, which ran about thirty feet away across a dirt road and beyond
a narrow stretch of ironweed. Rayber had passed the place before but had
never been tempted to stop.

He had selected it because it was only thirty miles from Powderhead and
because it was cheap and he arrived there the next day with the two boys
in time for them to take a walk and look around before they ate. The
ride up had been oppressively silent, the boy sitting as usual on his
side of the car like some foreign dignitary who would not admit speaking
the language—the filthy hat, the stinking overalls, worn defiantly like
a national costume.

Rayber had hit upon his plan in the night. It was to take him back to
Powderhead and make him face what he had done. What he hoped was that if
seeing and feeling the place again were a real shock, the boy’s trauma
might suddenly be revealed. His irrational fears and impulses would
burst out and his uncle—sympathetic, knowing, uniquely able to
understand—would be there to explain them to him. He had not said they
were going to Powderhead. So far as the boy knew, this was to be a
fishing trip. He thought that an afternoon of relaxation in a boat
before the experiment would help ease the tension, his own as well as
Tarwater’s.

On the drive up, his thoughts had been interrupted once when he saw
Bishop’s face rise unorganized into the rearview mirror and then
disappear as he attempted to crawl over the top of the front seat and
climb into Tarwater’s lap. The boy had turned and without looking at him
had given the panting child a firm push onto the back seat again. One of
Rayber’s immediate goals was to make him understand that his urge to
baptize the child was a kind of _sickness_ and that a sign of returning
health would be his ability to begin looking Bishop in the eye. Rayber
felt that once he could look the child in the eye, he would have
confidence in his ability to resist the morbid impulse to baptize him.

When they got out of the car, he watched the boy closely, trying to
discover his first reaction to being in the country again. Tarwater
stood for a moment, his head lifted sharply as if he detected some
familiar odor moving from the pine forest across the lake. His long
face, depending from the bulb-shaped hat, made Rayber think of a root
jerked suddenly out of the ground and exposed to the light. The boy’s
eyes narrowed so that the lake must have been reduced to the width of a
knife-blade in his sight. He looked at the water with a peculiar
undisguised hostility. Rayber even thought that as his eye fell on it,
he began to tremble. At least he was certain that his hands clenched.
His glare steadied, then with his usual precipitous gait, he set off
around the building without looking back.

Bishop climbed out of the car and thrust his face against his father’s
side. Absently Rayber put his hand on the little boy’s ear and rubbed it
gingerly, his fingers tingling as if they touched the sensitive scar of
some old wound. Then he pushed the child aside, picked up the bag and
started toward the screen door of the lodge. As he reached it, Tarwater
came quickly around the side of the building with the distinct look to
Rayber of being pursued. His feeling for the boy alternated drastically
between compassion for his haunted look and fury at the way he was
treated by him. Tarwater acted as if to see him at all required a
special effort. Rayber opened the screen door and stepped inside,
leaving the two boys to come in or not as they pleased.

The interior was dark. To the left he made out a reception desk with a
heavy plain-looking woman behind it, leaning on her elbows. He set the
bag down and gave her his name. He had the feeling that though her eyes
were on him, they were looking behind him. He glanced around. Bishop was
a few feet away, gaping at her.

“What’s your name, Sugarpie?” she asked.

“His name is Bishop,” Rayber said shortly. He was always irked when the
child was stared at.

The woman tilted her head sympathetically. “I reckon you’re taking him
off to give his mother a little rest,” she said, her eyes full of
curiosity and compassion.

“I have him all the time,” he said and added before he could stop
himself, “his mother abandoned him.”

“No!” she breathed. “Well,” she said, “it takes all kinds of women. I
couldn’t leave a child like that.”

You can’t even take your eyes off him, he thought irritably and began to
fill out the card. “Are the boats for rent?” he asked without looking
up.

“Free for the guests,” she said, “but anybody gets drowned, that’s their
lookout. How about him? Can he sit still in a boat?”

“Nothing ever happens to him,” he murmured, finishing the card and
turning it around to her.

She read it, then she glanced up and stared at Tarwater. He was standing
a few feet behind Bishop, looking around him suspiciously, his hands in
his pockets and his hat pulled down. She began to scowl. “That boy
there—is yours too?” she asked, pointing the pen at him as if this were
inconceivable.

Rayber realized that she must think he was some one hired for a guide.
“Certainly, he’s mine too,” he said quickly and in a voice the boy could
not fail to hear. He made it a point to impress on him that he was
wanted, whether he cared to be wanted or not.

Tarwater lifted his head and returned the woman’s stare. Then he took a
stride forward and thrust his face at her. “What do you mean—is his?”
he demanded.

“Is his,” she said, drawing back. “You don’t look it is all.” Then she
frowned as if, continuing to study him, she began to see a likeness.

“And I ain’t it,” he said. He snatched the card from her and read it.
Rayber had written, “George F. Rayber, Frank and Bishop Rayber,” and
their address. The boy put the card down on the desk and picked up the
pen, gripping it so hard that his fingers turned red at the tips. He
crossed out the name _Frank_ and underneath in an old man’s meticulous
hand he began to write something else.

Rayber looked at the woman helplessly and lifted his shoulders as if to
say, “I have more than one problem,” and shrug it off, but the gesture
ended in a violent tremor. To his horror he felt the side of his mouth
give a series of quick jerks. He had an instant’s premonition that if he
wished to save himself, he should leave at once, that the trip was
doomed.

The woman handed him the key and, looking at him suspiciously, said, “Up
the steps yonder and four doors down to the right. We don’t have anybody
to tote the bags.”

He took the key and started up a rickety flight of steps to the left.
Halfway up, he paused and said in a voice in which there was a remnant
of authority, “Bring up that bag when you come, Frank.”

The boy was finishing his essay on the card and gave no indication of
hearing.

The woman’s curious gaze followed Rayber up the stairs until he
disappeared. She observed as his feet passed the level of her head that
he had on one brown sock and one grey. His shoes were not run-down but
he might have slept in his seersucker suit every night. He was in bad
need of a haircut and his eyes had a peculiar look—like something human
trapped in a switch box. Has come here to have a nervous breakdown, she
said to herself. Then she turned her head. Her eyes rested on the two
boys, who had not moved. And who wouldn’t? she asked herself.

The afflicted child looked as if he must have dressed himself. He had on
a black cowboy hat and a pair of short khaki pants that were too tight
even for his narrow hips and a yellow t-shirt that had not been washed
any time lately. Both his brown hightop shoes were untied. The upper
part of him looked like an old man and the lower part like a child. The
other, the mean-looking one, had picked up the desk card again and was
reading over what he had written on it. He was so taken up with it that
he did not see the little boy reaching out to touch him. The instant the
child touched him, the country boy’s shoulders leapt. He snatched his
touched hand up and jammed it in his pocket. “Leave off!” he said in a
high voice. “Git away and quit bothering me!”

“Mind how you talk to one of them there, you boy!” the woman hissed.

He looked at her as if it were the first time she had spoken to him.
“Them there what?” he murmured.

“That there kind,” she said, looking at him fiercely as if he had
profaned the holy.

He looked back at the afflicted child and the woman was startled by the
expression on his face. He seemed to see the little boy and nothing
else, no air around him, no room, no nothing, as if his gaze had slipped
and fallen into the center of the child’s eyes and was still falling
down and down and down. The little boy turned after a second and skipped
off toward the steps and the country boy followed, so directly that he
might have been attached to him by a tow-line. The child began to
scramble up the steps on his hands and knees, kicking his feet up on
each one. Then suddenly he flipped himself around and sat down squarely
in the country boy’s way and stuck his feet out in front of him,
apparently wanting his shoes tied. The country boy stopped still. He
hung over him like some one bewitched, his long arms bent uncertainly.

The woman watched fascinated. He ain’t going to tie them, she said, not
him.

He leaned over and began to tie them. Frowning furiously, he tied one
and then the other and the child watched, completely absorbed in the
operation. When the boy finished tying them, he straightened himself and
said in a querulous voice, “Now git on and quit bothering me with them
laces,” and the child flipped over on his hands and feet and scrambled
up the stairs, making a great din.

Confused by this kindness, the woman called, “Hey boy.”

She had intended to say, “Whose boy are you?” but she said nothing, her
mouth opening on a vanished sentence. His eyes as they turned and looked
down at her were the color of the lake just before dark when the last
daylight has faded and the moon has not risen yet, and for an instant
she thought she saw something fleeing across the surface of them, a lost
light that came from nowhere and vanished into nothing. For some moments
they stared at each other without issue. Finally, convinced she had not
seen it, she muttered, “Whatever devil’s work you mean to do, don’t do
it here.”

He continued to look down at her. “You can’t just say NO,” he said. “You
got to do NO. You got to show it. You got to show you mean it by doing
it. You got to show you’re not going to do one thing by doing another.
You got to make an end of it. One way or another.”

“Don’t you do nothing here,” she said, wondering what he would do here.

“I never ast to come here,” he said. “I never ast for that lake to be
set down in front of me,” and he turned and moved on up the stairs.

The woman looked in front of her for some time as if she were seeing her
own thoughts before her like unintelligible handwriting on the wall.
Then she looked down at the card on the counter and turned it over.
“Francis Marion Tarwater,” he had written. “Powderhead, Tennessee. NOT
HIS SON.”




                                  VIII

AFTER THEY HAD had their lunch, the schoolteacher suggested they get a
boat and fish awhile. Tarwater could tell that he was watching him
again, his little eyes protected and precise behind his glasses. He had
been watching him ever since he came but now he was watching in a
different way: he was watching for something that he planned to make
happen. The trip was designed to be a trap but the boy had no attention
to spare for it. His mind was entirely occupied with saving himself from
the larger grander trap that he felt set all about him. Ever since his
first night in the city when he had seen once and for all that the
schoolteacher was of no significance—nothing but a piece of bait, an
insult to his intelligence—his mind had been engaged in a continual
struggle with the silence that confronted him, that demanded he baptize
the child and begin at once the life the old man had prepared him for.

It was a strange waiting silence. It seemed to lie all around him like
an invisible country whose borders he was always on the edge of, always
in danger of crossing. From time to time as they had walked in the city,
he had looked to the side and seen his own form alongside him in a store
window, transparent as a snakeskin. It moved beside him like some
violent ghost who had already crossed over and was reproaching him from
the other side. If he turned his head the opposite way, there would be
the dim-witted boy, hanging onto the schoolteacher’s coat, watching him.
His mouth hung in a lop-sided smile but there was a judging sternness
about his forehead. The boy never looked lower than the top of his head
except by accident for the silent country appeared to be reflected again
in the center of his eyes. It stretched out there, limitless and clear.

Tarwater could have baptized him any one of a hundred times without so
much as touching him. Each time the temptation came, he would feel that
the silence was about to surround him and he was going to be lost in it
forever. He would have fallen but for the wise voice that sustained
him—the stranger who had kept him company while he dug his uncle’s
grave.

Sensations, his friend—no longer a stranger—said. Feelings. What you
want is a sign, a real sign, suitable to a prophet. If you are a
prophet, it’s only right you should be treated like one. When Jonah
dallied, he was cast three days in a belly of darkness and vomited up in
the place of his mission. That was a sign; it wasn’t no sensation.

It takes all my time to set you straight. Look at you, he said—going to
that fancy-house of God, sitting there like an ape letting that
girl-child bend your ear. What did you expect to see there? What did you
expect to hear? The Lord speaks to prophets personally and He’s never
spoke to you, never lifted a finger, never dropped a gesture. And as for
that strangeness in your gut, that comes from you, not the Lord. When
you were a child you had worms. As likely as not you have them again.

The first day in the city he had become conscious of the strangeness in
his stomach, a peculiar hunger. The city food only weakened him. He and
his great-uncle had eaten well. If the old man had done nothing else for
him, he had heaped his plate. Never a morning he had not awakened to the
smell of fatback frying. The schoolteacher paid scarce attention to what
he put inside him. For breakfast, he poured a bowl of shavings out of a
cardboard box; in the middle of the day he made sandwiches out of
lightbread; and at night he took them to a restaurant, a different one
every night run by a different color of foreigner so that he would
learn, he said, how other nationalities ate. The boy did not care how
other nationalities ate. He had always left the restaurants hungry,
conscious of an intrusion in his works. Since the breakfast he had
finished sitting in the presence of his uncle’s corpse, he had not been
satisfied by food, and his hunger had become like an insistent silent
force inside him, a silence inside akin to the silence outside, as if
the grand trap left him barely an inch to move in, barely an inch in
which to keep himself inviolate.

His friend was adamant that he refuse to entertain hunger as a sign. He
pointed out that the prophets had been fed. Elijah had lain down under a
juniper tree to die and had gone to sleep and an angel of the Lord had
come and waked him and fed him a hearth-cake, had done it moreover
twice, and Elijah had risen and gone about his business, lasting on the
two hearth-cakes forty days and nights. Prophets did not languish in
hunger but were fed from the Lord’s bounty and the signs given them were
unmistakable. His friend suggested he demand an unmistakable sign, not a
pang of hunger or a reflection of himself in a store window, but an
unmistakable sign, clear and suitable—water bursting forth from a rock,
for instance, fire sweeping down at his command and destroying some site
he would point to, such as the tabernacle he had gone to spit on.

His fourth night in the city, after he had returned from listening to
the child preach, he had sat up in the welfare-woman’s bed and raising
his folded hat as if he were threatening the silence, he had demanded an
unmistakable sign of the Lord.

Now we’ll see what class of prophet you are, his friend said. We’ll see
what the Lord has in mind for you.

The next day the schoolteacher had taken them into a park where trees
were fenced together in a kind of island that cars were not allowed in.
They had only but entered it when he felt a hush in his blood and a
stillness in the atmosphere as if the air were being purged for the
approach of revelation. He would have turned and run but the
schoolteacher parked himself on a bench and pretended to go to sleep
with the dimwit in his lap. The trees rustled thickly and the clearing
rose to his mind’s eye. He imagined the blackened spot in the center of
it between the two chimneys, and saw rising from the ashes the burnt-out
frames of his own and his uncle’s bed. He opened his mouth to get air
and the schoolteacher woke up and began asking questions.

He prided himself that from the first night he had answered his
questions with the cunning of a Negro, giving no information, knowing
nothing, and each time he was questioned, raising his uncle’s fury until
it was observable under his skin in patches of pink and white. A few of
his ready answers and the schoolteacher was willing to move on.

They had walked deeper into the park and he began to feel again the
approach of mystery. He would have turned and run in the opposite
direction but it was all on him in an instant. The path widened and they
were faced with an open space in the middle of the park, a concrete
circle with a fountain in the center of it. Water rushed out of the
mouth of a stone lion’s head into a shallow pool below and as soon as
the dim-witted boy saw the water, he gave a whoop and galloped off
toward it, flapping his arms like something released from a cage.

Tarwater saw exactly where he was heading, knew exactly what he was
going to do.

“Too late, goddamit,” the schoolteacher muttered, “he’s in.”

The child stood grinning in the pool, lifting his feet slowly up and
down as if he liked the feel of the wet seeping into his shoes. The sun,
which had been tacking from cloud to cloud, emerged above the fountain.
A blinding brightness fell on the lion’s tangled marble head and gilded
the stream of water rushing from his mouth. Then the light, falling more
gently, rested like a hand on the child’s white head. His face might
have been a mirror where the sun had stopped to watch its reflection.

Tarwater started forward. He felt a distinct tension in the quiet. The
old man might have been lurking near, holding his breath, waiting for
the baptism. His friend was silent as if in the felt presence, he dared
not raise his voice. At each step the boy exerted a force backward but
he continued nevertheless to move toward the pool. He reached the rim of
it and lifted his foot to swing it over the side. Just as his shoe
touched the water, the schoolteacher bounded forward and snatched the
dimwit out. The child split the silence with his bellow.

Slowly Tarwater’s lifted foot came down on the edge of the pool and he
leaned there, looking into the water where a wavering face seemed trying
to form itself. Gradually it became distinct and still, gaunt and
cross-shaped. He observed, deep in its eyes, a look of starvation. I
wasn’t going to baptize him, he said, flinging the silent words at the
silent face. I’d drown him first.

Drown him then, the face appeared to say.

Tarwater stepped back, shocked. Scowling, he straightened himself and
moved away. The sun had gone in and there were black caves in the tree
branches. Bishop was lying on his back, roaring from a red distorted
face, and the schoolteacher stood above him, staring at nothing in
particular as if it were he who had received a revelation.

Well, that’s your sign, his friend said—the sun coming out from under a
cloud and falling on the head of a dimwit. Something that could happen
fifty times a day without no one being the wiser. And it took that
schoolteacher to save you and just in time. Left to yourself you would
already have done it and been lost forever. Listen, he said, you have to
quit confusing a madness with a mission. You can’t spend your life
fooling yourself this way. You have to take hold and put temptation
behind you. If you baptize once, you’ll be doing it the rest of your
life. If it’s an idiot this time, the next time it’s liable to be a
nigger. Save yourself while the hour of salvation is at hand.

But the boy was shaken. He scarcely heard the voice as he walked off
deeper into the park and down a path he scarcely saw. When he finally
took note of his surroundings, he was sitting on a bench, looking down
at his feet where two pigeons were moving in drunken circles. On the
other side of the bench was a man of a generally grey appearance who had
been examining a hole in his shoe when Tarwater sat down but who stopped
then and devoted himself to a close scrutiny of the boy. Finally he
reached over and plucked Tarwater’s sleeve. The boy looked up into two
pale yellow-rimmed eyes.

“Be like me, young fellow,” the stranger said, “don’t let no jackasses
tell you what to do.” He was grinning wisely and his eyes held a
malevolent promise of unwanted friendship. His voice sounded familiar
but his appearance was as unpleasant as a stain.

The boy got up and left hastily. An interesting coincident, his friend
observed, that he should say the same thing as I’ve been saying. You
think there’s a trap laid all about you by the Lord. There ain’t any
trap. There ain’t anything except what you’ve laid for yourself. The
Lord is not studying about you, don’t know you exist, and wouldn’t do a
thing about it if He did. You’re alone in the world, with only yourself
to ask or thank or judge; with only yourself. And me. I’ll never desert
you.

The first sight that met his eyes when he got out of the car at the
Cherokee Lodge was the little lake. It lay there, glass-like, still,
reflecting a crown of trees and an infinite overarching sky. It looked
so unused that it might only the moment before have been set down by
four strapping angels for him to baptize the child in. A weakness
working itself up from his knees, reached his stomach and came upward
and forced a tremor in his jaw. Steady, his friend said, everywhere you
go you’ll find water. It wasn’t invented yesterday. But remember: water
is made for more than one thing. Hasn’t the time come? Don’t you have to
do something at last, one thing to prove you ain’t going to do another?
Hasn’t your hour of dallying passed?

They ate their lunch in the dark other-end of the lobby where the woman
who ran the place served meals. Tarwater ate voraciously. With an
expression of intense concentration, he ate six buns filled with
barbecue and drank three cans of beer. He might have been preparing
himself for a long journey or for some action that would take all his
strength. Rayber observed his sudden appetite for the poor food and
decided that he was eating compulsively. He wondered if the beer might
loosen his tongue, but in the boat he was as glum as ever. He sat
hunched over, his hat pulled down, and scowled at the spot where his
line disappeared in the water.

They had managed to get the boat away from the dock before Bishop came
out of the lodge. The woman had drawn him to an icecooler and produced a
green popsickle which she held up for him while she gazed fascinated
into his mysterious face. They were in the middle of the lake before he
came clattering down the dock, the woman running behind. She snatched
him just in time to keep him from plunging over the edge.

Rayber made a frantic grabbing motion in the boat and cried out. Then he
reddened and scowled. “Don’t look,” he said, “she’ll take care of him.
We need a break.”

The boy gazed darkly where the accident had been prevented. The child
was a black spot in the glare of his vision. The woman turned him around
and started leading him back to the lodge. “It wouldn’t have been no
great loss if he had drowned,” he observed.

Rayber had an instant’s picture of himself, standing in the ocean,
holding the child’s limp body in his arms. With a kind of convulsive
motion, he cleared his head of the image. Then he saw that Tarwater had
observed his discomposure; he was looking at him with a distinct
attention, a peculiar prescient look as if he were about to penetrate
some secret.

“Nothing ever happens to that kind of child,” Rayber said. “In a hundred
years people may have learned enough to put them to sleep when they’re
born.”

Something appeared to be working on the boy’s face, struggling there,
some war between agreement and outrage.

Rayber’s blood burned beneath his skin. He tried to restrain the urge to
confess. He leaned forward; his mouth opened and closed and then in a
dry voice he said, “Once I tried to drown him,” and grinned horribly at
the boy.

Tarwater’s lips parted as if only they had heard, but he said nothing.

“It was a failure of nerve,” Rayber said. The glare on the water gave
him the sensation of glancing at white fire each time he looked up or
out where it was reflected on the water. He turned down the brim of his
hat all the way around.

“You didn’t have the guts,” Tarwater said as if he would put it in a
more accurate way. “He always told me you couldn’t do nothing, couldn’t
act.”

The schoolteacher leaned forward and said between his teeth, “I’ve
resisted him. I’ve done that. What have you done? Maybe you attended to
him the quickest way but it takes more than that to go against his will
for good. Are you quite sure,” he said, “are you quite sure you’ve
overcome him? I doubt it. I think you’re chained to him right now. I
think you’re not going to be free of him without my help. I think you’ve
got problems that you’re not capable of solving yourself.”

The boy scowled and was silent.

The glare pierced Rayber’s eyeballs fiercely. He did not think he could
stand an afternoon of this. He felt recklessly compelled to pursue the
subject. “How do you like being in the country again?” he growled.
“Remind you of Powderhead?”

“I come to fish,” the boy said disagreeably.

Goddam you, his uncle thought, all I’m trying to do is save you from
being a freak. He was holding his line unbaited in the blinding water.
He felt a madness on him to talk about the old man. “I remember the
first time I ever saw him,” he said. “I was six or seven. I was out in
the yard playing and all of a sudden I felt something between me and the
sun. Him. I looked up and there he was, those mad fish-coloured eyes
looking down at me. Do you know what he said to me—a seven year old
child?” He tried to make his voice sound like the old man’s. “‘Listen
boy,’ he said, ‘the Lord Jesus Christ sent me to find you. You have to
be born again.’” He laughed, glaring at the boy with his furious
blistered-looking eyes. “The Lord Jesus Christ had my welfare so at
heart that he sent a personal representative. Where was the calamity?
The calamity was I believed him. For five or six years. I had nothing
else but that. I waited on the Lord Jesus. I thought I’d been born again
and that everything was going to be different or was different already
because the Lord Jesus had a great interest in me.”

Tarwater shifted on the seat. He seemed to listen as if behind a wall.

“It was the eyes that got me,” Rayber said. “Children may be attracted
to mad eyes. A grown person could have resisted. A child couldn’t.
Children are cursed with believing.”

The boy recognized the sentence. “Some ain’t,” he said.

The schoolteacher smiled thinly. “And some who think they aren’t are,”
he said, feeling that he was back in control. “It’s not as easy as you
think to throw it off. Do you know,” he said, “that there’s a part of
your mind that works all the time, that you’re not aware of yourself.
Things go on in it. All sorts of things you don’t know about.”

Tarwater looked around him as if he were vainly searching for a way to
get out of the boat and walk off.

“I think you’re basically very bright,” his uncle said. “I think you can
understand the things that are said to you.”

“I never came for no school lesson,” the boy said rudely. “I come to
fish. I ain’t worried what my underhead is doing. I know what I think
when I do it and when I get ready to do it, I don’t talk no words. I do
it.” There was a dull anger in his voice. He was becoming aware of how
much he had eaten. The food appeared to be sinking like a leaden column
inside him and to be pushed back at the same time by the hunger it had
intruded upon.

The schoolteacher watched him a moment and then said, “Well anyway, as
far as the baptizing went, the old man could have spared himself. I was
already baptized. My mother never overcame her upbringing and she had
had it done. But the damage to me of having it done at the age of seven
was tremendous. It made a lasting scar.”

The boy looked up suddenly as if there had been a tug at his line. “Him
back there,” he said and jerked his head toward the lodge, “he ain’t
been baptized?”

“No,” Rayber said. He looked at him narrowly. He thought that if he
could get the right words in now, he might do some good, might give him
a painless lesson. “I may not have the guts to drown him,” he said, “but
I have the guts to maintain my self-respect and not to perform futile
rites over him. I have the guts not to become the prey of superstitions.
He is what he is and there’s nothing for him to be born into. My guts,”
he finished, “are in my head.”

The boy only stared at him, his eyes filmed with a dull cast of nausea.

“The great dignity of man,” his uncle said, “is his ability to say: I am
born once and no more. What I can see and do for myself and my fellowman
in this life is all of my portion and I’m content with it. It’s enough
to be a man.” There was a light ring in his voice. He watched the boy
closely to see if he had struck a chord.

Tarwater turned an expressionless face toward the rim of trees that made
a paling around the lake. He appeared to stare into emptiness.

Rayber subsided again but he could stand it only a few minutes. He
finished the cigaret and lit another. Then he decided to start off on a
new tack and leave the morbid alone for a while. “I’ll tell you what
I’ve planned for us to do in a couple of weeks,” he said in an almost
affable tone. “We’re going up for a plane ride. How about that?” He had
been considering this, holding it in reserve, thinking it would be the
greatest marvel he could produce, something that would surely stir the
glum child out of himself.

There was no response. The boy’s eyes looked glazed.

“Flying is the greatest engineering achievement of man,” Rayber said in
an irked voice. “Doesn’t it stir your imagination even slightly? If it
doesn’t I’m afraid there’s something wrong with you.”

“I done flew,” Tarwater said and suppressed a belch. He was entirely
occupied with his nausea which he could feel minutely rising.

“How could you have flown?” his uncle asked angrily.

“Him and me give a dollar to go up in one at a fair once,” he said. “The
houses weren’t nothing but matchboxes and the people were
invisible—like germs. I wouldn’t give you nothing for no airplane. A
buzzard can fly.”

The schoolteacher gripped both sides of the boat and pushed forward.
“He’s warped your whole life,” he said hoarsely. “You’re going to grow
up to be a freak if you don’t let yourself be helped. You still believe
all that crap he taught you. You’re eaten up with false guilt. I can
read you like a book!” The words were out before he could stop them.

The boy did not even look at him. He leaned over the side of the boat
and shuddered. The column, released, formed a sweetly sour circle on the
water. A wave of dizziness came over him and then his head cleared. A
ravenous emptiness raged in his stomach as if it had re-established its
rightful tenure. He washed his mouth out with a handful of the lake and
then wiped his face on his sleeve.

Rayber trembled at his recklessness. He felt certain he had produced
this by the word _guilt_. He put his hand on the boy’s knee and said,
“You’ll feel better now.”

Tarwater said nothing, glaring with his red-lidded wet eyes at the water
as if he were glad he had polluted it.

“It’s just as much relief,” his uncle said, pressing his advantage, “to
get something off your mind as off your stomach. When you tell somebody
else your troubles, then they don’t bother you so much, they don’t get
in your blood and make you sick. Somebody else shares the weight. God
boy,” he said, “you need help. You need to be saved right here now from
the old man and everything he stands for. And I’m the one who can save
you.” With his hat turned down all around he looked like a fanatical
country preacher. His eyes glistened. “I know what your problem is,” he
said. “I know and I can help you. Something’s eating you on the inside
and I can tell you what it is.”

The boy looked at him fiercely. “Why don’t you shut your big mouth?” he
said. “Why don’t you pull that plug out of your ear and turn yourself
off? I come to fish. I never came to have no traffic with you.”

His uncle snapped the cigaret out of his fingers and it hit the water
with a hiss. “Every day,” he said coldly, “you remind me more of the old
man. You’re just like him. You have his future before you.”

The boy put down his line. With rigid deliberate movements he lifted his
right foot and pulled off his shoe, then his left foot and pulled off
that shoe. Then he jerked the straps of his overalls off his shoulders
and pulled them down, over his bottom and off. He had on a pair of long
thin old man’s drawers. He pulled his hat tight down on his head so that
it would not possibly come off, then he threw himself out of the boat
and swam away, smashing the glassy lake with his cupped fists as if he
would like to make it sting and bleed.

My God! Rayber thought, I touched a nerve that time! He kept his eye on
the hat in the receding spasm of water. The empty overalls lay at his
feet. He grabbed them and felt in the pockets. He took out two stones, a
nickel, a box of wooden matches and three nails. He had brought along
the new suit and shirt and laid them out on a chair.

Tarwater reached the dock and climbed onto it, the drawers clinging to
him, the hat still ground down on his forehead. He turned just in time
to see his uncle thrust the bundled overalls below the surface of the
water.

Rayber felt as if he had just run across a mined field. At once he was
afraid he had made a mistake. The thin rigid figure on the dock did not
move. It seemed no more than a wraith-like column of fragile white-hot
rage, materialized for an instant, the makings of some pure unfathomable
passion. The boy turned and started rapidly toward the lodge and Rayber
decided it would be best to linger on the lake a while.

When he came in, he was startled to see Tarwater lying on the far cot in
his new clothes and to see Bishop sitting on the other end of it,
watching him as if he were mesmerized by the steel-like glint that came
from the boy’s eyes and was directed into his own. In the plaid shirt
and new blue trousers, he looked like a changeling, half his old self
and half his new, already half the boy he would be when he was
rehabilitated.

Rayber’s spirits rose cautiously. He was holding the shoes with the
contents of the overall pockets in them. He set them down on the bed and
said, “No hard feelings about the clothes, old man. That was just my
round.”

There was a strange suppressed excitement about the boy’s whole figure,
as if he had settled on an inevitable course of action. He did not get
up, did not acknowledge the shoes, but he acknowledged his uncle’s
presence by shifting the glint in his eyes slightly, on him and then
away. The schoolteacher might have been just enough present to be
ignored. Then he looked back at Bishop, triumphantly, boldly, into the
very center of his eyes.

Rayber stood puzzled in the doorway. “Who wants to go for a ride?” he
asked.

Bishop jumped off the bed and was at his side in an instant. Tarwater
started at the little boy’s abrupt disappearance from his field of
vision, but he did not get up or turn his face toward the schoolteacher
in the door.

“Well, we’ll leave Frank to his meditations,” Rayber said and swung the
child around by the shoulder and left with him, hastily. He wanted to
escape before the boy changed his mind.




                                   IX

THE HEAT WAS not as intense on the road as it had been on the lake and
he drove with a sense of refreshment he had not felt in the five days
Tarwater had been with him. Once out of sight of the boy, he felt a
pressure had been lifted from the atmosphere. He eliminated the
oppressive presence from his thoughts and retained only those aspects of
it that could be abstracted, clean, into the future person he
envisioned.

The sky was a cloudless even blue and he drove without destination,
though he meant before they returned to the lodge to stop and have the
car filled for tomorrow’s trip to Powderhead. Bishop was hanging out the
window, his mouth open, letting the air dry his tongue. Automatically,
Rayber reached over and locked the door and pulled him back in by his
shirt. The child sat, solemnly taking his hat off his head and putting
it on his feet, then taking it off his feet and putting it on his head.
After he had done this a while, he climbed over the seat and disappeared
into the back of the car.

Rayber continued to think of Tarwater’s future, his thoughts rewarding
except when every now and then the boy’s actual face would lodge in the
path of a plan. The sudden intrusion of the face made him think of his
wife. He seldom thought of her anymore. She would not divorce him for
fear she would be given custody of the child and she was now as far away
as she could get, in Japan, in some welfare capacity. He was aware of
his good fortune in getting rid of her. It was she who had prevented his
going back and getting Tarwater away from the old man. She would have
been glad enough to have had him if she had not seen him that day when
they went to Powderhead to face the old man down. The baby had crawled
into the door behind old Tarwater and had sat there, unblinking, as the
old man raised his gun and shot Rayber in the leg and then in the ear.
She had seen him; Rayber had not; but she would not forget the face. It
was not simply that the child was dirty, thin, and grey; it was that its
expression had no more changed when the gun went off than the old man’s
had. This had affected her deeply.

If there had not been something repellent in its face, she said, her
maternal instinct would have made her rush forward and snatch it. She
had even had that in mind before they arrived and she would have had the
courage to do it in spite of the old man’s gun; but the child’s look had
frozen her. It was the opposite of everything appealing. She could not
express her exact revulsion, for her feeling was not logical. It had,
she said, the look of an adult, not of a child, and of an adult with
immovable insane convictions. Its face was like the face she had seen in
some medieval paintings where the martyr’s limbs are being sawed off and
his expression says he is being deprived of nothing essential. She had
had the sense, seeing the child in the door, that if it had known that
at that moment all its future advantages were being stolen from it, its
expression would not have altered a jot. The face for her had expressed
the depth of human perversity, the deadly sin of rejecting defiantly
one’s own obvious good. He had thought all this was possibly her
imagination but he understood now that it was not imagination but fact.
She said she could not have lived with such a face; she would have been
bound to destroy the arrogant look on it.

He reflected wryly that she had not been able to live with Bishop’s face
any better though there was no arrogance on it. The little boy had
climbed up from the floor of the back seat and was hanging over
breathing into his ear. By temperament and training she was ready to
handle an exceptional child, but not one as exceptional as Bishop, not
one bearing her own family name and the face of “that horrible old man.”
She had returned once in the last two years and demanded that he put
Bishop in an institution because she said he could not adequately care
for him—though it was plain from the look of him that he thrived like
an air plant. His own behaviour on that occasion was still a source of
satisfaction to him. He had knocked her not quite halfway across the
room.

He had known by that time that his own stability depended on the little
boy’s presence. He could control his terrifying love as long as it had
its focus in Bishop, but if anything happened to the child, he would
have to face it in itself. Then the whole world would become his idiot
child. He had thought what he would have to do if anything happened to
Bishop. He would have with one supreme effort to resist the recognition;
with every nerve and muscle and thought, he would have to resist feeling
anything at all, thinking anything at all. He would have to anesthetize
his life. He shook his head to clear it of these unpleasant thoughts.
After it had cleared, they returned one by one. He felt a sinister pull
on his consciousness, the familiar undertow of expectation, as if he
were still a child waiting on Christ.

The car apparently of its own volition had turned onto a dirt road which
without warning pierced his abstraction with its familiarity. He put on
his brakes.

It was a narrow corrugated road sunk between deep red embankments. He
looked about him angrily. He had not had the least intention of coming
here today. His car was on the crest of a hill and the embankments on
either side had the look of forming an entrance to a region he would
enter at his peril. The road sloped down a quarter of a mile or so
within his sight and then turned to disappear behind an edge of the
wood. When he had been on this road the first time, he had ridden it
backwards. A Negro with a mule and wagon had met him and his uncle at
the junction and they had ridden, their feet dangling from the back of
the wagon. He had leaned over most of the way, watching the mule’s
hoofprints in the dust as they rolled over them.

He decided finally that there would be wisdom in looking at the place
today so that there would be no surprises for him when he returned
tomorrow with the boy, but for some few moments, he did not move on. The
road that lay in front of him he remembered as being four or five miles
long. Then there was a stretch through the woods that would have to be
walked and then the field to be crossed. He thought with distaste of
crossing it twice, today and again tomorrow. He thought with distaste of
crossing it at all. Then as if to stop his thinking, he put his foot
down hard on the accelerator and took the road defiantly. Bishop jumped
up and down, squealing and making unintelligible noises of delight.

The road grew narrower as it approached its end and presently he found
himself going over what was no more than a rutted wagon path, his speed
reduced to nothing. He stopped the car finally in a little clearing
grown up in Johnson grass and blackberry bushes where what was left of
the road touched the edge of the wood. Bishop jumped out and made for
the blackberry bushes, attracted by the wasps that buzzed over them.
Rayber leapt out and grabbed him just before he reached for one.
Gingerly he picked the child a blackberry and handed it to him. The
little boy studied it and then, with his fallen smile, returned it to
him as if they were performing a ceremony. Rayber flung it away and
turned to find the trail through the woods.

He took the child by the hand and pulled him along on what he thought
might shortly become a path. The forest rose about him, mysterious and
alien. Descending to speak with the shade of my uncle, he thought
irritably and wondered if the old man’s charred bones would be lying in
the ashes. At the thought he almost stopped but did not. Bishop could
barely walk for gaping. He lifted his face to stare open-mouthed above
him as if he were in some vast overwhelming edifice. His hat fell off
and Rayber picked it up and clamped it on his head again and pulled him
on. Somewhere below them out of the silence a bird sounded four crystal
notes. The child stopped, his breath held.

Rayber knew suddenly that alone with Bishop he could not go to the
bottom and cross the field. Tomorrow with the other boy, with his brain
engaged, he would be able to make it. He remembered that somewhere along
here there was a point where one could look out between two trees and
see the clearing below. When he had first walked through the wood with
his uncle, they had stopped at that place and his uncle had pointed down
to where, far across the field, a sagging unpainted house stood in a
bare hard-packed yard. “Yonder it is,” he had said, “and someday it’ll
be yours—these woods and that field and that fine house.” He remembered
that his heart had expanded unbelievably.

Suddenly he realized that the place _was_ his. In the stress of having
the boy return to him, he had never considered the property. He stopped,
astounded by the fact that he owned all of this. His trees stood rising
above him, majestic and aloof, as if they belonged to an order that had
never budged from its first allegiance in the days of creation. His
heart began to beat frenetically. Quickly he reduced the whole wood in
probable board feet into a college education for the boy. His spirits
lifted. He pulled the child along, intending to find the opening where
the house could be seen. A few yards below, a sudden patch of sky
indicated the spot. He let Bishop go and strode toward it.

The forked tree was familiar to him or seemed so. He put his hand on one
trunk, leaned forward and looked out. His gaze moved quickly and
unseeing across the field and stopped abruptly where the house had been.
Two chimneys stood there, separated by a black space of rubble.

He stood expressionless, his heart strangely wrenched. If the bones were
lying in the ashes he could not see them from this distance, but a
vision of the old man, farther away in time, rose before him. He saw him
standing on the edge of the yard, one hand lifted in an astounded
greeting, while he stood a little way off in the field, his fists
clenched, trying to shout, trying to make his adolescent fury come out
in clear sensible words. He had only stood there shrilling, “You’re
crazy, you’re crazy, you’re a liar, you have a head full of crap, you
belong in a nut house!” and then had turned and run, carrying away
nothing but the registered change in the old man’s expression, the
sudden drop into some mysterious misery, which afterwards he had never
been able to get out of his mind. He saw it as he stared at the two
denuded chimneys.

He felt a pressure on his hand and glanced down, continuing to see the
same expression and barely noting that it was Bishop he was looking at
now. The child wanted to be lifted up to see. Absently he picked him up
and held him in the fork of the tree and let him look out. The dull
face, the empty grey eyes seemed to Rayber to reflect the ravaged scene
across the field. The little boy turned his head after a moment and
gazed instead at him. A dreaded sense of loss came over him. He knew
that he could not remain here an instant longer. He turned with the
child and went quickly back through the woods the way he had come.

On the highway again, he drove gripping the wheel, his face tense, his
mind turned on the problem of Tarwater as if his own and not only the
boy’s salvation depended on his solving it. He had ruined his plan by
going to Powderhead too soon. He knew he could not go there again, that
he would have to find another way. He went over the afternoon’s
experience in the boat. There, he thought, he had been on the right
track. He had simply not gone far enough. He decided that he would put
the whole thing verbally before the boy. He would not argue with him but
only tell him, tell him in so many plain words that he had a compulsion
and what it was. Whether he answered, whether he co-operated, he would
have to listen. He could not escape knowing that there was someone who
knew exactly what went on inside him and who understood it for the good
reason that it was understandable. He would go the whole way this time
and tell him everything. The boy should at least know that he had no
secrets. Casually while they ate their supper, he would lift the
compulsion from his mind, expose it to the light, and let him have a
good look at it. What he did about it would be his own affair. All at
once this seemed to him extremely simple, the way he should have
proceeded in the first place. Only time simplifies, he thought.

He stopped for gas at a pink stucco filling station where pottery and
whirligigs were sold. While the car was being filled, he got out and
looked for something to take as a peace offering, for he wanted the
encounter to be pleasant if possible. His eye roved over a shelf of
false hands, imitation buck teeth, boxes of simulated dog dung to put on
the rug, wooden plaques with cynical mottos burnt on them. Finally he
saw a combination corkscrew-bottleopener that fit in the palm of the
hand. He bought it and left.

When they returned to the room, the boy was still lying on the cot, his
face set in a deadly calm as if his eyes had not moved since they left.
Again Rayber had a vision of the face his wife must have seen and he
experienced a moment’s revulsion for the boy that made him tremble.
Bishop climbed onto the bottom of the cot and Tarwater returned the
child’s gaze steadily. He seemed unaware that Rayber was in the room.

“I could eat a horse,” the schoolteacher said. “Let’s go down.”

The boy turned his head and regarded him evenly, with no interest but
with no hostility. “It’s what you’ll get,” he said, “if you eat here.”

Rayber, unamused, pulled out the corkscrew-bottleopener and dropped it
negligently on his chest. “That might come in handy sometime,” he said
and turned and began to wash his hands at the basin.

In the mirror, he saw him pick it up gingerly and look at it. He pushed
the corkscrew out of the circle and then meditatively pushed it back. He
studied it back and front and held it in the palm of his hand where it
fit like a halfdollar. Presently he said in a grudging voice, “I don’t
have no use for it but I thank you,” and put it in his pocket.

He returned his attention to Bishop as if this were its natural place.
He lifted himself on one elbow and fixed the child with a narrow look.
“Git up, you,” he said slowly. He might have been commanding a small
animal he was successfully training. His voice was steady but
experimental. The hostility in it seemed contained and directed toward
some planned goal. The little boy was watching with complete
fascination.

“Git up now, like I tol’ you to,” Tarwater repeated slowly.

The child obediently climbed down off the bed.

Rayber felt a twinge of ridiculous jealousy. He stood by, his brows
working irritably as the boy moved out of the door without a word and
Bishop followed him. After a moment he slung his towel into the basin
and walked after them.

The lodge was shaking with the stamping of four couples dancing at the
other end of the lobby where the woman who ran the place had a
nickelodeon. The three of them sat down at the red tin table and Rayber
turned off his hearing aid until the racket should stop. He sat glaring
around him, disgruntled at this intrusion.

The dancers were about Tarwater’s age but they might have belonged to a
different species entirely. The girls could be distinguished from the
boys only by their tight skirts and bare legs; their faces and heads
were alike. They danced with a furious stern concentration. Bishop was
entranced. He stood up in his chair, watching them, his head hanging
forward as if any moment it might drop off. Tarwater, his eyes dark and
distant, stared through them. They might have been insects buzzing
across the surface of his vision.

When the music whined to a stop, they clambered back to their table and
sprawled in their chairs. Rayber turned his hearing aid on and winced as
Bishop’s bellow blared into his head. The child was jumping up and down
in his chair, roaring his disappointment. As soon as the dancers saw
him, he stopped making the noise and stood still, devouring them with
his gape. An angry silence fell over them. Their look was shocked and
affronted as if they had been betrayed by a fault in creation, something
that should have been corrected before they were allowed to see it. With
pleasure Rayber could have dashed across the room and swung his lifted
chair in their faces. They got up and pushed each other out sullenly,
packed themselves in a topless automobile and roared off, sending an
indignant spray of gravel against the side of the lodge. Rayber let out
his breath as if it were sharp and might cut him. Then his eyes fell on
Tarwater.

The boy was looking directly at him with an omniscient smile, faint but
decided. It was a smile that Rayber had seen on his face before. It
seemed to mock him from an ever-deepening inner knowledge that grew in
indifference as it came nearer and nearer to a secret truth about him.
Without warning its meaning pierced Rayber and he felt such a fury that
for the moment all his strength left him. Go, he wanted to shout. Get
your damn impudent face out of my sight! Go to hell! Go baptize the
whole world!

The woman had been standing for some time at his side, waiting to take
their order but she could have been invisible for all the notice he paid
her. She began tapping the menu on a glass, then she slid it in front of
his face. Without reading it, he said, “Three hamburger plates,” and
thrust it aside.

When she was gone, he said in a dry voice, “I want to lay some cards on
the table.” He sought the boy’s eyes and steadied himself by the hated
glint in them.

Tarwater looked at the table as if waiting for the cards to be laid on
it.

“That means I want to talk straight to you,” Rayber said, rigidly
keeping the exasperation out of his voice. He strove to make his gaze,
his tone, as indifferent as his listener’s “I have some things to say to
you that you’ll have to listen to. What you do about what I have to say
is your own business. I have no further interest in telling you what to
do. I only intend to put the facts before you.” His voice was thin and
brittle-sounding. He might have been reading from a paper. “I notice
that you’ve begun to be able to look Bishop in the eye. That’s good. It
means you’re making progress but you needn’t think that because you can
look him in the eye now, you’ve saved yourself from what’s preying on
you. You haven’t. The old man still has you in his grip. Don’t think he
hasn’t.”

The boy continued to give him the same omniscient look. “It’s you the
seed fell in,” he said. “It ain’t a thing you can do about it. It fell
on bad ground but it fell in deep. With me,” he said proudly, “it fell
on rock and the wind carried it away.”

The schoolteacher grasped the table as if he were going to push it
forward into the boy’s chest. “Goddam you!” he said in a breathless
harsh voice. “It fell in us both alike. The difference is that I know
it’s in me and I keep it under control. I weed it out but you’re too
blind to know it’s in you. You don’t even know what makes you do the
things you do.”

The boy looked at him angrily but he said nothing.

At least, Rayber thought, I’ve shocked that look off his face. He did
not say anything for a few moments while he thought how to continue.

The woman returned with the three plates. She set them down slowly,
giving herself time for observation. The man’s face had a sweaty
harassed look and so did the boy’s. He threw her an ugly glance. The man
began to eat at once as if he wanted to get it over with. The little boy
took his bun apart and began to lick the mustard off it. The other boy
looked at his as if it were probably bad meat and did not touch it. She
left and watched indignantly for a few seconds from the kitchen door.
The boy finally picked his hamburger up. He raised it half-way to his
mouth and then put it down again. He picked it up and put it down twice
without biting into it. Then he pulled his hat down and sat there, his
arms folded. She had had enough and closed the door.

The schoolteacher leaned forward across the table, his eyes pin-pointed
and very bright. “You can’t eat,” he said, “because something is eating
you. And I intend to tell you what it is.”

“Worms,” the boy hissed as if his disgust could not be contained an
instant longer.

“It takes guts to listen,” Rayber said.

Tarwater leaned toward him with a kind of blaring attention. “You ain’t
got nothing to say to me that I don’t have the guts to listen to,” he
said.

The schoolteacher sat back. “All right,” he said, “then listen.” He
folded his arms and looked at him for an instant before he began. Then
he started coldly. “The old man told you to baptize Bishop. You have
that order lodged in your head like a boulder blocking your path.”

The blood drained from the boy’s face but his eyes did not swerve. They
looked at Rayber furiously, the glint in them gone.

The schoolteacher spoke slowly, picking his words as if he were looking
for the steadiest stones to step on across a rushing stream. “Until you
get rid of this compulsion to baptize Bishop, you’ll never make any
progress toward being a normal person. I said in the boat you were going
to be a freak. I shouldn’t have said that. I only meant you had the
choice. I want you to see the choice. I want you to make the choice and
not simply be driven by a compulsion you don’t understand. What we
understand, we can control,” he said. “You have to understand what it is
that blocks you. I wonder if you’re smart enough to take this in. It’s
not simple.”

The boy’s face seemed dry and old as if he had taken it in long ago, and
now it was part of him like the current of death in his blood. The
schoolteacher was touched by this muteness before the facts. His anger
left him. The room was silent. A pink cast had fallen from the windows
over the table. Tarwater looked away from his uncle at Bishop. The
little boy’s hair was pink and lighter than his face. He was sucking his
spoon; his eyes were drowned in silence.

“I want to put two solutions before you,” Rayber said. “What you do is
up to you.”

Tarwater looked at him again, with no mockery, no glint in his eye, but
with no anticipation either, as if his course were irrevocably set.

“Baptism is only an empty act,” the schoolteacher said. “If there’s any
way to be born again, it’s a way that you accomplish yourself, an
understanding about yourself that you reach after a long time, perhaps a
long effort. It’s nothing you get from above by spilling a little water
and a few words. What you want to do is meaningless, so the easiest
solution would be simply to do it. Right here now, with this glass of
water. I would permit it in order to get it out of your mind. As far as
I’m concerned, you may baptize him at once.” He pushed his own glass of
water across the table. His look was patient and ironical.

The boy’s glance touched the top of the glass and then bounded off. His
hand lying by the side of his plate twitched. He jammed it into his
pocket and looked the other way, out the window. His whole aspect seemed
shaken as if his integrity had been dangerously challenged.

The schoolteacher pulled back the glass of water. “I knew that would be
too cheap for you,” he said. “I knew you would refuse to do anything so
unworthy of the courage you’ve already shown.” He raised the glass and
drank the rest of the water. Then he set it down on the table. He looked
tired enough to collapse; his aspect was so weary that he might just
have attained the top of a mountain he had been climbing for days.

After an interval he said, “The other way is not so simple. It’s the way
I’ve chosen for myself. It’s the way you take as a result of being born
again the natural way—through your own efforts. Your intelligence.” His
words had a disconnected sound. “The other way is simply to face it and
fight it, to cut down the weed every time you see it appear. Do I have
to tell you this? An intelligent boy like you?”

“You don’t have to tell me nothing,” Tarwater murmured.

“I don’t have a compulsion to baptize him,” Rayber said. “My own is more
complicated, but the principle is the same. The way we have to fight it
is the same.”

“It ain’t the same,” Tarwater said. He turned toward his uncle. The
glint had reappeared. “I can pull it up by the roots, once and for all.
I can do something. I ain’t like you. All you can do is think what you
would have done if you had done it. Not me. I can do it. I can act.” He
was looking at his uncle now with a completely fresh contempt. “It’s
nothing about me like you,” he said.

“There are certain laws that determine every man’s conduct,” the
schoolteacher said. “You are no exception.” He saw with perfect clarity
that the only feeling he had for this boy was hate. He loathed the very
sight of him.

“Wait and see,” Tarwater said as if it needed only a short time to be
proved.

“Experience is a terrible teacher,” Rayber said.

The boy shrugged and got up. He walked off, across the room to the
screen door where he stood looking out. At once Bishop climbed down off
his chair and started after him, putting on his hat as he went. Tarwater
stiffened when the child approached but he did not move and Rayber
watched as the two of them stood there side by side, looking out the
door—the two figures, hatted and somehow ancient, bound together by
some necessity of nerve that excluded him. He was startled to see the
boy put his hand on Bishop’s neck just under his hat, open the door and
guide him out of it. It occurred to him that what he meant by “doing
something” was to make a slave of the child. Bishop would be at his
command like a faithful dog. Instead of avoiding him, he planned to
control him, to show who was master.

And I will not permit that, he said. If anyone controlled Bishop, it
would be himself. He put his money on the table under the salt-shaker
and went out after them.

The sky was a bright pink, casting such a weird light that every color
was intensified. Each weed that grew out of the gravel looked like a
live green nerve. The world might have been shedding its skin. The two
were in front of him half-way down the dock, walking slowly, Tarwater’s
hand still resting just under Bishop’s hat; but it seemed to Rayber that
it was Bishop who was doing the leading, that the child had made the
capture. He thought with a grim pleasure that sooner or later the boy’s
confidence in his own judgment would be brought low.

When they arrived at the end of the dock, they stood looking down into
the water. Then to Rayber’s chagrin, the boy lifted the child like a
sack under the arms and lowered him over the edge of the dock into the
boat that was tied there.

“I haven’t given you permission to take Bishop out in the boat,” Rayber
said.

Tarwater may have heard or he may not; he did not answer. He sat down on
the edge of the dock and for a few moments looked across the water at
the opposite bank. Part of a red globe hung almost motionless in the far
side of the lake as if it were the other end of the elongated sun cut
through the middle by a swath of forest. Pink and salmon-colored clouds
floated in the water at different depths. Suddenly Rayber wanted nothing
so much as a half hour to himself, without sight of either of them. “But
you may take him,” he said, “if you’ll be careful.”

The boy didn’t move. He was leaning forward, his thin shoulders hunched,
his hands gripped on the edge of the dock. He seemed poised there
waiting to make a momentous move.

He dropped down into the boat with Bishop.

“You’ll look after him?” Rayber asked.

Tarwater’s face was like a very old mask, colorless and dry. “I’ll tend
to him,” he said.

“Thanks,” his uncle said. He experienced a short feeling of warmth for
the boy. He strolled back down the dock to the lodge and when he reached
the door, he turned and watched the boat move out into view on the lake.
He raised his arm and waved but Tarwater showed no sign of seeing him
and Bishop’s back was turned. The small black-hatted figure sat like a
passenger being borne by the surly oarsman across the lake to some
mysterious destination.

Back in his room, Rayber lay on the cot trying to feel the release he
had felt when he started out in the car in the afternoon. More than
anything else, what he experienced in the boy’s presence was the feeling
of pressure and when it was taken off for a while, he realized how
intolerable it was. He lay there thinking with distaste of the moment
when the silent mutinous face would appear again in the door. He
imagined the rest of the summer spent coping with the boy’s cold
intractability. He began to consider the possibility of his leaving of
his own accord and after a moment he knew that this was actually what he
wanted him to do. He no longer felt any challenge to rehabilitate him.
All he wanted now was to get rid of him. He thought with horror of being
stuck with him for good and began to consider ways that he might hasten
his departure. He knew he would never leave as long as Bishop was
around. The thought flew through his mind that he might put Bishop in an
institution for a few weeks. He was shaken and turned his mind to other
things. For a while he dozed and dreamed that he and Bishop were
speeding away in the car, escaping safely from a lowering tornado-like
cloud. He awoke to find the room growing dim.

He got up and went to the window. The boat with the two of them in it
was near the middle of the lake, almost still. They were sitting there
facing each other in the isolation of the water, Bishop small and squat,
and Tarwater gaunt, lean, bent slightly forward, his whole attention
concentrated on the opposite figure. They seemed to be held still in
some magnetic field of attraction. The sky was an intense purple as if
it were about to explode into darkness.

Rayber left the window and threw himself on the cot again but he was no
longer sleepy. He had a peculiar sense of waiting, of marking time. He
lay with his eyes closed as if listening to something he could hear only
when his hearing aid was off. He had had this sense of waiting, kin in
degree but not in kind, when he was a child and expected any moment that
the city would blossom into an eternal Powderhead. Now he sensed that he
waited for a cataclysm. He waited for all the world to be turned into a
burnt spot between two chimneys.

All he would be was an observer. He waited with serenity. Life had never
been good enough to him for him to wince at its destruction. He told
himself that he was indifferent even to his own dissolution. It seemed
to him that this indifference was the most that human dignity could
achieve, and for the moment forgetting his lapses, forgetting even his
narrow escape of the afternoon, he felt he had achieved it. To feel
nothing was peace.

He watched idly as a round red moon rose into the lower corner of his
window. It might have been the sun rising on the upsidedown half of the
world. He came to a decision. When the boy came back he would say:
Bishop and I are returning to town tonight. You may go with us under
these conditions: not that you _begin_ to co-operate, but that you
co-operate, fully and completely, that you change your attitude, that
you allow yourself to be tested, that you prepare yourself to enter
school in the fall, and that you take that hat off your head right now
and throw it out the window into the lake. If you can’t meet these
requirements, then Bishop and I are leaving by ourselves.

It had taken him five days to reach this state of clarity. He thought of
his foolish emotions the night the boy had come, thought of himself
sitting by the side of the bed, thinking that at last he had a son with
a future. He saw himself again following the boy down back alleys to end
finally at a detestable temple, saw the idiot figure of himself standing
with his head in the window, listening to the mad child preach. It was
unbelievable. Even the plan to take the boy back to Powderhead seemed
ridiculous to him now and going to Powderhead this afternoon was the act
of an insane person. His indecision, his uncertainty, his eagerness up
to now appeared shameful and absurd to him. He felt that he had regained
his senses after five days of madness. He could not wait for them to
return so that he could deliver his ultimatum.

He closed his eyes and went over the scene in detail, seeing the sullen
face at bay, the haughty eyes forced to look down. His power would lie
in the fact that he was indifferent now whether the boy stayed or went,
or not indifferent for he positively wanted him to leave. He smiled at
the thought that his indifference lacked that one perfection. Presently
he dozed again, and again he and Bishop were fleeing in the car, the
tornado just behind them.

When he awoke again, the moon travelling toward the middle of the window
had lost its color. He sat up startled as if it were a face looking in
on him, a pale messenger breathlessly arrived.

He got up and went to the window and leaned out. The sky was a hollow
black and an empty road of moonlight crossed the lake. He leaned far
out, his eyes narrowed, but he could see nothing. The stillness
disturbed him. He turned the hearing aid on and at once his head buzzed
with the steady drone of crickets and treefrogs. He searched for the
boat in the darkness and could see nothing. He waited expectantly. Then
an instant before the cataclysm, he grabbed the metal box of the hearing
aid as if he were clawing his heart. The quiet was broken by an
unmistakable bellow.

He did not move. He remained absolutely still, wooden, expressionless,
as the machine picked up the sounds of some fierce sustained struggle in
the distance. The bellow stopped and came again, then it began steadily,
swelling. The machine made the sounds seem to come from inside him as if
something in him were tearing itself free. He clenched his teeth. The
muscles in his face contracted and revealed lines of pain beneath harder
than bone. He set his jaw. No cry must escape him. The one thing he
knew, the one thing he was certain of was that no cry must escape him.

The bellow rose and fell, then it blared out one last time, rising out
of its own momentum as if it were escaping finally, after centuries of
waiting, into silence. The beady night noises closed in again.

He remained standing woodenly at the window. He knew what had happened.
What had happened was as plain to him as if he had been in the water
with the boy and the two of them together had taken the child and held
him under until he ceased to struggle.

He stared out over the empty still pond to the dark wood that surrounded
it. The boy would be moving off through it to meet his appalling
destiny. He knew with an instinct as sure as the dull mechanical beat of
his heart that he had baptized the child even as he drowned him, that he
was headed for everything the old man had prepared him for, that he
moved off now through the black forest toward a violent encounter with
his fate.

He stood there trying to remember something else before he moved away.
It came to him finally as something so distant and vague in his mind
that it might already have happened, a long time ago. It was that
tomorrow they would drag the pond for Bishop.

He stood waiting for the raging pain, the intolerable hurt that was his
due, to begin, so that he could ignore it, but he continued to feel
nothing. He stood light-headed at the window and it was not until he
realized there would be no pain that he collapsed.




                                 THREE




                                   X

THE HEADLIGHTS REVEALED the boy at the side of the road, slightly
crouched, his head turned expectantly, his eyes for an instant lit red
like the eyes of rabbits and deer that streak across the highway at
night in the path of speeding cars. His pantslegs were wet up to the
knees as if he had been through a swamp. The driver, minute in the
glassed cab, brought the looming truck to a halt and left the motor
idling while he leaned across the empty seat and opened the door. The
boy climbed in.

It was an auto-transit truck, huge and skeletal, carrying four
automobiles packed in it like bullets. The driver, a wiry man with a
nose sharply twisted down and heavy-lidded eyes, gave the rider a
suspicious look and then shifted gears and the truck began to move
again, rumbling fiercely. “You got to keep me awake or you don’t ride,
buddy,” he said. “I ain’t picking you up to do you a favor.” His voice,
from some other part of the country, curled at the end of each sentence.

Tarwater opened his mouth as if he expected words to come out of it but
none came. He remained, staring at the man, his mouth half-open, his
face white.

“I’m not kiddin’, kid,” the driver said.

The boy kept his elbows gripped into his sides to prevent his frame from
shaking. “I only want to go as far as where this road joins 56,” he said
finally. There were queer ups and downs in his voice as if he were using
it for the first time after some momentous failure. He appeared to
listen to it himself, to be trying to hear beyond the quaver in it to
some solid basis of sound.

“Start talking,” the driver said.

The boy wet his lips. After a moment he said in a high voice, entirely
out of control, “I never wasted my life talking. I always done
something.”

“What you done lately?” the man asked. “How come your pantslegs are
wet?”

He looked down at his wet pantslegs and kept looking. They seemed to
turn his mind entirely from what he had been going to say, to absorb his
attention completely.

“Wake up, buddy,” the driver said. “I say how come are your pantslegs
wet?”

“Because I never took them off when I done it,” he said. “I took off my
shoes but I never taken off my pants.”

“When you done what?”

“I’m going home,” he said. “It’s a place I get off at on 56 and then
down that road a piece I take a dirt road. It’s liable to be morning
before I get there.”

“How come your pantslegs are wet?” the driver persisted.

“I drowned a boy,” Tarwater said.

“Just one?” the driver asked.

“Yes.” He reached over and caught hold of the sleeve of the man’s shirt.
His lips worked a few seconds. They stopped and then started again as if
the force of a thought were behind them but no words. He shut his mouth,
then tried again but no sound came. Then all at once the sentence rushed
out and was gone. “I baptized him.”

“Huh?” the man said.

“It was an accident. I didn’t mean to,” he said breathlessly. Then in a
calmer voice he said, “The words just come out of themselves but it
don’t mean nothing. You can’t be born again.”

“Make sense,” the man said.

“I only meant to drown him,” the boy said. “You’re only born once. They
were just some words that run out of my mouth and spilled in the water.”
He shook his head violently as if to scatter his thoughts. “There’s
nothing where I’m going but the stall,” he began again, “because the
house is burnt up but that’s the way I want it. I don’t want nothing of
his. Now it’s all mine.”

“Of his whose?” the man muttered.

“Of my great-uncle’s,” the boy said. “I’m going back there. I ain’t
going to leave it again. I’m in full charge there. No voice will be
uplifted. I shouldn’t never have left it except I had to prove I wasn’t
no prophet and I’ve proved it.” He paused and jerked the man’s sleeve.
“I proved it by drowning him. Even if I did baptize him that was only an
accident. Now all I have to do is mind my own bidnis until I die. I
don’t have to baptize or prophesy.”

The man only looked at him, shortly, and then back at the road.

“It’s not going to be any destruction or any fire,” the boy said. “There
are them that can act and them that can’t, and them that are hungry and
them that ain’t. That’s all. I can act. And I ain’t hungry.” The words
crowded out as if they were pushing each other forward. Then he was
suddenly silent. He seemed to watch the darkness that the headlights
pushed in front of them, always at the same distance. Sudden signs would
spring up and vanish at the side of the road.

“That don’t make sense but make up some more of it,” the driver said. “I
gotta stay awake. I ain’t riding you just for a good time.”

“I don’t have no more to say,” Tarwater said. His voice was thin, as if
many more words would destroy it permanently. It seemed to break off
after each sound had found its way out. “I’m hungry,” he said.

“You just said you weren’t hungry,” the driver said.

“I ain’t hungry for the bread of life,” the boy said. “I’m hungry for
something to eat here and now. I threw up my dinner and I didn’t eat no
supper.”

The driver began to feel in his pocket. He pulled out half a bent
sandwich wrapped in waxed paper. “You can have this,” he said. “It don’t
have but one bite out of it. I didn’t like it.”

Tarwater took it and held it wrapped in his hand. He didn’t open it.

“Okay, eat it!” the driver said in an exasperated voice. “What’s the
matter with you?”

“When I come to eat, I ain’t hungry,” Tarwater said. “It’s like being
empty is a thing in my stomach and it don’t allow nothing else to come
down in there. If I ate it, I would throw it up.”

“Listen,” the driver said, “I don’t want you puking in here and if you
got something catching, you get out right now.”

“I’m not sick,” the boy said. “I never been sick in my life except
sometimes when I over ate myself. When I baptized him it wasn’t nothing
but words. Back home,” he said, “I’ll be in charge. I’ll have to sleep
in the stall until I get to where I can build me back a house. If I
hadn’t been a big fool I’d have taken him out and burned him up outside.
I wouldn’t have burned up the house along with him.”

“Live and learn,” the driver said.

“My other uncle knows everything,” the boy said, “but that don’t keep
him from being a fool. He can’t do nothing. All he can do is figure it
out. He’s got this wired head. There’s an electric cord runs into his
ear. He can read your mind. He knows you can’t be born again. I know
everything he knows, only I can do something about it. I did,” he added.

“Can’t you talk about something else?” the driver asked. “How many
sisters you got at home?”

“I was born in a wreck,” the boy said.

He took off his hat and rubbed his head. His hair was flat and thin,
dark across his white forehead. He held the hat in his lap like a bowl
and looked into it. He took out a box of wooden matches and a white
card. “I put all this here in my hat when I drowned him,” he said. “I
was afraid my pockets would get wet.” He held up the card close to his
eyes and read it aloud. “T. Fawcett Meeks. Southern Copper Parts.
Mobile, Birmingham, Atlanta.” He stuck the card in the inside band of
his hat and put the hat back on his head. He put the box of matches in
his pocket.

The driver’s head was beginning to roll. He shook it and said, “Talk,
dammit.”

The boy reached into his pocket and pulled out the combination
corkscrew-bottleopener the schoolteacher had given him. “My uncle give
me this,” he said. “He ain’t so bad. He knows a heap. I speck I’ll be
able to use this thing some time or other,” and he looked at it lying
compact in the center of his hand. “I speck it’ll come in handy,” he
said, “to open something.”

“Tell me a joke,” the driver said.

The boy didn’t look as if he knew any joke. He didn’t look as if he knew
what a joke was. “Do you know what the greatest invention of man is?” he
asked finally.

“Naw,” the driver said, “what?”

He didn’t answer. He was staring ahead again into the darkness and
seemed to have forgotten the question.

“What’s the greatest invention of man?” the truck driver asked
irritably.

The boy turned and looked at him without comprehension. There was a
choking sound in his throat and then he said, “What?”

The driver glared a him. “What’s the matter with you?”

“Nothing,” the boy said. “I feel hungry but I ain’t.”

“You belong in the booby hatch,” the driver muttered. “You ride through
these states and you see they all belong in it. I won’t see nobody sane
again until I get back to Detroit.”

For a few miles they rode in silence. The truck moved slower and slower.
The driver’s lids would fall as if they were weighted with lead and he
would shake his head to open them. Almost at once they would close
again. The truck began to veer. He shook his head once violently and
pulled off the road onto a wide shoulder and leaned back and began to
snore without once looking at Tarwater.

The boy sat quietly on his side of the cab. His eyes were open wide
without the least look of sleep in them. They seemed not to be able to
close but to be open forever on some sight that would never leave them.
Presently they closed but his body did not relax. He sat rigidly
upright, a still alert expression on his face as if under the closed
lids an inner eye were watching, piercing out the truth in the
distortion of his dream.

They were sitting facing each other in a boat suspended on a soft
bottomless darkness only a little heavier than the black air around
them, but the darkness was no hindrance to his sight. He saw through it
as if it were day. He looked through the blackness and saw perfectly the
light silent eyes of the child across from him. They had lost their
diffuseness and were trained on him, fish-colored and fixed. By his
side, standing like a guide in the boat, was his faithful friend, lean,
shadow-like, who had counseled him in both country and city.

Make haste, he said. Time is like money and money is like blood and time
turns blood to dust.

The boy looked up into his friend’s eyes, bent upon him, and was
startled to see that in the peculiar darkness, they were violet-colored,
very close and intense, and fixed on him with a peculiar look of hunger
and attraction. He turned his head away, unsettled by their attention.

No finaler act than this, his friend said. In dealing with the dead you
have to act. There’s no mere word sufficient to say NO.

Bishop took off his hat and threw it over the side where it floated
right-side-up, black on the black surface of the lake. The boy turned
his head, following the hat with his eyes, and saw suddenly that the
bank loomed behind him, not twenty yards away, silent, like the brow of
some leviathan lifted just above the surface of the water. He felt
bodiless as if he were nothing but a head full of air, about to tackle
all the dead.

Be a man, his friend counseled, be a man. It’s only one dimwit you have
to drown.

The boy edged the boat toward a dark clump of bushes and tied it. Then
he removed his shoes, put the contents of his pockets into his hat and
put the hat into one shoe, while all the time the grey eyes were fixed
on him as if they were waiting serenely for a struggle already
determined. The violet eyes, fixed on him also, waited with a barely
concealed impatience.

This is no time to dwaddle, his mentor said. Once it’s done, it’s done
forever.

The water slid out from the bank like a broad black tongue. He climbed
out of the boat and stood still, feeling the mud between his toes and
the wet clinging around his legs. The sky was dotted with fixed tranquil
eyes like the spread tail of some celestial night bird. While he stood
there gazing, for the moment lost, the child in the boat stood up,
caught him around the neck and climbed onto his back. He clung there
like a large crab to a twig and the startled boy felt himself sinking
backwards into the water as if the whole bank were pulling him down.

Sitting upright and rigid in the cab of the truck, his muscles began to
jerk, his arms flailed, his mouth opened to make way for cries that
would not come. His pale face twitched and grimaced. He might have been
Jonah clinging wildly to the whale’s tongue.

The silence in the truck was corrugated with the snores of the driver,
whose head rolled from side to side. The boy’s jerking arms almost
touched him once or twice as he struggled to extricate himself from a
monstrous enclosing darkness. Occasionally a car would pass,
illuminating for an instant his contorted face. He grappled with the air
as if he had been flung like a fish on the shores of the dead without
lungs to breathe there. The night finally began to fade. A plateau of
red appeared in the eastern sky just above the treeline and a
dun-colored light began to reveal the fields on either side. Suddenly in
a high raw voice the defeated boy cried out the words of baptism,
shuddered, and opened his eyes. He heard the sibilant oaths of his
friend fading away on the darkness.

He sat trembling in the corner of the cab, exhausted, dizzy, holding his
arms tight against his sides. The plateau had widened and was broken by
the sun which rose through it majestically with a long red wingspread.
With his eyes open, his face began to look less alert. Deliberately,
forcefully, he closed the inner eye that had witnessed his dream.

In his hand he was clutching the truck driver’s sandwich. His fingers
had clenched it through. He loosened them and looked at it as if he had
no idea what it was; then he put it in his pocket.

After a second he grabbed the driver’s shoulder and shook him violently
and the man woke up and grabbed the steering wheel convulsively as if
the truck were moving at a high rate of speed. Then he perceived that it
was not moving at all. He turned and glared at the boy. “What do you
think you’re doing in here? Where do you think you’re going?” he asked
in an enraged voice.

Tarwater’s face was pale but determined. “I’m going home,” he said. “I’m
in charge there now.”

“Well get out and go then,” the driver said. “I don’t ride nuts in the
day time.”

With dignity the boy opened the door and stepped down out of the cab. He
stood, scowling but aloof, by the side of the road and waited until the
gigantic monster had grated away and disappeared. The highway stretched
in front of him, lean and grey, and he began to walk, putting his feet
down hard on the ground. His legs and his will were good enough. He set
his face toward the clearing. By sundown he would be there, by sundown
he would be where he could begin to live his life as he had elected it,
and where, for the rest of his days, he would make good his refusal.




                                   XI

AFTER HE HAD walked about an hour, he took out the truck driver’s
pierced sandwich which he had stuck, still wrapped, in his pocket. He
undid it and let the paper blow behind. The truck driver had bitten off
one of the pointed ends. The boy put the unbitten end in his mouth but
after a second he took it out again with faint teeth marks in it and put
it back in his pocket. His stomach alone rejected it; his face looked
violently hungry and disappointed.

The morning had opened up, clear and cloudless and brilliant. He walked
on the embankment and did not look over his shoulder as cars came behind
him and swiftly passed, but as each one disappeared on the narrowing
strip of highway, he felt the distance between himself and his goal grow
longer. The ground under him was strange to his feet, as if he were
walking on the back of a giant beast which might any moment stretch a
muscle and send him rolling into the ditch below. The sky was like a
fence of light to keep it in. The glare forced him to lower his lids but
on the other side of it, hidden from his daily sight but present to his
inner eye that remained rigidly open, there stretched the clear grey
borders of the country he had saved himself from crossing into.

He repeated every few yards, to force himself on faster, that he would
soon be home, that there was only the rest of the day between him and
the clearing. His throat and eyes burned with dryness and his bones felt
brittle as if they belonged to a person older than himself and with much
experience; and when he considered it—his experience—it was apparent
to him that since his great-uncle’s death, he had lived the lifetime of
a man. It was as no boy that he returned. He returned tried in the fire
of his refusal, with all the old man’s fancies burnt out of him, with
all the old man’s madness smothered for good, so that there was never
any chance it would break out in him. He had saved himself forever from
the fate he had envisioned when, standing in the schoolteacher’s hall
and looking into the eyes of the dim-witted child, he had seen himself
trudging off into the distance in the bleeding stinking mad shadow of
Jesus, lost forever to his own inclinations.

The fact that he had actually baptized the child disturbed him only
intermittently and each time he thought of it, he reviewed its
accidental nature. It was an accident and nothing more. He considered
only that the boy was drowned and that he had done it, and that in the
order of things, a drowning was a more important act than a few words
spilled in the water. He realized that in this small instance the
schoolteacher had succeeded where he had failed. The schoolteacher had
not baptized him. He recalled his words: “My guts are in my head.” My
guts are in my head too, the boy thought. Even if by some chance it had
not been an accident, what was of no consequence in the first place was
of no consequence in the second; and he had succeeded in drowning the
child. He had not said NO, he had done it.

The sun, from being only a ball of glare, was becoming distinct like a
large pearl, as if sun and moon had fused in a brilliant marriage. The
boy’s narrowed eyes made a black spot of it. When he was a child he had
several times, experimentally, commanded the sun to stand still, and
once for as long as he watched it—a few seconds—it had stood still,
but when he turned his back, it had moved. Now he would have liked for
it to get out of the sky altogether or to be veiled in a cloud. He
turned his face enough to rid his vision of it and was aware again of
the country which seemed to lie beyond the silence, or in it, stretching
off into the distance around him.

Quickly he set his mind again on the clearing. He thought of the burnt
spot in the center of it and he imagined with a careful deliberateness
how he would pick up any burnt bone that he might find in the ashes of
the house and sling it off into the nearest gulley. He envisioned the
calm and detached person who would do this, who would clear out the
rubble and build back the house. Beyond the glare, he was aware of
another figure, a gaunt stranger, the ghost who had been born in the
wreck and who had fancied himself destined at that moment to the torture
of prophecy. It was apparent to the boy that this person, who paid him
no attention, was mad.

As the sun burned brighter, he became more and more thirsty and his
hunger and thirst combined in a pain that shot up and down him and
across from shoulder to shoulder. He was about to sit down when ahead in
a brush-swept space off the side of the road he saw a Negro’s shack. A
small colored boy stood in the yard, alone except for a razor-backed
shoat. His eyes were already fixed on the boy coming down the road. As
Tarwater came nearer he saw a cluster of colored children watching him
from the shack door. There was a well to the side under a sugarberry
tree and he quickened his pace.

“I want me some water,” he said, approaching the forward boy. He took
the sandwich from his pocket and handed it to him. The child, who was
about the size and shape of Bishop, put it to his mouth with the same
motion that he took it and never removed his eyes from the boy’s face.

“Yonder hit,” he said and pointed with the sandwich to the well.

Tarwater went to it and cranked the bucket up level with the rim. There
was a dipper but he did not use it. He leaned over and put his face to
the water and drank. He drank until he began to feel dizzy. Then he
pulled off his hat and thrust his head into the water. As it touched the
deeper parts of his face, a shock ran through him, as if he had never
been touched by water before. He looked down into a grey clear pool,
down and down to where two silent serene eyes were gazing at him. He
tore his head away from the bucket and stumbled backwards while the
blurred shack, then the hog, then the coloured child, his eyes still
fixed on him, came into focus. He slammed his hat down on his wet head
and wiped his sleeve across his face and walked hastily away. The little
Negroes watched him until he was off the place and had disappeared down
the highway.

The vision stuck like a burr in his head and it took him more than a
mile to realize he had not seen it. The water had strangely not assuaged
his thirst. To take his mind off it, he reached in his pocket and pulled
out the schoolteacher’s present and began to admire it. It reminded him
that he also had a nickel. The first store or filling station he came
to, he would buy himself a drink and open it with the opener. The little
instrument glittered in the center of his palm as if it promised to open
great things for him. He began to realize that he had not adequately
appreciated the schoolteacher while he had the opportunity. The lines of
his uncle’s face had already become less precise in his mind and he
began to see again the eyes shadowed with knowledge that he had imagined
before he went to the city. He returned the corkscrew-bottleopener to
his pocket and held it there in his hand as if henceforth it would be
his talisman.

Presently up ahead, he caught sight of the crossroads where 56 joined
the highway he was on. The dirt road was not ten miles down from this
point. There was a patched-together store and filling station on the far
side of the crossroad. He hastened on in anticipation of the drink he
was going to buy, his thirst growing by the second. Then as he came
closer, he saw the large woman who stood in the door of the place. His
thirst increased but his enthusiasm fled. She was leaning against the
frame, her arms folded, and she filled almost the whole entrance. She
was a black-eyed woman with a granite-like face and a tongue persistent
to question. He and his great-uncle had traded at this place on occasion
and when the woman was there, the old man had liked to linger and
discourse, for he found her as pleasant as a shade tree. The boy had
always stood by impatiently, kicking up the gravel, his face dark with
boredom.

She spotted him across the highway and although she did not move or
raise her hand, he could feel her eyes reeling him in. He crossed the
highway and was drawn forward, scowling at a neutral space between her
chin and shoulder. After he had arrived and stopped, she did not speak
but only looked at him and he was obliged to direct a glance upward at
her eyes. They were fixed on him with a black penetration. There was all
knowledge in her stony face and the fold of her arms indicated a
judgment fixed from the foundations of time. Huge wings might have been
folded behind her without seeming strange.

“The niggers told me how you done,” she said. “It shames the dead.”

The boy pulled himself together to speak. He was conscious that no sass
would do, that he was called upon by some force outside them both to
answer for his freedom and make bold his acts. A tremor went through
him. His soul plunged deep within itself to hear the voice of his mentor
at its most profound depths. He opened his mouth to overwhelm the woman
and to his horror what rushed from his lips, like the shriek of a bat,
was an obscenity he had overheard once at a fair. Shocked, he saw the
moment lost.

The woman did not move a muscle. Presently she said, “And now you come
back. And who is going to hire out a boy who burns down houses?”

Still aghast at his failure, he said in a shaky voice, “I ain’t ast
nobody to hire me out.”

“And shames the dead?”

“The dead are dead and stay that way,” he said, gaining a little
strength.

“And scorns the Resurrection and the Life?”

His thirst was like a rough hand clenched in his throat. “Sell me a
purple drink,” he said hoarsely.

The woman did not move.

He turned and went, his look as dark as hers. There were circles under
his eyes and his skin seemed to have shrunk on the frame of his bones
from dryness. The obscenity echoed sullenly in his head. The boy’s mind
was too fierce to brook impurities of such a nature. He was intolerant
of unspiritual evils and with those of the flesh he had never truckled.
He felt his victory sullied by the remark that had come from his mouth.
He thought of turning and going back and flinging the right words at her
but he had still not found them. He tried to think of what the
schoolteacher would have said to her but no words of his uncle’s would
rise to his mind.

The sun was behind him now and his thirst had reached the point where it
could not get worse. The inside of his throat felt as if it were coated
with burning sand. He moved on doggedly. No cars were passing. He made
up his mind that he would flag the next car that passed. He hungered now
for companionship as much as food and water. He wanted to explain to
someone what he had failed to explain to the woman and with the right
words to wipe out the obscenity that had stained his thought.

He had gone almost two more miles when a car finally passed him and then
slowed down and stopped. He had been trudging absently and had not waved
it down but when he saw it stop, he began to run forward. By the time he
reached it, the driver had leaned over and opened the door. It was a
lavender and cream-colored car. The boy scrambled in without looking at
the driver and closed the door and they drove on.

Then he turned and looked at the man and an unpleasant sensation that he
could not place came over him. The person who had picked him up was a
pale, lean, old-looking young man with deep hollows under his
cheekbones. He had on a lavender shirt and a thin black suit and a
panama hat. His lips were as white as the cigaret that hung limply from
one side of his mouth. His eyes were the same color as his shirt and
were ringed with heavy black lashes. A lock of yellow hair fell across
his forehead from under his pushed-back hat. He was silent and Tarwater
was silent. He drove at a leisurely rate and presently he turned in the
seat and gave the boy a long personal look. “Live around here?” he
asked.

“Not on this road,” Tarwater said. His voice was cracked from dryness.

“Going somewheres?”

“To where I live,” the boy croaked. “I’m in charge there now.”

The man said nothing else for a few minutes. The window by the boy’s
side was cracked and patched with a piece of adhesive tape and the
handle to lower it had been removed. There was a sweet stale odor in the
car and there did not seem enough air to breathe freely. Tarwater could
see a pale reflection of himself, eyeing him darkly from the window.

“Don’t live on this road, huh?” the man said. “Where do your folks
live?”

“No folks,” Tarwater said. “It’s only me. I take care of myself. Nobody
tells me what to do.”

“Don’t huh?” the man said. “I see it’s no flies on you.

“No,” the boy said, “there’s not.”

There was something familiar to him in the look of the stranger but he
could not place where he had seen him before. The man put his hand in
the pocket of his shirt and brought out a silver case. He snapped it
open and passed it over to Tarwater. “Smoke?” he said.

The boy had never smoked anything but rabbit tobacco and he did not want
a cigaret. He only looked at them.

“Special,” the man said, continuing to hold out the case. “You don’t get
one of this kind every day, but maybe you ain’t had much experience
smoking.”

Tarwater took the cigaret and hung it in the corner of his mouth,
exactly as the man’s was hung. Out of another pocket, the man produced a
silver lighter and flashed the flame over to him. The cigaret didn’t
light the first time but the second time he pulled in his breath, it lit
and his lungs were unpleasantly filled with smoke. The smoke had a
peculiar odor.

“Got no folks, huh?” the man said again. “What road do you live on?”

“It ain’t even a road to it,” the boy said. “I lived with my great-uncle
but he’s dead, burnt up, and now it’s only me.” He began to cough
violently.

The man reached across the dashboard and opened the glove compartment.
Inside, lying on its side was a flat bottle of whiskey. “Help yourself,”
he said. “It’ll kill that cough.”

It was an old-looking stamped bottle without the paper front on it and
with a bitten-off cork in the top. “I get that special too,” the man
said. “If there’s flies on you, you can’t drink it.”

The boy grasped the bottle and began to pull at the cork, and
simultaneously there came into his head all his great-uncle’s warnings
about poisonous liquor, all his idiot restrictions about riding with
strangers. The essence of all the old man’s foolishness flooded his mind
like a rising tide of irritation. He grasped the bottle the more firmly
and pulled at the cork, which was too far in, with his fingers. He put
the bottle between his knees and took the schoolteacher’s
corkscrew-bottleopener out of his pocket.

“Say, that’s nifty,” the man said.

The boy smiled. He pushed the corkscrew in the cork and pulled it out.
Never a thought of the old man’s but he would change it now. “This here
thing will open anything,” he said.

The stranger was driving slowly, watching him.

He lifted the bottle to his lips and took a long swallow. The liquid had
a deep barely concealed bitterness that he had not expected and it
appeared to be thicker than any whiskey he had ever had before. It
burned his throat savagely and his thirst raged anew so that he was
obliged to take another and fuller swallow. The second was worse than
the first and he perceived that the stranger was watching him with what
might be a leer.

“Don’t like it, huh?” he said.

The boy felt a little dizzy but he thrust his face forward and said,
“It’s better than the Bread of Life!” and his eyes glittered.

He sat back and took the cork off the opener and put it back on the
bottle and returned the bottle to the compartment. Already his motions
seemed to be slowing down. It took him some time to get his hand back in
his lap. The stranger said nothing and Tarwater turned his face to the
window.

The liquor lay like a hot rock in the pit of his stomach, heating his
whole body, and he felt himself pleasantly deprived of responsibility or
of the need for any effort to justify his actions. His thoughts were
heavy as if they had to struggle up through some dense medium to reach
the surface of his mind. He was looking into thick unfenced woods. The
car moved almost slow enough for him to count the outside trunks and he
began to count them, one, one, one, until they began to merge and flow
together. He leaned his head against the glass and his heavy lids
closed.

After a few minutes the stranger reached over and pushed his shoulder
but he did not stir. The man then began to drive faster. He drove about
five miles, speeding, before he espied a turnoff into a dirt road. He
took the turn and raced along for a mile or two and then pulled his car
off the side of the road and drove down into a secluded declivity near
the edge of the woods. He was breathing rapidly and sweating. He got out
and ran around the car and opened the other door and Tarwater fell out
of it like a loosely-filled sack. The man picked him up and carried him
into the woods.

Nothing passed on the dirt road and the sun continued to move with a
brilliant blandness on its way. The woods were silent except for an
occasional trill or caw. The air itself might have been drugged. Now and
then a large silent floating bird would glide into the treetops and
after a moment rise again.

In about an hour, the stranger emerged alone and looked furtively about
him. He was carrying the boy’s hat for a souvenir and also the
corkscrew-bottleopener. His delicate skin had acquired a faint pink tint
as if he had refreshed himself on blood. He got quickly into his car and
sped away.

When Tarwater woke up, the sun was directly overhead, very small and
silver, sifting down light that seemed to spend itself before it reached
him. He saw first his thin white legs stretching in front of him. He was
propped up against a log that lay across a small open space between two
very tall trees. His hands were loosely tied with a lavender
handkerchief which his friend had thought of as an exchange for the hat.
His clothes were neatly piled by his side. Only his shoes were on him.
He perceived that his hat was gone.

The boy’s mouth twisted open and to the side as if it were going to
displace itself permanently. In a second it appeared to be only a gap
that would never be a mouth again. His eyes looked small and seedlike as
if while he was asleep, they had been lifted out, scorched, and dropped
back into his head. His expression seemed to contract until it reached
some point beyond rage or pain. Then a loud dry cry tore out of him and
his mouth fell back into place.

He began to tear savagely at the lavender handkerchief until he had
shredded it off. Then he got into his clothes so quickly that when he
finished he had half of them on backwards and did not notice. He stood
staring down at the spot where the displaced leaves showed him to have
lain. His hand was already in his pocket bringing out the box of wooden
matches. He kicked the leaves together and set them on fire. Then he
tore off a pine branch and set it on fire and began to fire all the
bushes around the spot until the fire was eating greedily at the evil
ground, burning every spot the stranger could have touched. When it was
a roaring blaze, he turned and ran, still holding the pine torch and
lighting bushes as he went.

He barely noticed when he ran out of the woods onto the bare red road.
It streaked beneath him like fire hardened and only gradually as his
breath choked him did he slow down and begin to take his bearings. The
sky, the woods on either side, the ground beneath him, came to a halt
and the road assumed direction. It swung down between high red
embankments and then mounted a flat field plowed to its edges on either
side. Off in the distance a shack, sunk a little on one side, seemed to
be afloat on the red folds. Down the hill the wooden bridge lay like the
skeleton of some prehistoric beast across the stream bed. It was the
road home, ground that had been familiar to him since his infancy but
now it looked like strange and alien country.

He stood clenching the blackened burnt-out pine bough. Then after a
moment he began to move forward again slowly. He knew that he could not
turn back now. He knew that his destiny forced him on to a final
revelation. His scorched eyes no longer looked hollow or as if they were
meant only to guide him forward. They looked as if, touched with a coal
like the lips of the prophet, they would never be used for ordinary
sights again.




                                  XII

THE BROAD ROAD began to narrow until it was no more than a rutted
rain-washed gulley which disappeared finally into a blackberry thicket.
The sun, red and mammoth, was about to touch the treeline. Tarwater
paused an instant here. His glance passed over the ripening berries,
turned sharply and pierced into the wood which lay dark and dense before
him. He drew in his breath and held it a second before he plunged
forward, blindly following the faint path that led down through the wood
to the clearing. The air was laden with the odor of honeysuckle and the
sharper scent of pine but he scarcely recognized what they were. His
senses were stunned and his thought too seemed suspended. Somewhere deep
in the wood a woodthrush called and as if the sound were a key turned in
the boy’s heart, his throat began to tighten.

A faint evening breeze had begun to stir. He stepped over a tree fallen
across his path and plunged on. A thorn vine caught in his shirt and
tore it but he didn’t stop. Farther away the woodthrush called again.
With the same four formal notes it trilled its grief against the
silence. He was heading straight for a gap in the wood where, through a
forked birch, the clearing could be seen below, down the long hill and
across the field. Always when he and his great-uncle were returning from
the road, they would stop there. It had given the old man the greatest
satisfaction to look out over the field and in the distance see his
house settled between its chimneys, his stall, his lot, his corn. He
might have been Moses glimpsing the promised land.

As Tarwater approached the tree, his shoulders were set high and tense.
He seemed to be preparing himself to sustain a blow. The tree, forked a
few feet from the ground, loomed in his way. He stopped and with a hand
on either trunk, he leaned forward through the fork and looked out at an
expanse of crimson sky. His gaze, like a bird that flies through fire,
faltered and dropped. Where it fell, two chimneys stood like grieving
figures guarding the blackened ground between them. His face appeared to
shrink as he looked.

He remained motionless except for his hands. They clenched and
unclenched. What he saw was what he had expected to see, an empty
clearing. The old man’s body was no longer there. His dust would not be
mingling with the dust of the place, would not be washed by the seeping
rains into the field. The wind by now had taken his ashes, dropped them
and scattered them and lifted them up again and carried each mote a
different way around the curve of the world. The clearing was burned
free of all that had ever oppressed him. No cross was there to say that
this was ground that the Lord still held. What he looked out upon was
the sign of a broken covenant. The place was forsaken and his own. As he
looked, his dry lips parted. They seemed to be forced open by a hunger
too great to be contained inside him. He stood there open-mouthed, as if
he had no further power to move.

He felt a breeze on his neck as light as a breath and he half-turned,
sensing that some one stood behind him. A sibilant shifting of air
dropped like a sigh into his ear. The boy turned white.

Go down and take it, his friend whispered. It’s ours. We’ve won it. Ever
since you first begun to dig the grave, I’ve stood by you, never left
your side, and now we can take it over together, just you and me. You’re
not ever going to be alone again.

The boy shuddered convulsively. The presence was as pervasive as an
odor, a warm sweet body of air encircling him, a violet shadow hanging
around his shoulders.

He shook himself free fiercely and grabbed the matches from his pocket
and tore off another pine bough. He held the bough under his arm and
with a shaking hand struck a match and held it to the needles until he
had a burning brand. He plunged this into the lower branches of the
forked tree. The flames crackled up, snapping for the drier leaves and
rushing into them until an arch of fire blazed upward. He walked
backwards from the spot pushing the torch into all the bushes he was
moving away from, until he had made a rising wall of fire between him
and the grinning presence. He glared through the flames and his spirits
rose as he saw that his adversary would soon be consumed in a roaring
blaze. He turned and moved on with the burning brand tightly clenched in
his fist.

The path twisted downward through reddened tree trunks that gradually
grew darker as the sun sank out of sight. From time to time he plunged
the torch into a bush or tree and left it blazing behind him. The wood
became less dense. Suddenly it opened and he stood at its edge, looking
out on the flat cornfield and far across to the two chimneys. Planes of
purpling red above the treeline stretched back like stairsteps to reach
the dusk. The corn the old man had left planted was up about a foot and
moved in wavering lines of green across the field. It had been freshly
plowed. The boy stood there, a small rigid, hatless figure, holding the
blackened pine bough.

As he looked, his hunger constricted him anew. It appeared to be outside
him, surrounding him, almost as if it were visible before him, something
he could reach out for and not quite touch. He sensed a strangeness
about the place as if there might already be an occupant. Beyond the two
chimneys, his eyes moved over the stall, grey and weathered, and crossed
the back field and stopped at the far black wall of woods. A deep filled
quiet pervaded everything. The encroaching dusk seemed to come softly in
deference to some mystery that resided here. He stood, leaning slightly
forward. He appeared to be permanently suspended there, unable to go
forward or back. He became conscious of the very breath he drew. Even
the air seemed to belong to another.

Then near the stall he saw a Negro mounted on a mule. The mule was not
moving; the two might have been made out of rock. He started forward
across the field boldly, raising his fist in a gesture that was
half-greeting and half-threat, but after a second his hand opened. He
waved and began to run. It was Buford. He would go home with him and
eat.

Instantly at the thought of food, he stopped and his muscles contracted
with nausea. He blanched with the shock of a terrible premonition. He
stood there and felt a crater opening inside him, and stretching out
before him, surrounding him, he saw the clear grey spaces of that
country where he had vowed never to set foot. Mechanically he began to
move forward. He came out on the hard ground of the yard a few feet from
the fig tree, but his eyes took the far circuit to it, lingering above
the stall and moving beyond it to the far treeline and back. He knew
that the next sight to meet his eyes would be the half-dug gaping grave,
almost at his feet.

The Negro was watching him steadily. He began to move forward on the
mule. When the boy finally forced his eyes to move again, he saw the
mule’s hooves first and then Buford’s feet hanging at its sides. Above,
the brown crinkled face was looking down at him with a scorn that could
penetrate any surface.

The grave, freshly mounded, lay between them. Tarwater lowered his eyes
to it. At its head, a dark rough cross was set starkly in the bare
ground. The boy’s hands opened stiffly as if he were dropping something
he had been clutching all his life. His gaze rested finally on the
ground where the wood entered the grave.

Buford said, “It’s owing to me he’s resting there. I buried him while
you were laid out drunk. It’s owing to me his corn has been plowed. It’s
owing to me the sign of his Saviour is over his head.”

Nothing seemed alive about the boy but his eyes and they stared downward
at the cross as if they followed below the surface of the earth to where
its roots encircled all the dead.

The Negro sat watching his strange spent face and grew uneasy. The skin
across it tightened as he watched and the eyes, lifting beyond the
grave, appeared to see something coming in the distance. Buford turned
his head. The darkening field behind him stretched downward toward the
woods. When he looked back again, the boy’s vision seemed to pierce the
very air. The Negro trembled and felt suddenly a pressure on him too
great to bear. He sensed it as a burning in the atmosphere. His nostrils
twitched. He muttered something and turned the mule around and moved
off, across the back field and down to the woods.

The boy remained standing there, his still eyes reflecting the field the
Negro had crossed. It seemed to him no longer empty but peopled with a
multitude. Everywhere, he saw dim figures seated on the slope and as he
gazed he saw that from a single basket the throng was being fed. His
eyes searched the crowd for a long time as if he could not find the one
he was looking for. Then he saw him. The old man was lowering himself to
the ground. When he was down and his bulk had settled, he leaned
forward, his face turned toward the basket, impatiently following its
progress toward him. The boy too leaned forward, aware at last of the
object of his hunger, aware that it was the same as the old man’s and
that nothing on earth would fill him. His hunger was so great that he
could have eaten all the loaves and fishes after they were multiplied.

He stood there, straining forward, but the scene faded in the gathering
darkness. Night descended until there was nothing but a thin streak of
red between it and the black line of earth but still he stood there. He
felt his hunger no longer as a pain but as a tide. He felt it rising in
himself through time and darkness, rising through the centuries, and he
knew that it rose in a line of men whose lives were chosen to sustain
it, who would wander in the world, strangers from that violent country
where the silence is never broken except to shout the truth. He felt it
building from the blood of Abel to his own, rising and engulfing him. It
seemed in one instant to lift and turn him. He whirled toward the
treeline. There, rising and spreading in the night, a red-gold tree of
fire ascended as if it would consume the darkness in one tremendous
burst of flame. The boy’s breath went out to meet it. He knew that this
was the fire that had encircled Daniel, that had raised Elijah from the
earth, that had spoken to Moses and would in the instant speak to him.
He threw himself to the ground and with his face against the dirt of the
grave, he heard the command: =go warn the children of god of the
terrible speed of mercy=. The words were as silent as seeds
opening one at a time in his blood.

When finally he raised himself, the burning bush had disappeared. A line
of fire ate languidly at the treeline and here and there a thin crest of
flame rose farther back in the woods where a dull red cloud of smoke had
gathered. The boy stooped and picked up a handful of dirt off his
great-uncle’s grave and smeared it on his forehead. Then after a moment,
without looking back he moved across the far field and off the way
Buford had gone.

By midnight he had left the road and the burning woods behind him and
had come out on the highway once more. The moon, riding low above the
field beside him, appeared and disappeared, diamond-bright, between
patches of darkness. Intermittently the boy’s jagged shadow slanted
across the road ahead of him as if it cleared a rough path toward his
goal. His singed eyes, black in their deep sockets, seemed already to
envision the fate that awaited him but he moved steadily on, his face
set toward the dark city, where the children of God lay sleeping.



